Scena Prima.




I Say, It is not so good to be cheated as to Cheat: So I do.



Do's he mean honestly?



Hang honesty, he has put me to I-know-not-how-much trouble. I vow, so I do.
A-Deuce take him for a knave.



Patience Sir, he did not intend 



Intend a fool; I protest so I do, I don't know what to do, I'm so vext about it.









How de y' Sir? Wel, what say you? de y' mark, I protest
So I do, you had almost hindred me of seeing
You; so you had, if you had not come as you
Did: Will you pay-in the Money, and have your Bond?



My fortunes bow to you. 



I can't abide this elegant Fortune,

  2Not I; My mony, My mony, Man?



Let my Condition plead for me.



That won't: the condition of the Bond is, to pay it
Double, (de se?) double, I vow.







Merciful me no more than I Merciful you:
For I vow (de se?) get it me quickly, or Il'e
Know why you won't: so I will as I live-law.
Exit Hare.
Go bid Berania come to me, do so.
Exit Beucer.


Well, how now Berania, what say you to me about

Litus? I protest, I believe he looks like a rich Man.



More tortures yet! The harmless dove pursu'd
By threatning death from the Jar-falcons Talons,
Avoyds that cruel touch, and lives secure;
My duty checks too great a scorn but Love.
Can utter stranger to his qualities,
Free me from Inquisitions, worse then Death?



Well then, you won't ha' him? Il'e tell him the
Long and the short of the business, so I will.




'Tis strange to see wealths power more then the strength
Of Vertue, stack't by Craesus his false fame;
Mony's Lord Paramount, and Riches sway
My Fathers fancy, for a prudent Soul
Content's a Paradice, as unknown to most,
As are the furthest Limits of Euphrates.

Every Sense turns Secretary, to record
His or my own hard Fortune, yielding's fatal;
I have set my Resolution, and I'le see
Myself Incloystred e're his wife Il'e bee.






Well, how stands the wind of your Daughter's Good liking?



Why I protest-law it was so sharp North (so〈◊〉


  3〈◊〉, that it had like to ha blown my Nose
Away, I vow, so soon as I mentioned you to her;
Law-ye.







Why, the Long and the short is, de se? she say's, she
Won't have you, I am in haste I vow, good b'y.




To Fortune's Jiggs the vulgar sort apply
An arm'd resistance, whose weak affronts
Dare not consult with Passion, unless
It sings their requies sum: To love
Is to be resolute, our wealth's a blessing
To be contemn'd by none but those whose thoughts
Fly to a Pin-feather'd Philosophy,
And use a Microscope, mounted on wings
Of rare devotion to see if the World be any thing:
My blood thaw's silence at a womans scorn;
Stay till I come.





My Lord will have her sure, if Means can do it.




He's too well known, to be belov'd by her.




In his land her denial may walk so far,
Tell it's weary steps, and forget itself.




I don't know what they'l do.





Go deliver this Letter to Madam Berania,


The labour of a strict persute,
Is recompenc't by handling the Prize.
Delay, like Poppy, invites to a sleep,
That cutting news should be the hardlier felt.
Provide a bow for smiles: but if disdain;
I'le get by Force what fair Means can't obtain.







Your syllables make worse than banishment:
throws it to them.
More captive to impiety, then the unwearied Passenger
Toth' fained mourning of a Crocodile
Whose jaws, while reeking in the bloud of those

  4His last allurements sung sad Dirge's to,
Seeks larger Preys.





May duty teach my Sister.







A Nobler lesson than Rebellion prompts to.
Recant your error, so your Reason may
A Prospect of all happiness seem clear
As day, whose Minut• are seldom favour'd by
Such smiles of Chance, as those were proffer'd you:
Resolve amendment; to your changed mind
The Golden Sands of Factolus come flowing;
Imbrace Honour.







By nourishing the hopes of Litus, whose soul,
As sad as Niobe's, takes pleasure
In throwing down the Gems that dwel in it.
His Birth ne'r taught him Courtship for a Maid
Below it self.



His rashness, like a Warrant,
Seconds his malice: to these I am an Enemy,
Had he no more blasts of Morality.



To call him rash is Passionate, Passionate witty,
An ornament to Youth.







Hatred's a Puritan compair'd, and frowns
To see you learn your lesson but by halves,
Too openly bore down his friends at this.
Would keep the Scent, and were you a Man,
Turn bloud-hounds, ore-turn weapons 'til revenge
Had gi'n the Lye, to all that dare maintain
Him otherwise then a Fable, he sighs
Meekly for you.



He's worse then Savage, that to get his will,
Won't Fawn and Flatter; but denyed still,
His expectation suddenly converts
His faigned Love to hatred and imparts
Envy to Force, till with his wile he gets
His own desire, by 'Proteus Changing fits.



All fancies Suppositions worse, his wealth
It's so weighty, 'twould quickly surprize
The swelling of a crook-back't quality,
Nobles are a Pumice, hard enough to grinde
His errors into nothing.




Be coverlids of vices wrong, 'tis pitty
Who's greatest fit to govern, he's not fit
To govern others, that cannot rule himself,
They should grow big together, Pliny never
Mockt Physick better. He comes, I'le not see him.






To paint out to my self the warlick Trophies,
Due to a Conqueror, of all that's bad
And strong; the stoln hours
Of Leander and Hero, when the Hellespont
Was but a Kennel to him; argues their joys,
Pigmies Fiction short of truth: my Sense
Has made no Plaudit, 'til your Sister
Seem'd checking my hasty courtship, with a brow
Clear of Anger.











A Dream, may be.







My Industry may embalm your hopes.




I come senseless here with equal passion,
Heaven or hell mop't to a Bul-begger;
I Tantalize my self, such a dul Agent
Deserves to see a foollish Messenger
Bring back his Letters, covered wich the mocks
Of a Chamber-maid. Harpes, true Harpes, come,
Why stay'st so long? 'Its past the time you promist.





An't I within my time, my Lord?




Then Ten pound, for an hours work: what say'st?







Trusty; ha'st forgot that Vertue?



My Bonus Genius, I am ne'r without it.







No matter: I can murder, may be, without it.



Pish you are wide o'th' mark,
We are about Venial sins.



Nay that's the mark I'de aim at.



A Lady, I'de ha'you and I steal from her Father.
Every night they walk at six a clock here:
Her Father•s an old fool can't fight,
Be ready: But if we are caught, canst swear?



If I can't swear, I can doe nothing.



Get a Coach ready at six a clock precisely,
Then meet me here.











What Friar grac't his Order by a Miracle,
In Spelling you to a Platonick love?



Resolves after Deliberation make
A Circle; in whose Center, the best life
Lyes hid on puny spirits such as boast
They have the Summum Bonum when they tread
In an old Mark made by their Mistris Shoo;
I'le bestow pitty.




When tired with burdens of a way to Honour;
Your Motion's quick, your Hands gripe labour, Mind
Resolute to advancement, purchast by
A weary diligence: a Ladies lap
Inchants your purpose to a solitude,
That into sleep, sleep to a dream, whose language
Courts you to sweetness inconceiveable:
As Considerations of Eternity.

  7A Thousand presidents, bewail lost time, in your condition.



He's well can beware of others Harms,
Example don't excuse a Fault,
Love-sick's a great one.



Hold, a line of this subject.










O Sacred! Sacred Love,
earths chiefest joys above!
That with thy nimble bow,
take'st pride to stick below
Thrice happy he whose Heart hath felt,
the quiver of thy Golden belt.

2.When Moping spirits Muse,
what pleasure here to chuse.
Then Love's great shrine draws nigh,
with enterprizes high,
To sway Mens hearts and wrap them Eeven,
to joyes divine, a taste of Heaven.






Parturiunt Montes. To our business.
Letters Inform me of the neer approach of Death toth' Reverend
Old Man: already 'tas took up all but his breath-room:
Those Industrious hands that have so often acted his words,
When they moved Audients passions to Love,
To Hate, to Mirth, to Tragedy,
Have now nothing to do but second fervent Prayers for you and I.



I'me promised news to day.



I expect some too.



At six a clock let's meet here,
We'll impart the Novelty of each stop,
And drown the time with tears that speaks him dead.



'T may fall out not so. Starrs, and the b•st of Men,
Do rise to set, and set to rise agen.






Well, how now, Mr. Hare? well, de se? I don't know
I vow, Oh will you pay in the Money, law-ye?
And have the Bond?



You let others have it: upon that condition,
I told you of, my Lord.



Sir I doe, and I do not.



How do you then?



Very well, but that's nothing: my Money, Man!









Good-buy: come Daughters, it's almost time to walk,
As I live, so it is, i'th' Garden: so I doe.



Will you bear us company?



My hours an't my own.



Well Beucer, you se (so do you,) that this Hare

Won't pay-in the Mony, so he won't,
I Vow now, de se, you may go if you will, I don't
Need your Witnes-manship.


Come Daughter I'l walk presently, as I live law-ye:
And tell you, you are a Fool! so I will, I vow, for not
Marrying the Gentle-man.







I shan't be known, well Harpes art' resolved?



My horse needs nothing but a Silver spur,
To hasten it on in such an Ambuscado.



She's leight, my Boy, we'll carry her with ease.



Leight! All the sex are so, Shee has been too leight
For you already, you may speak Probatum.



Stand in that corner you, but fir•t provide
A Sword to fright the old Man, the young one's got
The sooner.


Honour's not repaid with Checks.
If her estate be it bladder's her Pride
I excell it; if her birth excell, that too.
These things well weighed, my brest's too generous;
To be submissive, and, at a Woman's scorn,
Turn Novice.










Hot enough to make him run, as Firebrands do
The Beasts of Greenland within that place:
I'm here. Let 'um walk a turn or two, we may
Take 'um at the more advantage.








Are you ready, Sir?



I'm ready to blow my fingers, they'r so cold I vow,
So I am.

Step i'th Garden and walk.




Haste Petus to his Elegy.




My Lord, Lord Petus stayes to speak with you.



Bid him come in, and bring hither a Table.







He's gone, those Ensigns of Honour;
Your proper due Succession ushers in.







Rich with the power of a holy Relique,
Read it.

Go to the Table.
Throws it upon the Table.
Harpes and Litus set on Berania.






Hark; the cry of some distrest Gentlewoman!



At the sight of a Frog.

Berania cryes out again.



Hark, hark, in earnest let's run.

(They run and see her between them.) Occus crying.



Dishonourable Villains! what Commission?



Our fancy's to your cost.






Occus creeps under the table, and peeps.

Litus runs, Harpes falls down.






The Rogues! pittiful unvalourful Dogs! I was mad as
I live-law, to see what Cowards they were, I vow,
To set on us as we were walking: but I
Wisht 'um hang'd in heat of blood; as I'm here,
So I did: thank the Gentlemen, Daughter, that
Have so finely delivered you.




To your protectors I'le be devout,
And beg for a reward due to your Vertue;
All the entreaties of a bended knee
Shall guard my Sacrifice till courteous Heavens
Know the deliverance of an innocent Maid.



Confirm we have serv'd you by excepting it,
The Gods make apprehensions of a Traytor,
Confound himself, his means, all dy'd with horrour,
Speaks daggers to his guilty soul, and saves
His enemy a triall.



My life payes tribute to your valour.



If it be valour, Madam, we no way
Can guess it's rising, but from the bright day
Of your own Beauties, which great Nature throws,
And duty ties to the hearts of all those
As profess honour.



Humble thanks your licent to my departure.







Well, Gentlemen, I protest, so I do, this is a
Great kindness; and I vow, I don't know how to
Make you amends, so I don't: but good by.
I would thank you a great deal longer, as I
Live-law (de se?) but I vow I am a going home.





Do'st know this pretty Gentlewoman, prithee?







Her Wit, Beauties, and Behaviour are excellent.







Be impartial to a Corrector.



Maintain it who are most secure
From Love his torments, soonest do endure.




What sudden passion, like damp news of death,
Conjures my blood about my heart grown weak?
Because I can't expound a petty riddle
Delivered her, what then? I'le ne're believe,
I alwayes dream'd till now I ha' been Garlick,
Destructive to Love's adamantick vertue;
Her very posture how it presents it self
Before my intellect, as a true prologue
To some future and stronger invasion.






Prefer the memory of those Gentlemen;
Doubtless, Madam, they were some that knew you.



Not one thunderbolt to kill this monster?



Trouble findes ease when open'd, Madam,
To my obedience here's, my life. Your counsel
Is further from my mouth than Mahometism.



He in the beard had the voice of Litus.



Monstrous villany! Can so foul intents
Lie i'th pavement of so smooth disguise?
The world's deceitful, who by fair words,
Credit, performances just and honourable,
Finde one is empty, the other void,
Perfidious.



I wish all been't so.



That all for one be blam'd, Heavens forbid!
Though foul pretences under fair he hid;
Yet mischief gathers mischief, and who thought
Others to catch, in his own net is caught.



Providence may pay him so.




Let my industry ease you of these sighs,

  12Your Sister's with him often.



Innocence is preserv'd by Angels.




Be it criminal, and take away my life,
To speak my Mistress Secrets; tell me, Madam,
What I ha' been I'le ever be,
In life a trust, to death fidelity.



Inquire the names of the two Gentlemen
That rescu'd me, describe the blackest most.



You love, I will dear Madam when I ha' done:
He begs admittance to kiss your hand.



Hush, here's my Sisters Maid, be intimate, enquire.



What she knows is my own already.





Madam, your Sister prayes your company.



I'le go my self.




Do'nt Litus often wait upon your Mistress?







Yes, shee'd have her Sister marry him;
His treachery ha's burthen'd all mens ears.







worse than a Rape.







I was by, and see it my self.



Since you know it, no longer I'le deny
Her private malice, his invet'racy



Shall be no more the cause of discontents,
To expectation happen cross events.








IT's all as I tell you.



Your Pilot taught you that trick.



I lost my silver Hatband aboard.



You thought she had been a prey conveighed thither;
By Cidnappers upon that built your hopes,
That Virginia would a nurst your Bastards:
Instead of writing your Masters Accounts,

  13Nothing was heard but, pray give Mistress Sarah

More Punch, white Bisket, Oyl to her Fish; her mother
Will oyl your Fish.



By this hand I'de not love
A Wench as well as thou for more money
Than you got by Annoque-Tobacco last year.



You love smoak too 'tis a sign, or else
You'd ne're a crept i'th' Stow.



But say, Wilt marry her? I'le adde to the Summe.



Marry, I may do so.







I don't love Flie-blows tho, farewell.




It's easie to do that with one finger
Can't be remedied: my business don't fadge.





Did you see Hacca?







How long ha' you been here?







Pray tell me, Sir.







The man's in a maze sure.




I'me in a maze sure enough with your face.
That sure is a Screech-owl to my advancement;
I wish I had a Wife, to spoil this ugly business,
This Gentlewoman's better, my conscience
Is i'th' Spanish mode, I'le see to get her:
Her name's Thele; my Schoolmaster I remember
S'ed, the Beast Hyena had that in her
Would be witch a man to love: I think
This Maid ha's some Hyena in her too,
I have a Book at home s'es, Marriage is
Angol.
Honourable, but it is good to be honourable.
I'le take another course, use this no more,
It's better love a Wife, than keep a Whore.






Imperial Madam, Could no lucky merit
Resist the charm of an insulting passion?

  14A foe as just as cruel, resents affronts
With rage, impetuous beyond proud Tarquin,

I'le do more penance than a Gally-Slave,
That spurns his thraldom with laborious strokes:
Eager to anticipate his destiny,
I'me guilty to expoliate my crime.
As your despiser strike my heart assunder,
But save the Love within it, carry it to her,
And tell my own words did it, may be then
One Tear may fall to glue it up agen.







A vow, as fatal to my purposes,
As his wisht Sword, whose glist'ring brandishings
Makes accents to his words, commands attention:
Must I be pillored to dishonour, stand
The moveless subject of both their hisses:
'Tis for Berania dye or cut through throngs
Of danger, were revenge i'th' same place,
Her favour should a grac't, surprize his chants,
E're they cleave air, and come unto her ear.
I speak of things above me, to his strength
My wounds set seal, may be he's innocent;
Then 'twould be base to intend a mischief, change
Thy fury into reason, may chance that may
Invent a safer and securer way.






What Bird has crost thy way? and drove you back
With Omens to our meeting, tell me prithee:
I'm Miserable of all lovers, that love
And dare not reveal it.



Nothing but Sunshine to our intents, Madam
Why grieve you? To your smiles I'le bett my Honour,
He suffers more for you, than you for him.
I see his blood daunt in his face: as if
It were Eclipst, and strove to master Love.

  15His eyes were steddy, you paid it again;
Not without checks to those inamoring Lamps,
For taking so much liberty.



Recount your Progress, to me dissemble nothing.
Ha'st spok to him? if he be sworn already
To serve another Mistris, I'le but weep,
And sing her happiness, where signs shall keep
Time to my Song, and part each line from other.



'Tis no such matter Madam; let us make
This hour remarkable, by finding out
A way may ease us, and resolve our doubt:
I'le do it thus.







I'le go a purpose, to ask if he took
The sword from him, that had the black beard on;
Pretending your misdeem is singly plac't:
And could by seeing the sword judge who it was
Before he answers: a dissembled qualm
Shall beg my excuse, for leaving him so quickly,
He comes my life for't, to resolve your self.



I like it, go, let providence bespeak
A crown for this imposture 't may deserve one.






If Love won't, pray let Pitty, of your oths
And earnest promises, incite you to
A kinder satisfaction for my Honour.



What, alwayes haunted with you as a Ghost?
I ha' found me a new Love: Seek you one too.

Admetus told me what would come of me•ling with Sluts:
I lost my Silver Hat-band aboard, following him about.



Consider, how your self swore and protested,
You were enamoured, of my poor Beauty;
Let the remembrance of your former Love
Be a privation, to your present Hate.



Why? rest contented, I tell you, if you had not
Been so free of your flesh, I should a loved you still:
And according to Plato, I may agen.




Justly disdained Sarah, now thou reap'st;
The fruits of thy o're fond credulity.
How oft might I have been candidly intreated?
Had I not thrown away my self upon
The Charybdes of his flattery; which brings
Me to the Scilly of this extremity
To repair my esteem, by his enjoyment,
Or take revenge for his disloyalty.
Away! should I, under a nother's name
Disguised, seek to vindicate my self
Or reputation, a las I may dye,
I love him too well, use fair means, Il'e humbly
Go and complain to Mother, and seek her help.
To urge affection, Treason lets refrain,
What meekness can't? Malice will ne're obtain.





Oh! my Daughter! my Daughter! my Child! my
Chick! Where hast' been my Love?
Come pretty Sarah, I have not seen you I
Know not when.






Man is but Mortal, his resolves more brittle
Than Ice a minute old: Certainty
Rests til 't'as breath, and fly's away agen
For one new reason, all faculties strike sail;
But sundry passions we are subject to,
Make Civil-war: then to the victor must
A pleasing object be presented. Love
Revels in's humours: What sad ditty is this?






Help ease great Powers, Why do you thus prevent me,
And laughing takes a pride still to torment me?
My fears and sorrows sadly mourn within,
To see their cause from troubles still begin.
Then miserable I, how shall I bear it:
Languish for Love, and yet must not declare it.





I fetch her, Sir.




From moaning your condition, your own plaints
Besought me silence; let's confirm our friendship.
Embrace
On your resolve to love none, experience
Has preacht a better lesson, then Meditation
Furnisht me with afore you sung.





Madam, here's the Gentleman, here's both I think.



While hot a wound's not felt, in the amazment
Your arms gave period to, I thought of nothing
But gratitude: since (all things quiet) Circumstances,
As Treason seldom goes unpunish't, offers
Me means of finding't out, the Sword, my Lords,
Discovers his Master's vilany if't be he,
Had either of you it from him.



He run woo't in his hand (Madam) 'tis kept,
To cut his Conscience when he gazes on't.





Well, how now Daughter? I protest (so I do)
I wondred where you were, I vow, your servant, humble Sir,
Your servant, Gentlemen.







Father, to these Gentlemen we owe
Our rescue in the Garden.



I vow, I think, I thought so, pardon me Sirs, I
Did not know you, I vow, so I do, why we fought
Bravely, I protest law-you, I was never in a worse
Combat in my life, as I live-law, but we came
Well off (de see?)







Gentlemen, will you please to drink a cup of Wine?
I vow I'de have you come in, (so I would,) be merry
All danger's over now, de-see, I pray' come in do so.



We'l follow your courtesie, my Lord.







Ah! Sweet Thele, Mistris Thele love me.



I wonder, you importune me so.




Wo'd I had thee I'de give all the desks in my Bond.



I must confess you are so charming, that
Your Rhetorick, like Orpheus his Harp, would make
Stones flye about your head.



If you'l ha' me,
My Rhetorick shall make stones flye about your
Ah ah ah ah ah head too.



Why, you are fuddl'd, you are in a pickle



Of Cucumbers, it's salt to see you want ha me! I'me sure.



Go sleep: till sober sober carriage, then,
And better manners learnt, come we agen.


Beucer runs after her.





Ah my dear Duck! where ha'st been my Love?
Come Dear, we'l go home and ha' a pot of ale, my Love:
Alack I'm undone! help, help, help, my Delight weeps:
Who ha's hurt my Love? I'le ta' 'um away.



If I, dear mother, have transgrest the Law
Of Nature, what I expect but Justice.



Tell me my Joy, I'le beat, kick, scratch, claw, bite 'm:
My Dear, who ha's hurt my Love?



Have patience Mother, and provide your car
To hear my loss, the story I'le declare,
And beg your pardon: my Lord Occus his man.



I am a'most mad, my Love.



Pray hear. Beucer coming aboard the Ship
Where I was then to take my leave of my Uncle,
Profest me Love; and with a thousand sighs
Mingled entreaties, soliced.
weeps.



Come, come, come, go on quick, speak my Dear.



My good will that Heavens know I thought
Was innocent and conjugal, his lasting
Importunities and promises
Of Marriage took my honour from me. I
O'recome by his deluding tongue, am forc't

  19To wail my hard fortune, and wailing so,
Augment my griefs, and they augment my woe,
Without the least hope of comfort.



Oh oh! I'm undone, I ha' lost my Daughters Virginity,
Virginity, I ha' lost my Daughters Virginity.







Oh! I ha' lost my Daughters Virginity.



Good Admetus be pleased to relate his leaving me,
Tears stop my utterance.



Tell on Love, tell on Duck; tell me Sir.



After this the Knave dishonestly leaves your Daughter,
And I believe is in love with another.



Is this true Daughter, my Joy?







I'le claw the Rogue's Nose off.







The entertainment was good.



Cruel Love! that takes his chief delight,
To use his fury, and display his spight;
Frowning he laughs, and strives to punish still
A Wretch with death, and yet denies to kill.
I love to see her, and her very eye,
As soon as seen, make me dissolve and dye.



Unless you'd shake me off, expel these words,
'T bewraies your folly.






I pray did you see Beucer the Rogue, the Villain? I'le
Claw him to pieces, the Rogue.




You want not the Lion's Kall or Herb Philocrassa,

As Naturalists name't, to touch her hand,
Perfume her chamber, or mingle in her drink:
S•e loves you well enough already: nothing
Disorders notes, and breaks your harmony,
But silence to a friend runs open-arm'd,
The sweetest message of all history.
I'le be your Spokes-man.








Promise to meet me here betwixt those Walls,

  20I'le sing your Lullaby, and borrow breath
From the wing'd words of your Berania.




My life and fortune wait upon the news.















Any other than your self?











More than all this.







She sleights your counsel, mocks your Fathers threats,
And, worse, o're throws her modesty: that custom
Which bears out Ladies, to expect the prayers
Of servants kindled by a hot denial,
Is buried in her thoughts; she out-does shame.







Among these Trees I heard her Lover mourn,
The giddy mixt words of a strucken Soul,
Desires Oratour for Berania.

He went, she came attended by her Maid,
'Twixt his complaints and her rash impudence,
Comparison is lost; she stretcht invention
For wayes to make him know she lov'd him,
Devises stratagems to see him, runs
The rest of punishments for violating
Her self, and friends to your serious thoughts
Contempts as plain as day; her wantonness
And toleration in't, it plows up duty,
Sows pride in'ts place; and, if suffer'd to grow,
Will o're-top your endeavours to reclaim her.
Your birth puts briars in your hand, why use them,
Blow down her Babel.




'Twas my Father's will
As well as mine, a mischief 'fore 'tis hatcht
Is bended; lightly grown benums those Joynts
That reach it's head: For desperate Maladies
Let's use severe purgations. Tyrants rule
By being smooth'd up in their Cruelty.
Then torments pay their tutors negligence,
Who nourish sucking Vices with a Flatter.

  21I'le break her or my self, let's set a time.



Do it when you please.



Don't fail, till then I'le seem
Honey to both.




My heart forbids me, and I'le never see
Her wed another that refused me.






Hee's a fine Gentleman, Madam.



His carriage puts me to a greater muse
Than Sphinx's Riddle; What do'st gather Hacca





I'm no Diviner, Madam.





A Gentleman, Madam, whom I dare speak vertuous
In doing Justice, was surprized and taken;
He suffers hardship in his close Confinement,
And seeks deliverance; his courteous Keeper
Craves but your hand and word for his Release.



I know him not.



A Stranger assaulted by a crew of Thieves
Already his masters, when past hopes of life,
Is succour'd by a noble Passenger,
Not without wounds to th' Victor, whose dumb signs
Seek help from him he rescu'd: if he can,
And won't contribute to the cure of t'other,
Ean't he ingrateful?



In the highest degree.



The Pris'ner is Lord Petus, Madam.















To your Graces and Beauties; 'tis so.



I l•ke your mirth, but change your subject.



Millions of sighs beg leave to kiss your hand,
Confirm your Judgement to the case I put;
His flames consume him, quench 'm with one word,
Let me haste to his Deliverance.



'Twould be too coy his Service to deny,
To grant it argues too much levity.



'Twould not be lightness to resolve a Grant,
'Tis for his Life, Madam, deny't you can't.



Love e're he seeks it, that's immodest, so,



Mercy before modesty ought to go.



Yea, where the time can dispence but of one,



It don't this kill that will revive alone.



Let's try both then, one with the other will
More welcome be, good is discern'd by ill.



To afflict one so cast down wo'd be too rough,
'Tis sin to tread what's trodden down enough.



Time future may what present can't produce;
Then of this favour let him make good use.



I'le carry his pardon.




The Stars take care of you, Madam,
Here's a Present beyond expectation;
You sav'd your blushes i'th' conquest too.



Our inventions may sleep hereafter.



How finely coy you were! I see Disguise
Is the Familiar of a Lady, Madam.
This verifies the Proverb:
Women like Shadows are, which if you shun,
They'l follow; but pursue 'm, away they'l run.






Mistris, the emptiness of my belly may tell you
How sorry I am for my last offence.



Then you fast for your looseness



Of life you mean; I can sooner be without my
Ears than seeing you.















This knocks down my ambition, if I do not wait
Upon you, that is to say, have your company; for
Sadness I am a second Melpomene.




But not half so grave.






Oh you Rogue Beucer, 'tis he, 'tis he.

goes to beat him.
Beucer runs behinde Occus.


Why I vow so I do, this is a disgrace.

Winifred runs about after Beucer.
Occus holds her stick.



Nay, hear woman, I vow I never see such a woman
I' my life, I protest so I do.



I ha' lost my Daughters Virginity, the Rascal had it
Aboard the Ship, and now leaves my Girle.



Speak softly, and I'le answer you.



Why I vow, why did you do so? you are a Knave;
De se, as I live-law, marry her, marry her.



Do, she's my onely Girle, then I'le love thee my Chuck.



Be patient, she's handsom I must needs confess.




Why law-now he may marry her in time.



If he don't, my Lord, I'le scratch the Rogue.





Here's my Father, Sister.



I Daughters I am here about an ugly business:
I vow I wish the Devil had it, so I do.



Pray Sir tell it us.



I vow one thing comes before another, that I can't
Speak a word, I'm so vext, as I'm here.



Pray Sir tell it us.




I will forsooth Mistris.
My Daughters Virginity! Beucer, the Rogue Beucer

Ha's lain with my Daughter, and sleights her.

Goeth and speaks to Thele.
How d' you Cozen, Beucer the Rogue ha's defil'd
My Daughters Virginity aboard a ship, and now ha's left her.



Ha's he so! (O Goodness!) Aunt be patient.
Is't possible? pray Aunt say nothing of it,
Till I give further order; seem to forget it.



I will indeed forsooth Cozen.





Beucer, how can you profess love to me,
And have abus'd my Cozen? It's well I know it;
May be I'le help it, Wisdom instruct me in't.




Well Daughters, de se, I'le leave you I vow.




Sister, your strangeness troubles me; if Love
Take up your fancy, tell me, to your counsel
I'le be as faithful as your inward thoughts.
Your Looks speak Passion.







Truth needs no gloze, Lord Petus claims you his.








They know more than my self.





Wan't Litus potent good enough for you?
Ha•s too much pride bewitcht you? he s'es true,
You do insult, and more, if suffer'd, will.
It's good remedying new sprung mischief still:
'Tis my resolve e're you two married be,
I ha' vow'd a stop.
















Snatch that word agen,
Do not mistake the liveliness that sits
Upon my Face is to add to perswasion;
That you would bear the news of doubtfull things
With a stay'd Courage.




Be fo't to prepare me for a death
To th' world and all his vanities: within
A narrow Cloyster I'le hem in't my wishes;
And when the Bell rings to a rigid meeting,
Repent my earthly thoughts, and punish them
With hard mortifications: speak my doom,
Or point it rather, let some dying sign
Throw my misfortune in my face, that I
May hush up all in silence.






  25Stay'd courage lest you should be extasi'd
With joy, and make your succour your undoing,
Like those are a'most starv'd when they see meat,
Expire with greediness.




Should check my welcome to you.




A man may be in Paradice e're he prayes for't?
Or hover amongst Angels e're he thinks it?



As to his thoughts may be.




Upon my honour all she commands you,
Is to be faithful; such a glorious Flower
Ne're blossom'd in so short a time before:
Her words are full of sweetness, mild and fair,
Courteous as may be, free from fond allurements.
I beg'd your life, she grants it, visit her,
And find more than I tell you to be true.



Say but she's mild, and I'le out-dare worst fate,
And kind, there's ne're another word like that:
It lifts my fancy higher than the story of Elizium.




Take my faith to't, mild and kind too.



Sure the Sphears sing to beguile me;
Upon your memory ten thousand thanks
Shall dwell: I'le publish how much friendship is
In Lisborn, in your self with such an accent,
Embrace.
'T shall more an imitation till the world,
Know to be honourable.









Well, how d'ye Gentlemen? d'e see, Sir, I am come
About a business of very great exigence as I
Live-law, so I am I vow the case is thus Law-you;
I heard you were in Love with my Daughter,
(D'e-see) and I vow she might a had a Lord
With a great Estate, (d'e-see) but as I live-law
I am so much a friend to Valour, I vow, that if
You have a good Estate, look you, Sir, I had as
Live you should have her (d'e-see) as any body else.



He possesses the Revenues of a noble and industrious
  26
Family, my Lord.



Look you, Sir, I an't for complementical words; but here
Stands the case, if my man Beucer s'es you are
A pretty Gentleman (d'e s'e) as to Estate, as I live-law
I'le present to my Daughters marrying you I vow, so
I will with all my heart: Can a man say more
For his heart-blood, Gentlemen?



You are all-obliging, my Lord.



Why every body se's so, as I live-law: Come smoak
A Pipe of Tobacco at my house, Gentlemen.



We attend you my Lord.






Dear Mistris I sigh till I am as hoarse as a
Parrot, and cry every day, I beseech you love me.



If I thought you were in earnest, I'de let loose
The reins of love, it's hard to keep 'um in;
You are so bewitching.



To my fovour, my face you mean:
If I ben't in earnest, I wish the hands of a
Pick-pocket may deprive me of my Looking-glass,
Before I see home.

Pulls out a glass and looks in't.


A deep curse, is it so precious?



A representitive of the external faculties of the
Face; or rather to talk elegantly: The lively object
Of Beauty or deformity; In which we view as it were
The heart through the eyes.



These are high words indeed,
To be no longer woo'd, I love: and think
The day too long till wee are Married.



I am mad with joy! Your goodness! Your goodness!



Ben't carried away with every beauty,
And leave me; seeing I have been so free:
And opened my self to you, I could not help it;
Every sight of you made my stomack dance.



Will you grant one favour, sweet Mistriss?



In Modesty, what is't?



Cool me a little Mistriss, it's my modesty makes Me mince it so.



Are you hot then?



Oh! Beyond the Superlitive degree far, alas, that is to say,
Otherwise tormented, you don't know how I burn!



You an't burnt yet, Sir.



But scorcht very much, adde that favour to the rest.



My Service is due to you as my Husband, Sir.



Give me leave to satisfie my self with you now,
And then, I shall dye without it, sweet Love.



I'le obey your will vertuously inclin'd, Sir, but
I don't know what you mean.











And the sight of Alablaster Legs, Mistris.



Away, Sir, that must crown our Marriage;
Rejoyce in this your sincerity made you the
First in my favour.



I do indeed, this Verse of my own making tells you
So; for I had a good sign that you would
Love me: A Raven cried, Marry, Marry, at my
Chamber-window afore-day;
Now I have all, what else can I implore?
I ha' got my Love, and I desire no more.







A very good Verse, we call it a Heroick, it ha's
Just ten feet, which is the Orthodox Rule
Of our Modern Poets.




The Fool, or rather Knave, thinks I am enamour'd;
I am so but to see my Cozen vindicated:
Heavens have heard my prayers, and smile down
A perfect grant to our own intents;
He sleeps in's pranks securely, little dreaming
That I am privy to his waggery.
How men speak double to ensnare our Sex
With gilded words, when all their purposes
Are more remote than East from West, I wish
I could but speak with her: Boy, you boy.
Calling.
Enter Boy.
Go to Sarah Moren, and tell her I stay to

  28Speak with her.
Exit Boy.
Poor Maid, how she builds Castles in the Air,
And dreams of peace if he'd love her again:
Such is the thoughts of pleasure after pain.





Here, here Cozen, here's my Daughter, my Duck;
I came running in such haste, that I sweat
Intollerably.




Dear Cozen, I threw away sadness at your message,
Thinking it might have good news in it.



I sent to renew my former charge that you
Would carry all things close and hush, and you,
Aunt Winifred.








Be not so mad and furious
With Beucer, 'tmay contribute to your good.



I forsooth: I will indeed forsooth.



My Mistris expects me. Adieu.




Now Daughter, this is brave i'faith! this is gallant!
Hie Boyes! my Daughter, my Duck.



Let things be carried on in course, I ha' found
Fortune so fickle, that I can't repose
Trust to a benefit before I se't.



Well, my Dear, I'le do so too my Joy, so I will my Love.



'Tis possible to see good dayes once more,
Till then submit to that mishap it may be,
To others common in this world we see,
Nothing that's constant but inconstancy.
Not to remedy, yet to grutch is vain;
Use patience where we can't redress our pain:
The darkest nights bright morning still ensue,
After grief joy.




It may be so with you.




You Tom, this way mon.







I saw their faces, they were like a Queen for gallantry.



You make a fool of one, so you do.



I tell you you lie.



Then they'd be here afore now.



A Scene discovering Petus sleeping in a Field, four
Nymphs lay their hands on him, and sing.



I freely here thy pleasure: pronounce in Joys rich Banket;
O happy thee, whose eyes shall see: such bliss great love be thanked.



Your prayers are accepted: her heart doth well affect thee;

Venus affirms, her Son from harms: of envy shall protect thee.



My coming warns thee, Petus, of disasters,
Which with a hare thy head hang quivering over;
The Gods agree, no remedy
Shall save thy mirth, O harmless Lover.
By Fate ordain'd, e're thou wert nam'd,
A sudden hate thy Love shall cover.



Then rest contented, till the time's expired;
This past, your Joyes shall once again renew,
Thy fury will, lead thee to ill,
Of fight, and almost murther too:
Before the space of many dayes,
What we predict, you'l find it true.




Apollo's will's obey'd, let us address
Our Nymphly posture to the Wilderness.





You Rogue you came too late; here was the
Rarest singing that e're you saw.



Rare! all mirth I brave Maids! I believe they were Spirits.



You kiss my Fool, they were Women.



So they were, we see 'um go you way mon.



They sung, and did so fashion.




I can tell best, they sung so.




What, what Gentleman's this?



U•snigs, look here you, here's a Gentleman.



Law-ya-now, you must pay ten groats for Swearing.



What, in jeast you Puppy.


  30First and second.
He's no more Puppy than your self.




Who s'es he is? remember this
When you come in our ground.







There you may stay for me.



A Coward, a Coward, ah ha, aha.






What Vision dare controul my quiet? Now
I'm Berania's I'le meet the shapes of night,
And jear their threat'nings, gaze on busie Spirits,
That would tempt men to dread their hellish Rhimes,
A power garrisons me from the mumblings
Of huge Succubusses, whose weighty load
Presses mens folly, makes a spill, and then
Turns to a Prophesie as false as may be.
Till now I fear'd to have the idle actions
Of a disturb'd brain, lest it had figur'd out
Some omen to my aim; but since she's mine,
Im not deluded with the lovely shape
Of fallest Nymphs that bless me in a Tune,
Nor pant a'th' curses of the two last Sisters.





What makes you look so sad, Sir?











They say I shall be a murtherer.







Some that do not know, Madam, what strength I fetch from every word you speak to tear 'um.



Tell me the business.



Sleeping on this Bank,
Viewing your Idea deriv'd from my last thoughts.







When it is not yours, let it be deaths.



A shape too grim, my Lord; but pray tell on.



A couple of Maids, I like't them pretty well,
Assur'd me of my Heven, your self, Madam.







I'de lose ten thousand lives for't.




Ordain you for a better.




Put clouds upon my hopes, and strove to vail 'um

  31With darts of envy, as thick as showers of hail.



Shine clearer by contemning fooleries.



I'le change them to ambition, that you
Instruct me to't, and speak what's in my minde,
A dream, it happens, by contraries this ha's;
'Twas trouble, till now this pleasant Meadows could not
Be sweet by the presence of Berania,

Nor I blest with such an encounter.



Dreams are but fancies, and who grieve or joy
At their portendment, dread and fear a toy.





Mishap o' Beucer for me, as I live-law he's an arrant
Knave, I vow; well, how d'ye my Lord? we come I vow to
See what you'l do about Marriage: I protest, so I
Do, d'ye love her still? I vow I ask because I don't
See you prate and talk, and hug her.



To answer your demands is not 



To speak, we know your mind, an imprecation
Tail'd with a sigh, and silence is enough
To your favour, Madam, this man owes 



Inquiry how you pleaded for him.



A Lawyer are you?



What's your Fee, Sir?



But to kiss your hand;
Then I'le confine your angry brow to limits,
Your servants dye else, take a President.





A Gipsie can't speak more, know things aforehand.



I'le work that wonder, Madam, he confirms; 
Points to Petus. I ha' studied Phisnomy, told him his fortune.















He'd sooner speak a line without a vowel,
Than leave abusing, those were Ladies Servants.



It's punisht with a great deal of sorrow.



D'ye talk of trouble and sorrow already, (d'e-see?)



She speaks backwards, Sir.



Why, I vow that's the way to raise the devil, they
Say to speak backwards, so they do, don't, don't I pray.



No Sir, the Devil is raised by a Planetae impositione Retrogressa, as they call it.



What's that? what is it like?



Why I vow, it's like to fright me out of my wits,
So it is, to hear you talk so barbastically of
Old-Nick, as I live-law.

Litus passes through behind them.



Language will be cheap, my Father farms it.











Troth I am vext at the old Fool Occus, he ha's
Got a Pond of me for almost two hundred Pounds,
And no Witness but my Hand and Seal, (I would I had it)
And the Dorerd keeps such a quarter to have in
His money, that I can't rest for him, and to
Disbarst so much I can't neither: He's an old doting
Fool as ever I see.



Why don't you make one of him, and get your
Bond then?



May-be he's a cunning Fool.



I rather think so.



Here stands the business, I borrowed this money to
Build two or three small Houses; afterwards I morgag'd them,
And spent the money, and now this old Lord Fool
Would have me pay it.  



We can tell your meaning, you would put a trick
Upon him, and get the Bond without money.



Why faith I would and I know companions you
Are very ready in such businesses, you don't vvant
Wit; if you do't, I'le give you forty Pounds betvveen you.



I am afraid it vvould be difficult to obtain, by
Reason his Man Beucer ha's the keeping of it; vve
Must do it by a vveild.



For forty Pounds vve'l venture a broken Pate.
A trick, a trick.

Hannibal oft by policy ha's got
The Fort, his military strength could not.



My true hearts be stout, I'le vvarrant vve do the deed.





Mr. Hare, I vow I believe you'll put me to trouble, to get my own money, so I do: I wonder you'll be so dishonest, as I'm here.



Have patience my Lord, I am here with three men that owe me mony, to pay in yours, if I can get it: they promise to do their best for me.



Best and worst, all's one to me: if you pay it in, d'ye see? you'll have your bond, and be out of harms way, so you will.



Why I tell you Sir, stay but till these men tell me what they'll do, and I'll have my bond.



Why law you, because you are my friend I'll stay so long, so I will; but I vow, no longer, so I won't.




'Twas well you said we owed you mony; a good conceit.



You hear him say he'll be delayed no longer, it will be worth our time, prethy gentlemen lets plot quickly; the reward as soon as the work's perform'd.



You speak nobly, lets lay our heads together
To get the Paper, let our Genius tend,
And if we loose our labour there's an end.
Walk about a turn or two.
Look here Sirs, I conceive this will be the best way, one of us shall go and tell Occus that he believes Hare is in a very poor con∣dition; and that he believes Occus will loose his mony, if he don't look after him, but shall disswade him from arresting him, for fear that undoes him, &c. Then if he requires counsel in this case, he shall tell him, that he knows a cunning man, to whom if he goes with his bond, he's sure he can give him good advice.



Well said, by this hand thou hast a politick pate of thy own.



Then I'm sure he'll go, for the old fool will ask of the Devil before he'll loose his mony: then one of you shall be the Conjurer: when he comes, dont ask to see the bond, lest it beget suspition; for Beucer has taught him not to trust his Father with such things: but make a Circle. You Mr. Hare shall be drest like a Devil: strange words we must use (but my life for't) rather
  34
then he'll be torn to pieces, he throws down the bond; if so, take it up and keep it.
All hallow.
Hare shall be the Devil; you the Conjurer (to the second;) and I'll be his perswader.







Go attire your self (to Hare:) And you Mr. Conjurer be ready at a call.



I will, I warrant you: do you stand and see pri∣vate (to the first man,) I'll to perswade him.




I shall get my part of Forty pounds for seeing
A trick; I'd be hired so always; it's good.
Mony, and pleasure too, 's a double gain:
I'll have the cole, and they may share the pain.







I came a purpose, my Lord.



Well Sir, what d'ye say?



My Lord, love to you bids me tell you of a thing that may something concern you.



What is't? what is't, d'ye see?



Sir, I hear Mr. Hare oweth you nigh two hundred pounds; he is in a very poor condition, and I believe, except you get it of him very suddenly, you will loose it, for he is down the winde.



Why I vow, so I do, I'll arrest him, so I will, as I'm here.



No, Sir, then he's an undone man, you'll ne'er get it so.



Why, what would you ha'me do, d'ye see?



Here liveth a cunning man hard by, that is able to re∣solve you in all such points, how you shall get your mony, for a small piece.



Prethy tell me where he lives, I protest I'll go to him, I vow, so I will.



Stay, my Lord, I'll go fetch him, he lives at next door.




Why, I vow, I think I was wrapt in my Mothers smock,
  35
so I do, every body loves me so, so they do, I vow, to tell me how to get my money, as I'm here.




This is he, my Lord.



Why, Sir, after humble commendations, I vow, there is a man, his man is Mr. Hare, as I'm here, a duce take him for a knave, oweth me almost two hundred pounds, and he won't pay me, I vow: I came to ask your counsel, so I do, for a small piece, d'ye see?



Have you brought your bond, my Lord?



No, Sir, but I'll fetch it, d'ye see?




Now for my skill.






Here it is, d'ye see?



I have business, my Lord.




Well, will you stand still?
I, I, I, I, I, vow.

Conjurer makes a Circle.


Your mony comes, my Lord, all to you, I'll warrant you, when we have made a Scheme; Earth and Saturn, you'll have it.



So much the better.



My Lord, you will stand still be sure.



Shall I ha' my mony then?



No fear: hold up your bond in your right hand.



I, I will hold it as fast as you will, I vow.



Hy surge tu grande nebulo.
He makes figures.
Occus shaking, draws further off.

Iterum per nomen Poldavi surge.





Satan I defie thee, Satan I defie thee, d'ye see?
O I'll ha'no mony, I'll ha'no mony.
crying.


Conjurer goes behind Occus and holds him.



Throw down the bond, or we shall be torn.


Occus goes to throw it down twice or thrice, and pulls back.



I'th' Red Sea for ever, i'th' Red Sea lay him.



Down with it, or you dye.




O good, O good.

Throws down the bond, and runs away.
Devil takes it up, unvails his face.


Here 'tis, our will's obtain'd, our skill is shown,
The deed is done, and now the bond's my own:
Wit plays the critick, Policie keeps school,
I've got my wish, and Devil take the fool.









DIsconsolate old man under an Aspect
Shewing afflictions, were thy Infant-griefs
Conceived: Oh my Son Litus, is he dead?
Gray-hairs repose your sorrow in the Grave;
Oblivious of all future happiness;
Is he devoured? Monstrous cruelty!
Barbarism in wilde Beasts; could you not content
Your hungry stomacks, with the woful ruines
Of my deceased life, so often walking
Through dismal Alleys of your woody territories?
But you must chaw the Branch of all our Race.



Be not immoderate, my Lord, in sorrow;
May be some nimble Buck, while he was hunting,
Was trac'd to death by his toilsome pursuit;
Or else so far, some honest passer by
Must guide his looks to homeward: thousand chances
Hinder intents of coming back; and yet
When he returns, makes mirth to think upon't.








Pray young Gentlewoman, do you hear report of Lord Litus?



Do I dream? or is his Villany before me? I'm terrified at's thoughts.



How dar'st O base woman
Takes her by the sleeve.
Stain my Sons honour with the name of Villain?
Unless your words be reasonable, I'll make
My aged hands the tragick instruments
Of your untimely murther.



Hold, my Lord, I have cause enough to speak it.







If he's your Son, Sir, understand he lately
Fained to sigh for my Mistriss Berania;
But she knowing his rashness, would not suffer
Him see, much less to confer with her: At which,
I weep to name it, he gave so much scope
To his vile passion, that he hir'd a Ruffin,
Help'd by himself, to force her from the Garden,
As she was walking with her Father and me:
She had perish'd, had not two young Gentlemen
Rescu'd her fainting soul; they kill'd his Ruffin,
Drove him away, my Lord; and since that time
Shame has conceal'd him.



Swear that this is true.



By all my love to truth.




Long since I have predicted some disastrous
And gloomy accident to follow his
High-minded stubbornness; Oh me, oh me!



A chair, a chair, my Lord faints.




My sons departure, tells me I must have
A doleful life, or else a doleful grave.
Fear ne'r to see him more, affrights me so,
It makes me loth to stay, and loth to go;
Lest he should live still, then if I expire,
'Twould kill his joy, and kill my own desire.
I'll tarry, perchance Heavens so kinde may be,
To revive my Son, and so to revive me.

  38By his return, if not, I'll yeild my breath,
First due to sorrow, and next due to death.
But why cheer I so? if he liv'd, ah then,
He'd send me news by word, or news by pen,
To ease my fears, or else expel my grief
By a quick burial, or a quick relief.
He's gone, I forgive you, now suffer me


To slide from this vale of extremity.




My Lord, I've here one lately see your son i'th' wood hereby.



Away, kill me no more.





What news, my Lord, has taught your eyes to weep?
Shed one tear more, and let that be bestowed,
For not accepting crosses as you should:
The change of all things here puts you in minde,
You're tossed like a Ball between the Rackets;
Shew your self Master of your passions; use 'um
As a wise Angler, play 'um all to death.



My son is buried, but where I know not.



Since this days dawning, Sir, his son was seen
Alive and well in these adjacent Woods.



Won't all perswade a change, my Lord? believe it,
Breath while there's hopes, the truth is quickly known.







If he's there, you have waies enough
For his recovery: beseech the King
His Forests may be search'd, and every place
Suspected, enter'd by his Commission:
The Seal makes people double diligent;
Let your reward provoke them to industry.



I'll go and beg that favour of the King.







Poor man, how sad he is!

  39Joy to you Mistriss,
Make much of your Servant Beucer.





Steward, count out a hundred Dollers for her,
Your news deserves it; till now, I could not trust
So fair a Fortune.



'Tis so, never mock.



Forget to part the Cash, add ten times more,
It's seconded; the Guinian Neger never
Humm'd for his passage more to serve a Master,
Then I at this; may it be credited?



As what you see.




Takes up the thoughts, awakes and conveys them
To skreeks of slumber; as the matter is,
A pill eant half so pleasant; this has wash'd
Disturbance down: I can freely inquire
The love and progress of Berania.




Dissemble what you know, all is providing;
We wish his voice be clear, bids 'um good morrow
After the Musick of the Marriage-night.
My Mistriss airs out sweetest expectation
To drive the time away.

Occus is free to't, no impediment
Stains blew proceedings, but Lord Petus Father,
Who I don't know his reason, keeps at distance,
But 'twill away, it has been motion'd twice.



Patience to hearing's the first sign of grant:
He's faint, whose Fathers first repulse doth dant.






Vile, damn'd, rotten, pockie, ugly, devilish Dogs, I vow, they have got my mony and my bond, so they have; a Devil on 'um, I'll see the Devil Hang'd, as I live, law so I will, before I'll go to him again, for a Rogue as he is, I vow, to come to cheat so, as I'm here: I believe the Witches sent him: it's a damn'd thing to be a Conjurer.







May't please your Majesty.



Rise up, my Lord.



To grant me one Petition 't may put off
The sorrows that do over-whelm my heart,
For my sons loss.



Name it, be confident,
Your former Services lye fresh within me,
I'll do more then you ask.




Betwixt this mornings fits of fate, when scarce
I could wish any thing but to end my life,
A beam warm'd me a little; and thus it was,
My son was seen alive; grant me so much,
All places may be searched with your order:
His golden mouth that tells me tidings of him,
Shall be inrich'd with a reward that's fit.



Why went he away?



I know not, but being out,
Some private grief is pleas•d with wandring,
And keep him there, if he's alive.




Give whom my Lord appoints a large Commission,
To the Chancellor.
To examine what's suspected; wish you tydings.



It shall be done.



Heavens bless your Majesty.


King going forth, enter Occus.
Kneels.


Your worship, your honour, Majesty, King, King, the De∣vil has got my bond, so he has, I vow, I pray give it me agen.



The Devil your bond, my Lord? I can't help that.




So, so, this is very brave, the King can grant other things, so he can, I vow; but he won't grant me, so he wont, I shall be plagued still; a Devil 'um all for me, that mony would a bought me and my daughter new clothes to the Wedding, so it would, I vow; he had a confoundable great pair of horns, so he had.







Now our business fadg'd gallantly, it did.









I got him here with a flea in his ear, to you Mr. Con∣jurer with your figures.



Your figures got the bond.




Old Occus thought we Saints had been,
He see us stand so civil;
Till I took him by the shoulder,
And thrust him to the Devil.



Now you have your bond, let's go and have our mony.









My Lord Lonus sayes I shall have mony enough, if I finde him.



You? I'll finde him first, or I'll look as Nunkle Morris does the Hedges for a Hare, faith.



Swaukers, we'll all go, go whoop and hollow, till we make him see, if he be to be seen, I'll warrant you.



You Owls, I'll make him come with a sussorarah, as the Gentle-folk say.



If I finde him, I'll drink Sack with all the mony.



You drink Sack? you drink a   won't you?



Out on such an unmannerly bastard to say   you're a great booby.



Hie to our work, before George.






Tell me some reason, Sir, 'tis easie for you
To contradict my remedy, because
You have forgot its torments; yeild to it,
Requite my duty with a Fathers grant:
Did you but feel the flames I do, your own
Tortures would kneel for a whole Sea to quench 'um.



Check your pretended fancy; to my care
Commit your self, I'll chuse a match shall please you:
Our Countries wide, within the circle on't
I'll fetch a beauty shall deface your Mistriss,

  42And bring you to your right minde.




I marry her, or else command my grave;
One of them two must end my love or life.



In sons obedience best besuits the minde
To Fathers precepts, as the Clouds by winde.



Yea, where obedience grees with good, 'tis so:
But 'tis not good to kill me; pitty show.



I will in giving what my self affects.



To please it self, Love others still neglects.



Why Love approaching mischief cannot see.



If that betyde, lay all your blames on me.



'Tis vain to move what's fixt: Heavens bless your choice,
That in your joys, we both may like rejoyce;
And not to strive against the stream, I here
Approve your love shown to your lovely deer.





Tell Berania, I am happy, sister;
Heavens shrowd from ills: Lidorus now descend 








Them all the way to Heaven.



Why must we leave you?



Understand me, Lady, 'tis so nigh,
I'll look at it as the wise Elephant
Adores the Moon, and use variety
Of contemplation to express my Jubil.



Forget to sigh then.



I may use a few that 'tis no neerer.



I'll go carry her word,
'T would be too harsh tho: won't your patience, Sir,
Make earthquakes till its spent?



Now what are Ladies?



Forgive, my Lord, han't I had punishment?
If not, I'll leave the seat of Cherubins
And be your Vassal; 'fraid to speak, I'll wait
the slowest motion of your hand or eye
That calls me to't again: consult definers
Of Angels or of women; let 'um ring

  43With words of rapture above all the flourishes
Have been invented since the time of Rome:

I'll swear they say true, when they call 'um gods.
If this won't do, perswade some gentle Beauty
To stick me for a year; and all that while
I'll cry its just, and with my latest breath,
Damn my condition, 'fore I was converted.



You make us think you worship every thing a Lady has laid hands on.





At a white Peticote a mile from him;
Be real, and under that consideration,
You'll finde a new world all made of delight.



There's other things between.



How now, my Lord!



Else every one would make discovery.



Women and truth are best, when naked, ha'
The sweetness of imagination, when
Their lovely blushes in a pretty face
Are fancied, telling us of all our sins.



Or but one touch of their hands charm with pleasure:
Refiners are not half so jocund, Sir,
To see gold drops fall thick as Rain from Ore
That promist little. 



As I, my Lord, have been
About your age to dwell on the melting lips
Of those sweet Females.



Excellent, I faith, it posts to him, my Lord.





I have often wish'd to see my Sister muse;
A reverend Priest would joyn 'um both together.



What undiscerned mischief dare lurk private?
The assenting trumpets of our holy Temples,
Confound all Treason; her one presence has
Power to kill the infection of an Adder
That leaps cross their can did intentions.



None can be sure of futures; every point
Of time's defended from black Maladies

  44By something pious, or the influence
Of prosperous sighs.



Where both are pure as they,
I'll prophesie the eights of Harmony.



Curst not to credit you.






Kept you at distance, like a well-bred Masty,
Will see a shoulder of Mutton in a Dish,
And Perish ere he'll taste it. 'Twas me Madam
Beat the Alarm.




To acknowledge it, I'll wait upon your safety,
And beg for watch-nights to attend your person.





Go for Litus: Thele stay you there,
Hell be almost angry I tarry so long.
To kill, or wound, or poyson, some of these
Shall open to the right or left: I can't

I can't, nor won't bear it, see my own self
Spit upon, while my younger flattering imp
Is always pray'd for and admired? away,
Let me be melted into nothing, if

I don't cure this ere I am two Suns older:


Stab me if I don't convert my promise
To performance. My Lord, their visits tire
The day: Cabinets full of letters stand
For gold to stare on, every breath brings message
Of new devoyrs, and returns deep loden
With Lovers whimsies: to your last discourse

I have paid reverence, 'twas right and true:
The hodge-podge words of her phantastick pate
Serve for good morrow to me: all their studies
Are for others to conjure one another,
In changing hearts: catalogues of their flouts
Swell when I'm amongst 'um; every moment

I ha'been urgent in perswasions to her,
She has scorn'd 'um.



Troth Madam, I wondred you

  45So long together could forget your birth:
Two gallant spirits, their continual practice
Strikes deeper then a Chinian Dart: You know
The unfit receiving she has of your counsel,
To all but who their cogging words and looks
Buy respect of; your Nobler minde is plain,
Kill bad examples; famous for a Pattern:
Shew their dull Genius the way to mend;
Correction's studied quickly, though I must
Confess revenge is hungry at their carriage,
I thought to come ere now.



Take this prevention, shortly I intend
To put in practice arms that shall divide 'um:
It's time enough, the more intire they,
One bullet takes two bodies glew'd together.
D'ye think I can forget their outrages?
Sooner my name and Country; I'll bear both
Fair looks till then.



My Father, I'm inform'd,
Has ordered for my search; I'll sooner dye
Then be discovered 'fore we have ended this.



I'll flee to 't.




If you don't, and quickly too,
I'll be contriver and Executioner:
She can't help it, may be, but my oath
Tears out the heart of one, if not of both.






I have defer'd so long, dear Cosen,
In expectation of your promist help,
That I can't hide it longer; my shame begins
To increase: I fear without your sudden counsel,
I shall be forc'd to give the world an Infant:
I blush to think on't.



Don't do so, my Joy.



Heal my distemper, use time while you have it.



I do, do my sweet Nephew, my love: my Daughter's with Childe for sooth.



Be diligent, ben't absent, shortly I'll send,
Till then I'll pray for good success.




My Cause is just; what rockie heart can hear
My sad complaints, and not relieve me? Wonders
Have brought content to th' harmless; let some vision
Threaten his disloyalty; and then beseech
Him view the curses ready to fall on him,
For taking holy things to witness how
Clear his thoughts were from this impiety.
Man's not impenetrable, can't a sin
Be frighted into goodness? sure it may:
Skies send I live to see that happy day.





Witness impartial ordinances how
I loath the falshood of a perjured lover:
Nature commands me to do justice, and
It's in my power; she admires him still.
Help me some shining Spirit to consult
Your own affairs, and reap the glory on't.





Dear Mistriss, I have seen a thousand doomsdays since you said I pleased you; one word now makes me lighter hearted then a feather; in sober sadness I shall be seen no more, if I dye for love: My tears run faster then Greyhounds for you: a good simile is the chiefest part of Language: I've read over the Aca∣demy of Complements, and pick'd out the best rhetorick to wo you; a Parson may Marry us: be attracted, be attracted.



The eagerness I have of Marrying you,
Makes Moons seem twelve-months, every minute hours:
But for my friends good will, I had long ere now
Seal'd to our Wedding.



You are so wise, Mistriss, that I should be worse then a Fanatick, to wish any thing till you say the word.



These are expressions fit for strangers, Sir,
Not her that duty tyes to you, cease 'um pray.



The best quality of a Sutor, is to be well spoken, and pro∣nounce every word with an emphasis; and I thank my Stars, I have both as sure as a dye; and if I live, will delight your ears with the
  47
high-flown words of Romances: Amadis de Gaule, and Palmorin de Oliva, shall be my every days discourse.







And I'll delight your ears with songs of my own making.



Would you not have me coy?



'T would kill me twenty times.



Provide a Priest, we'll invite nobody.



Am I above or no? methinks I turn round, and see a hundred nooks, and a bag of gold in every one; so high and mighty is my rapture: when, Angel, when?



Be Lord o'th' time your self, when you'll appoint it,
I have chang'd my condition already:
What a tode am I (to speak passionately?)







I bought a Token of my love, and forgot to give it you.

Gives her a stomacher of Ribonds, and a Love-hood.


You put your self to charge, I humbly thank you;
These shall be my Wedding-Furniture.



Every particle of 'um, I bought them for the same pur∣pose; to be privately and suddenly Married, are the symptoms of a fiery and Elegant Lover, you know my meaning.



You have forc'd my will, meet me at S. Thomas Church,
Ere half an hour's spent, I'll be your wife:
Shall I use flattery to my dearest heart?



I'll hire a Parson, you prodigious heap of vertues, and meet you sooner then I would Elyzium delights.



Be swift, sweet Sir: for since it must be so,
I'll haste to Church, and dress me as I go.



I am going to Paradise in a down Blanket.





You lye you Cur, I see it.



Sir, I say, I see it first tho.



You, guds Waukers, I came when it was welly hot with∣in side, so I did, you fools.



So did I, and I'll go carry it to my Lord Lonus.



So do, it's warm still, and so it was, when we all see it first, Wan't it? then it must be his Sons Glove, and he must be some∣where hereabouts.







You shan't, you whelp, I will.

First and second fight.
Third takes it up; all take it from him.


We'll teach you better manners then to steal: I dare swear it's Litus his glove.



So I say, you may see it is a Lords glove mon, by the Ribonds, what dost talk of that?



And he's within shot.



I'll carry it to his Father and tell him so.



If you don't say we all found it, I'll swinge you agood.



You fool, would you trust him? I'll cudgel you faith, so I will, ha' you no more wit? we'll all carry it together, else he'll get the mony to himself.



You ha' more wit then us all.



Shall's drink when we have done?



All wheaters, my hony.







My humour was fain'd, I'll counterfeit no longer, but be serious.

Thele enters, and pulls off Sarath's Love-hood: Beucer amazed.







'Tis so, 'tis so;
Negromancie vanish, no Negromancie.





It's so indeed, it's so my love, my chuck.




I married her by the name of Thele Moron,

Hers is so, and I changed mine to make
Your Marriage firm, and you religious:
She hers from the beginning by design.





It's just, my Lord and husband.



'Tis just, just Maiden, and I free remit


Your sacred wisdom that invented it.
Great powers above ordain'd it; and I yeild
I'm rightly serv'd, who soweth shall reap the field.
And now to you dear Mistriss, I forgive,
To his wife.
And more commend the plot that makes you live
My dearest wife, protesting to Apollo,

This chastest Marriage, chastly true to follow,

  49With purest love imbrace, I do repent
What's past, and pray our lives hence be content.







MY Lord, between Berania and my Son
You know proceedings, bless 'um both together.



A Devil Devil 'um, he has got my bond, so they have, I vow.







Why, I vow, I think they did it a purpose.



I mean, speak to the matter.



So I do, I vow; it's a great matter I should be cheated so, so it is; but she shall have him, if she will, as I live, d'ye see? we'll talk by and by, I'll ha' new clothes to the Wedding, so I will.






I'll finish quickly to that Gallery there.





Sir, whether should one prize a noble name
And vertuous, or the respect of a friend,
If both can't dwell together?



Loose not the first for worlds.



Was ever any tryed like me?
One of them two I must, 'tis your concerns:
I'll dye guiltless of your hurt, my Lord:
Please you to hear me, take the saddest story
That ere was told, yet short I'll strive to speak it,
It requires privacie.











Well, we have done a great deal of business, let me see, we have, I vow; well, what then? if my Daughter have Children, I shall be a Grand-father, so I shall.


How d'ye Son-in-law? this is a damnable trouble, so it is, till it's
  50
done; you'll make all the haste you can, d'ye see? I vow, I was never half so preteritory when I was a Batchelor; if you were Married, it would be over, would it not?





Our meeting, my Lord, tells me 't was ordain'd


You should avoid: 'lass I can go no further;
I've so much breath as shall tell you the strangest.
Forgive me Skies, shall I be false, my Lord?



Tell me why this sadness is upon you.



I will: turn Rock to hear it, let's be close.


Litus from the Gallery speaks.



To kill, or to be kill'd 's the largest scope
My injuries can give; though all the signs
Of Hell and Terror meet me, I'll go on,
And be as famous for my courage in't
As Nero for his tyranny: What boots
A man when dead, to be accounted good?
If his exploits be noted, though they have power
To give an ague at the relation of them,
And make men drop down dead with very fear,
To tell the most inhumane bloody murthers
They have committed; yet some stander by
Adores the Actor for the strangeness of 'um.

Dionysius is as much talkt on, as if
He had chang'd all Cicily to Alms-houses:
I'm in the custody of sin, it whirls me
With his byas, and I can't resist it;
As good proceed as draw back and be murthered:
Though I should be surpriz'd i'th' midst o'th' fact,
My name shall signifie a bloody act.






Whence comes my ruine? he won't speak to me;
What Sorcerer has had to do with him?







Oh racks of horror! could you finde no other
Subject to work upon, but my destruction?

Lidorus, where's the truth your flattering tongue
Would dress in pleasant painted skins of Serpents?
Supream Commanders, is my life alone


Odious, that under such a black dark Cloud
You would smother all my joys?



With grief, my Lord,

I tell you of your faults: love blinded you,
Else many a time you might a seen him coming
Softly to meet Berania alone;
When you appear'd, he slunk away; and still
It is his custom, try, and trust: Adieu.




Fawning delusions, you have took your pride,
To build higher the imaginations of my triumph,
That they the greater downfal may receive:
If I revenge my self, I'm worst of all.
Tho his disloyal heart can smother up
Such treachery to me, I'll never prove
Guilty of so much wickedness to him.
But stay fond kindeness, what, shall I incline
To spare him his life, that seeks to take mine,

I am reduc'd to this untoward end,
Either to loose my honour, or loose my friend.
If this my comfort's gone, that to forego,
Makes me ingrateful, and a Traytor too:
He gave it first, and who better then he
May borrow that which himself lent to me?
In this quandary make thy self a sheath:
Farewel once Mistriss, I must bid adieu
To my own self, but first of all to you;


When I am dead, that you may know the truth,
Sets it to his Brest.
My blood shall be the pen and writer both:
Though you to others kindness could impart,
Yet your name onely's graven within my heart:
If ask'd, what did this tragedy incur,
You've been the cause, but I the Murtherer.
Throw fury on it self.

He goes to kill himself.
Berania catches the sword.



For Heavens sake, my Lord, tell me the cause.

Lidorus enters; seeing Petus, walks away.



'Tis true, ye darts of Pluto nail me here.




He turns from her.
'Tis too much to bear; he has been my friend,
Well, but now he is my foe; and I as justly
May make my self his, my sword shall reward it.


Losana and Litus in the Gallery.



How now, what think you?



Whither is he gone?



To write an invitation to Lidorus.



Then one or both; Lidorus has the best judgement.




I know't, my Lord, tother's sooner dispatcht;
He has no skill at all, he dyes, my life for't.



'Tis well contriv'd, thanks to your wit and will.

Go from the Gallery.





Deliver this to Lord Lidorus; flee.




 meets Lidorus, he reads it.



Upon suspition, my Lord, where's the Wisdom
And sobriety was moderator
In all your passion? quite forgot? tho he
Be frenzied with an Amorous fire, I'll
Not take it as a challenge: Yet consider,
He's in earnest; if I don't accept it,
A woman or a coward nick-names me.
In Challenges, we ought more to reflect
On honours splendor, then the fight's neglect;
And invitations warlike, ought to be
Answer'd with courage, not benignity.
Tell him I stay: how clear am I from it?
Exit Page.
Sweet is a life retir'd from all affairs
Of State or Court; one sad mischance or other
Waits upon Pomp; 't has always emulation
To study ones own private houshold-good,
In the short walks of an inclosed Garden;
And there content strikes envy in the bosome.





My life or his, this treason must redeem:
Honor then friendship should have more esteem.

Lidorus bare to meet Petus.






Hold, your villany's too obvious to admit of ceremoni∣ous parles.



















Fight again: Lidorus falls.



One thing I crave before I dye; tell me
The reason of this fight.



By your life that sees his last period, resolve
The truth to what I ask.



Else Heavens shew themselves my everlasting enemies.



Hast not betray'd me? tell your unjust dealing.
With Berania, you are both dishonest.



Some miracle of the Gods shew my innocence:
Or if I have been guilty, all the torments
In Hell torment me for disloyalty.
Who blowed this fire in your brest, my Lord?



Will't make me kill my self? is it not true?

Losana told me, and I see it too.



What did you see?



You walk away as soon
As entred; 'twas because we were together:
She must be alone to entertain your visits.




Losona told me, you suspected me
Of being too familiar with your Mistress;
Advised me to march off when I beheld

Berania with you, that in time it might
Abate your jealousie.



Your coming was upon a match, what say you?



If so, let me be match'd with the worst fury
That ever howl'd in Hell: Losana bid me
Come to meet her here about some business:

I went when I see you, you know the cause.




I smell sulphur; Losana told me
What I have spoke, and that you were lov'd of her.



Trayterous Losana, she-Devil, she 'twas, she
Brought me to my grave; secure her, I am faint;
The house is full of treason, use your judgement
To punish it; I could divulge it now,
But I want breath: I am sent for, Sir, farewel;

  54Your innocent servant remits you his death:
Once more farewel, and think upon me.







My Lord, what's this?



Speak woman, did'st thou think
He'd a dyed with a heavy conscience, and
Conceal'd your sin to damn him?



I'll be tryed with fire, and in my defence
Kiss glowing steel: bring burning coles to me,
I'll keep 'um in my hand till they extinguish,
And never cry, to shew you I am clear,
Believe me, Sir.




Did not you and Lidorus 'gree to meet?
He was a coming, but seeing me with you, return'd.



My Sister bid me come about some business;

I thought not to meet you, and much less him.



It's clear a plot to make us fight; tells him
That I suspected he was too familiar
With Berania: then tells me, that he
Was naught with her indeed; and more, that he
Agreed to meet her, but to walk away
At any time, when he see her with me;
Then bids him walk away, when he see me,
That it might in time abate my Jealousie,
And so got's all together here unknown
To each other; a cast a contrived Devilry:
He went away, for fear of my displeasure;
And I thought he went guilty of what was told me;
That we were both innocent, and both suspitious.



Litus contrives it, my Maid once or twice see 'um together.



Desperate Losana, could the Devil invent
To cloak thy damn'd malice with this pretence
Of love to us both?




Lidorus is dead, it's known you kill'd him.




A wretch to tread the earth: Villanous woman,
Wert here, I'd gore thy hellish heart. O Monster!
Treacherous Monster; no less then thy infernal

  55Life shall satisfie me. Dear Lidorus,

How dare I name thee? every noise I hear
Crokes horror to me: why, I could not help it,
He can't be brought to life again: I'll dye,
And punish my self for so damn'd a sin.

Losana, Tiger-bitch, to thy breath
My hands inrag'd shall give a mournful death:
And for your witch-craft, I will make thee rue it
By just revenge, if my lifes price can do it.







Hereabouts 'twas done; Petus is fled.



He's gone, the King must pardon him, or we shall see him no more: what was it about?



They talk of treachy i'th' business.







Good morrow my Masters all, good morrow.







May it please your Majesty, it's I am 



Why you know it is against our Act that Duels should be fought, the penaltie's death.



I come not to know rigor, but crave pardon.



To pardon this, would against Justice tend.

King sits in a chair.


Justice draws mercy, Sir, at every end.



Yea, where the offence is done against the will.



It was my Liege, he did not love to kill.



Why fought he then?



To vindicate his right.



That's got by Law, and not by single might.



'T was, Sir, so sudden done, forc'd by a plot,
That strength must needs decide, what Law could not.



The Fathers service, and the Sons deport;
One in our Wars, the tother in our Court,
Tho against my Law, command me to asswage
For once the penance of my Statutes rage;
But take notice, lest it should authorize
Others like manner precepts to despise,

  56Renew its force; and hence will hardly I
Give him his life that makes another dye.




But let it teach better things.


Litus and Losana in the Gallery.



I knew it would not take, Lidorus is dead.



I wish it had been Petus.



Wishes nothing avail, our treason's divulg'd; and
If we are caught, we shall soundly suffer.



My disgrace is so great, I dare not return:
But since 'tis so, I'll alter our design,
And have his life, or it shall cost me mine.






A pardon? it were better that I were
Condemn'd to death, by the most cruel torture:
To live, is onely to be knawed upon,
And suffer lingrings, which subtly beguile
Me of my rest: One blow consumes them all;
But on my life depends a dearer; and
If I were dead, she'd be expos'd to th' rage
Of bloudy butcheries: I'll be reveng'd.
Dear Lidorus, how shall I pacifie
Thy angry Ghost! I kill'd thee, and were serv'd
But just, if thy deathy fingers should
Pull out my timorous heart.



You see, my Lord,
The fruits of too rash anger.




Dear Madam, so sudden a Burial; let me
Sacrifice my life to asswage this fault,
In doubting of your chastity.




Hold, my Lord, I shall dye to see you thus;
'T was foul, but now it's over.



Oh that I could come at this demons urchin!
Litus appears i' th' Gallery.

I'd break the charms of Belzebub, and bite
The sulphry links that keep her; all the flashes
Of brimstone should but heat my purposes,
Till with her blood I had made a deadly poyson

  57Should kill all that but speak or think upon her:
Where art Air? cover her not, she will infect thee:
Ground swallow her up, or throw her to me, that I
May rid the world of lust and treachery.






You see how things fall out.




You are sled; Petus beside himself,
Studies to make a sad example of you.



Are you against me too?



Not I, I wish
I could but see the colour of his heart-blood;
Till then I shant be quiet, nor you peel off
Perpetual shame.



Does he tear at me thus?



I heard him in the Gallery.




I'll do his business: stay here, I have provided.






I wish I had ne'er begun this, I am vext;
I dream of Blood and War: in my condition
Distraction banquets: I have entred on it,
And will go on.


But this one way to save our lives, go up,






Here, here, come hither.




We attend your will.



There's one has done me a great deal of wrong,
Weeps.
'Twill do no good to name it; if you will
Undertake to murder him, you shall
Be satisfied largely.



No fear Madam, we can do it.



I, and we will do it.







Stand in that corner; within a little while he comes to you Gentlemen, be sure you kill him; I can't describe him by his clothes, but there none comes in a whole year; dispatch him quickly.



We'll use swords to't.



Best we have them ready.



Surest and safest, these (All draw) will give him a meal he shall never disgest, I'll warrant you.



Go, and don't fail to kill the first that comes.












Go to Lord Petus, and tell him you saw Losana go down that lane just now; do your arrand well, and here's for you; then out by my Chamber.











I was a coming to you, my Lord.







I heard you inquire for Madan Losana,

And I see her go down that lane just now.





Now pitty be gone.

He goes apace: draws his sword.

Four Clowns overtake him with clubs, and surprize him, taking him for Litus.


Ha, ha, now we ha' you; nay, go to your Father.



What mean you, Gentlemen?



Gentleman us no more then we Gentleman you; for I'faith you shall go.




Hold fast there: you are an undutiful son indeed; we'll Litus you, I'faith.



So, I thought we should catch you at last.



Stand off, you rustick Bores.




Hold him fast; if we let him go, we shall all be hang'd.



Get you home, we have searched the woods for you to some purpose.



How dare you Villains?



Uds waukers, we'll cudgel you, so we will, for all you're a Lord.



There's a good one, shall we please your father or you?



Swinge him, swinge him agood if he won't go; the King man set us a work to look you, and gave us leave.



Was ever Noble scratch'd with dogs before?




In with him, in with him to his father; come along, good my Lord Litus, come along, or we'll make you with a murrin.

All pull him in.


It must be Litus man, and nobody else.


Litus and Losana in the Gallery.



Now Sir, from an abyss of discontent
Three thrusts have built us up security;
Peace over all those mists that interpos'd
Between Berania and you are vanish'd.

Petus is dead, the Boy came to my Chamber,
And see him run to eternal banishment:
Them three dispatcht him, ere one cry could come
Toth' ears of any living. Court your Mistriss;
But make devotion to me; I invented
His death, and your felicity.




Seeing there's no lets to my preferment, I'll
Adore your memory, and gratifie
With forty Duckets, them that laid him dead:
Come along Madam, I'll see how they sped.



They could not finde resistance from him.





I'm ravish'd with these Musical words,
I'll see how they did their business, and
Content 'um for it.



Well enough, I warrant you.

Litus goes to the stage, and to the Thieves.

Thieves set on him, follow him out and fight.


Hold, I am not the man.










Take me for Litus? Oh I fear she's gone.
He sees the body.
Ho, ho; Watch, Watch, what's this? what bloudy business?




How came this, do you know, my Lord? I dare not but ask you.



Coming by and seeing it, made me cry out.



Alack, he is newly kill'd;

  60Watch, go pursue the murderers: Alas, my Lord,
Exeunt Watch.
This is my Lord Lonus his son Litus, for whom
We have search'd so long.




I was subdu'd, and carried to his father
Instead of him, not twenty minutes ago:
Curst be the foolish messengers for't.




O be gratious, good my Lord, I'll confess all.



To the Justice with him.



We caught him by himself, just at the gate.






Oh my son! could I not see him ere he dyed?





Now alls fulfill'd, that I
Did with my Sister prophesie.



It is, it is, it is.

Voices heard answering within.


Their days shall increase
In kindness, love and peace.







Till the terms of their breath.
Shall be ended by death.




Chorus.Now the Season draws nigh,
That we welcome our Bride;
With our Songs Melody,
When all grief's laid aside.











The Crocodel confest it was:
But by kinde providence those Clowns ordain'd
To stop me by mistake, I should ha' perish'd.



Is my father so long a getting my Sister clear?



You have run through tryals.



This was the most horrid,
Take all the story at a fitter time.






O come in my Daughter, Losana doth almost despair, so she does; she is forgiven, so she is, and at liberty, I vow, come in.

Petus offers to run at her; Berania holds him.







Here they come, I won't go to the Justices, I shall be burnt, keep me; there's Lidorus his Ghost.







I'll go to bed; the man in the white cap; the dead man bound under the chin; the great Devils, and the little Devils twitch, and twitch off all the clothes: Look the dead horse heads chop, and chop in the sea, and the water all over my chamber: O dear, help, help, a cave in the Wet-wood; the Fryars and the Nuns that are dead, look how they run by me: Now, now again, there's the spirit with the withered face stands boult upright: d'ye see the little beads tumble about? tingle, tingle, tingle, that's the bell in the Monastery: Through the grates, the woman in Pau∣tado, is hang'd without her head, for saying her prayers: Here comes the Devil like a mourning Gentlewoman with a peak: The Candles burn dim.



Hold, hold, what shall I do? here's nobody, what shall I do?



In the name of all the Powers be silent.

She falls down in a swound, they recover her; kneeling.


Oh I'm undone! what ails me terror? I'm dead, forgive me.



Sister, you have offended grievously.



I am, tho griev'd, not sham'd to ask pardon
For that which will defile good lips to utter;
Caus'd by my envy to my Sister dear:
Envy, damn'd envy, makes me kneeling here.
The Devil and Litus urg'd me with their tongues
To cause my Sisters and your death at once:
Which sinful thought with grief I now repent,
To Litus vile, that I should so consent.
All men, me seem'd, did onely well affect
My virtuous Sister, and my self neglect:
That prompted me to this revengeful spight,
Fit to be nam'd in Charon's dismal night.
I'm justly serv'd, and Heavens just Judge hath brought
My wicked purpose to this wicked nought;

  62And made that evil light on my own head,
With which I hop'd you would be ruined.
Oh pardon me, and I'll henceforward be
Your humble Hand-maid in captivity.



Rise Losana, I forgive you
Your basest Treason, and henceforward wish
That better graces may your Brest inrich:
Your freest freedom, I do not deny,
Do what you please.



Dear Sister, so do I.




I repent all for a preparative
To order and Religon, if I may
Be worthy on't: I humbly beg your leave,
That my devotion may be fitted by
A pilgrimage to the Shrine of Loretto;
By a new favour I may be absolv'd,
As penitent for all the impious stains
Of my bad life.




I grant you your petition;
Go, if I never see you any more,
Labour to expoliate these sins
By earnest penitence: live holy,
And the everlasting goodness be your guide.



If we ne'er see more, adieu, dear Sister,
Weeps.

I wish you all the sweetest contents of
Your strict and holy being.
Kisses her.



Well, dear hony, God b'w'y, I weep to part, so I do: you had best take some Strong-water with you, I vow, so I do, to cheer you up in your long Journey, d'ye see?





That ere we see if this be the last day,
Do you for me, as I for you will pray.






Petus takes Berania by the hand.



Now what remains, but after all our fears,
Griefs, sorrows, troubles, terrors, frights and tears,
We beg. 






Make me not miserable again;
Or is it true? speak, can Lidorus live?



Read the just cause of his being secret.





  63That of a man have made me an Angel;
Or happier, if't be true; don't tantalize me.



My Master fearing your displeasure, vow'd
I'th' Holy Temple to see you bestow'd
On that fair Lady, or see his Winding-sheet
Laid at his head, ere you should know he liv'd;
But now rejoyces at your welfare.



Where remains the crown of all our sweetness?





Here, if you are resolv'd to call it so.



Forgive me, or punish, I am at your mercy.



Rise, and be as happy in your Mistriss,
As I in seeing you: my wounds, though deep,
Were cured on this condition. 







For offering him a thrust, my eyes have since
I've been recovered, paid the private walls
A thousand tears.



Let this bright day be worship'd:
A universal benefit lives with you.
The King has got his thoughts clad all in black
For your supposed loss; chang'd to ambition
My son, but you to make him glorious.



It vext me to the heart to hear you were kill'd, so it did.



Don't let me hinder your proceedings, crown your ex∣pectation, my felicity.



Your hands; I joyn you both, you're man and wife.
Takes 'um by the hand.
The Ceremonies take another time.



And so say I, I vow: but hark, who comes here?






WIth Joy and delight
We'll fill up the night;
That your marriage should be ended,
This dance we intended.

  64Minerva and the Gods,
When you first were at ods,
Did order this sporting
For your innocent courting.
Then happen what will,
We'll of mirth have our fill:
Your tears were our askers;
Look here come the Masquers.

Descend three Goddesses, two Gods, one singing.


Hymen and all the Gods above
That on this Wedding kindly smile:
Grant your blessings, and your love,
Envy and mischief to remove,
Peace and plenty all the while.



We grant it all, it shall be so:
The Stars our bounty, and our will shall know.


Hymen and Gods sing.

Your nuptial pleasures shall abide
So long as love your hearts inflames;
Neer to cease for time or tide,
In joy your days shall swiftly glide;
With honour we'll ingross your names.



We grant it all, it shall be so:
The Stars our bounty, and our wills shall know.



Live like our selves, may every hour renew
Triumphs for constancy; Garlands for you
Shall be prepared rich, to make you prove
Shining below, as we are bright above:
Till then our Dance and Banquet shall display
The pleasure we have in this happy day.




