





WHat Town's this Boy?







Take care my Trunk be brought ashore to Night, and there's for your Pains.



God bless you Master.



What do you call this House?



Mrs Flirts, Master, the best House for Commendation in all Virginia.



That's well, has she any handsome Lady's Sirrah?



Oh! She's woundly handsome her self Master, and the Kindest Gentlewoman look here she comes Master God bless you Mistriss, I have brought you a young Gentleman here.



That's well, honest Jack Sir, you are most heartily Welcome.








Please you to walk into a Chamber Sir.



By and by, Madam, but I'le repose here a while for the cool∣ness of the Air.



This is a Publick Room, Sir, but 'tis at your Service.



Madam, you oblige me.



A Fine-spoken Person A Gentleman I'le warrant him, come Jack, I'le give thee a Cogue of Brandy for old acquaintance.



Hazard Pulls out Pen, Ink and Paper, and goes to Write.





Here Nell, a Tankard of Cool drink quickly.



You shall have it, Sr.



Hah! who's that Stranger? he seems to be a Gentleman.



If I should give Credit to mine Eyes, that should be Friendly.



Sr, you seem a stranger, may I take the Liberty to present my Service to you?



If I am not mistaken Sr, you are the only Man in the world
  2
whom I would soonest Pledge, you'l Credit me if three years Absence has not made you forget Hazard.



Hazard, my Freind! come to my Arms and Heart.



This Unexpected Happiness O're-Joys me. Who could have I∣magin'd to have found thee in Virginia? I thought thou hadst been in Spain with thy Brother.



I was so till Ten Months since, when my Uncle Colonell Frendly dying here, left me a Considerable Plantation; And faith I find Diversions not altogether to be despis'd; the God of Love Reigns here, with as much Power, as in Courts or Popular Cities: but prethee what Chance, (Fortunate for me) drove thee to this part of the New World?



Why (faith) Ill Company, and that Common Vice of the Town, Gaming, soon run out my Younger Brothers Fortune, for Ima∣gining like some of the Luckier Gamesters to Improve my Stock at the Groom-Porters; Ventur'd on and lost all My Elder Brother an Er∣rant Jew, had neither Friendship, nor Honour enough to Support me, but at last was mollified by perswasions and the hopes of being for ever rid of me, sent me hither with a small Cargo to seek my fortune, 



And begin the world withall.



I thought this a better Venture then to turn Sharping Bully, Cully in Prentices and Country Squires, with my Pocket full of false dice, your high and low Flats and Bars, or turn broker to young Heirs; take up goods, to pay ten fold at the Death of their Fathers, and take Fees on both sides; or set up all night at the Groom Porters begging his Honour to go a Guinney the better of the lay. No. Friendly, I had ra∣ther starve abroad then live Pitty'd and dispised at home.



Thou art in the Right, and art come just in the Nick of time to make thy Fortune Wilt thou follow my advice?



Thou art too honest to Command any thing any thing that I shall Refuse.



You must know then, there is about a Mil•… from James Town a Young Gentlewoman No matter for her Birth, her Breeding's the best this world affords, she is Marryed to one of the Richest Merchants here, he is Old and Sick, and now gone into England for the Recovery of his Health, where he'l e'e•… give up the Ghost, he has writ her word he finds no Amendment, and Resolves to stay another Year, the Letter I accidently took up and have about me; 'tis easily Counter∣feited and will be of great use to us.



Now do I fancy I conceive thee.



Well, hear me first, you shall get another Letter writ like this Character, which shall say, you are his Kinsman, that is come to Trafick in this Country, and 'tis his will you should be received into his House as such.





Well, and what will come of this?



Why thou ar•… Young and Handsome; She Young and De•…∣ring; 〈◊〉 were easy to make her Love thee, and if the Old Gentleman chance to dye, you Guess the rest, you are no Fool.



Ay, but if he shou'd return 



If Why if she Love you, that Other will be but a slender Bar to thy happiness; For if thou canst not Marry her, thou mayst lye with her, (and Gad) a Younger Brother may pick out a Pritty Live∣lyhood here that way, as well as in England Or if this •…ail, there thou wilt find a perpetual Visiter the Widdow Ranter, a Woman bought from the Ship by Old Coll. Ranter; she serv'd him half a year, and then he Marry'd her, and dying in a year more, left her worth Fifty thou∣sand Pounds Sterling, besides Plate and Jewells: She's a great Gallant, But assuming the Humour of the Country Gentry, her Extravagancy is very Pleasant, she retains something of her Primitive Quallity still, but is good natur'd and Generous.



I like all this well.



But I have a further End in this matter, you must know there is in the same House a Young Heiress, one Coll. Downrights Daughter, whom I Love, I think not in Vain, her Father indeed has an Implaca∣ble hatred to me, for which Reason I can but seldom Visit her, and in this Affair I have need of a Friend in that House.



Me you're sure of.



And thus you'l have an Opportunity to Mannage both our Amours: here you will find Occasion to shew your Courage as well as Express your Love; For at this time the Indians by our ill Management of Trade, whom we have Armed against Our selves, Very frequently make War upon us with our own Weapons, Tho' often coming by the Worst are forced to make Peace with us again, but so, as upon every turn they fall to Massacring us whereever we ly exposed to them.



I heard the news of this in England, which hastens the new Go∣vernours arrivall here, who brings you fresh Supplys.



Would he were landed, we hear he is a Noble Gentleman.



He has all the Qualities of a Gallant Man, besides he is Nobly Born.



This Country wants nothing but to be People'd with a well∣born Race to make it one of the best Collonies in the World, but for want of a Governour we are Ruled by a Councill, some of which have been perhaps transported Criminals, who having Acquired great E∣states are now become your Honour, and Right Worshipfull, and Pos∣sess all Places of Authority; there are amongst 'em some honest Gentlemen who now begin to take upon 'em, and Manage Affairs as they ought to be.



Bacon I think was one of the Councill.





Now you have named a Man indeed above the Common Rank, by Nature Generous; Brave Resolv'd, and Daring; who study∣ing the Lives of the Romans and great Men, that have raised themselves to the most Elevated fortunes, fancies it easy for Ambitious men, to aim at any Pitch of Glory, I've heard him often say, Why cannot I Con∣quer the Universe as well as Alexander? or like another Romulus form a new Rome, and make my self Ador'd?



Why might he not? great Souls are born in common men, sometimes as well as Princes.



This Thirst of Glory cherisht by Sullen Melancholly, I be∣lieve was the first Motive that made him in Love with the young Indian-Queen, fancying no Hero ought to be without his Princess. And this was the Reason why he so earnestly prest for a Commission, to be made General against the Indians, which long was promis'd him, but they fear∣ing his Ambition, still put him off, till the Grievances grew so high, that the whole Country flockt to him, and beg'd he would redress them, he took the opportunity, and Led them forth to fight, and vanquishing brought the Enemy to fair terms, but now instead of receiving him as a Conquerour, we treat him as a Traytor.



Then it seems all the Crime this brave Fellow has committed, is serving his Country without Authority.



'Tis so, and however I admire the Man, I am resolv'd to be of the Contrary Party, that I may make an Interest in our new Gover∣nour; Thus stands-affairs, so that after you have seen Madam Sure-Love, I'le present you to the Councill for a Commission.



But my Kinsmans Character 



He was a Lester-shire younger Brother, came over hither with a small fortune, which his Industry has increas'd to a thousand pound a year, and he is now Coll. John Sure-love, and one of the Councill.







About it then, Madam Flirt to direct you.



You are full of your Madams here.



Oh! 'tis the greatest affront imaginable, to all a woman Mistris, tho' but a retale Brandy-munger. Adieu•… one thing more, tomorrow is our Country-Court, pray do not fa•…l to be there, for the rarity of the Entertainment: but I shall see you anon at Sure-lo•… where I'le Salute thee as my first meeting, and as an old acquaintance in Eng∣land here's company, farewell.






Here Nell Well Lieutenant Boozer, what are you for?





I am for Cooling Nants, Major:





Here Nell, a quart of Nants, and some Pipes and smoak.



And do ye hear Nell, bid your Mistriss come in to Joke a little with 〈◊〉, for adzoors I was damnable drunk last night, and am better at the petticoat than the bottle to day.



Drunk last night, and sick to day, how comes that about Mr. Justice? you use to bear your Brandy well enough.



Ay your shier-Brandy I'le grant you, but I was Drunk at Coll. Downrights with your high Burgundy Claret.



A Pox of that Paulter Liquor, your English French wine, I won∣der how the Gentlemen do to drink it.



Ay so do I, 'tis for want of a little Virginia Breeding: how much more like a Gentleman 'tis, to drink as we do, brave Edifying Punch and Brandy, but they say the young Noble-men now and Sparks in England begin to reform, and take it for their mornings Draught, get Drunk by noon, and despise the Lowsey Juce of the Grape.
Enter Mrs. Flirt.




Come Landlady, come, you are so taken up with Parson Dunce, that your old friends can't Drink a Dram with you, what no smutty Catch now, no Gibe or Joke to make the Punch go down Merrily, and advance Trading? Nay, they say, Gad forgive ye, you never miss going to Church when Mr. Dunce Preaches but here's to you▪




Lords, your Honours are pleas'd to be merry but my service to your Honour.




Honours, who the Devill have we here? some of the wise Coun∣cill at least, I'd sooner took 'em for Hoggerds.




Say what you please of the Doctor, but I'le swear he's a fine Gentleman, he makes the Prettiest Sounets, nay, and Sings 'em himself to the rarest Tunes.



Nay the man will serve for both Soul and Body, for they say he was a Farrier in England, but breaking turn'd Life-guard man, and his Horse dying he Counterfeited a Deputation from the Bishop, and came over here a Substantiall Orthodox: but come, where stands the Cup? here, my Service to you Major.



Your Honours are pleas'd but me-thinks Doctor Dunce is a very Edifying Person, and a Gentleman, and I pretend to know a Gen∣tleman, For I my self am a Gentlewoman; my Father was a Barronet, but undone in the late Rebellion and I am fain to keep on Ordinary now, Heaven help me.



Good lack, why see how Virtue may be bely'd we heard your Father was a Taylor, but trusting for old Olivers Funerall, Broke, and so came hither to hide his head, but my Service to you; what, you are never the worse?



Your Honours knows this is a Scandalous place, for they say
  6
your Honour was but a broken Excise-ma•…, who spent the Kings money to buy your Wife •…ne Petticoats, and at last •…ot worth a Groat, you came over a poor Servant, though now a Justice of Peace, and of the Honourable Council.



Adz zoors if I knew who 'twas said so, I'd sue him for Scandalum Magnatum.



Hang 'em Scoundrells, hang 'em, they live upon Scandal, and we are Scandall-Proof, They say too, that I was a Tinker and run∣ing the Country, robb'd a Gentlemans House there, was put into New∣gate, got a reprieve after Condemnation, and was Transported hither And that you Boozer was a Common Pick-pocket, and being often flogg'd at the Carts-tale, afterwards turn'd Evidence, and when the times grew Honest was fain to fly.



Ay, Ay, Major, if Scandal would have broke our hearts, we had not arriv'd to the Honour of being Pri•…y-Councellors but come Mrs. Flirt, what never a Song to Entertain us?



Yes, and a Singer too newly come ashore:



Adz zoors, let's have it then:




Here Maid, a Tankard of your Drink;



Quickly Nell, wait upon the Gentleman;



Please you Sir to tast of our Liquor My service to you 〈◊〉 see you are a Stranger and alone, please you to come to our Table?




Come Sir, pray sit down here, these are very Honourable Per∣sons I assure you, This is Major Dullman, Major of his Excellencies own Regiment, when he Arrives, this Mr. Timorous, Justice a Peace in 〈◊〉 T•…s Capt. 〈◊〉, all of the Honourable Councill.



With your leave, Gentlemen;




My service to you Sir;


What have you brought over any Cargo Sir, I'le be your Customer.



Ay, and cheat him too, I'le warrant him.




I was not bred to Merchandizing Sir, nor do intend to fol∣low the Drudgery of Trading.



Men of Fortune seldom travell hither Sir to see fashions.



Why Brother, it may be the Gentleman has a mind to be a Plan∣ter, will you hire your self to make a Crop of Tobacco this year?



I was not born to work Sir.



Not work Sir, zoors your betters have workt Sir, I have work•… my self Sir▪ both set and stript Tobacco, for all I am of the Honourable Councill not work quoth a I suppose Sir you wear your fortune upon your Pack Sir?



Is ityour Custom here Sir to affront Strangers? I shall expect satisfaction.






Why does any body here owe you any thing?



No, unless he means to be paid for drinking with us ha, ha, ha.



No Sir, I have money to pay for what I drink: here's my Club my Guinia,

I scorn to be oblig'd to such Scoundrells;



Hum Call Men of Honour Scoundrells;




Let him alone, let him alone Brother, how should he learn man∣ners, he never was in Virginia before.



He's some Covent-Garden Bully;



Or some broken Citizen turn'd Factor,



Sir you lye, and you're a Rascall,




Adz zoors he has spill'd all the Brandy.

Tim. runs behind the door, Dull. and Booz. strike Hazard.




I understand no Cudgel Play, but wear a sword to right my self.




Good heavens, what quarelling in my House?



Do the Persons of Quallity in this Country treat strangers thus?



Alas Sir, 'tis a familiar way they have, Sir.



I'm glad I known it, Pray Madam can you inform one how I may be furnisht with a Horse and a guide to Madam Sure Loves?



A most Accomplisht Lady, and my very good friend you shall be Immediately 










Come Mr. Dunce, tho' you are no Councellour, yet your Coun∣cil may be good in time of necessity, as now.



If I may be worthy advice, I do not look upon our danger to be so great from the Indians, as from young Bacon, whom the People have nick nam'd Fright-all.



Ay, Ay that same Bacon, I would he were well hang'd, I am a∣fraid that under pretence of killing all the Indians he means to Murder us, Ly with our Wives, and hang up our little Children, and make him∣self Lord and King.



Brother Whimsey, not so hot, with leave of the Honourable Board, My Wife is of Opinion, that Bacon came seasonably to our Aid, and what he has done was for our defence, the Indians came down upon us, and Ravisht us all, Men, Women, and Children.



If these Grievances were not redres•… we had our reasons for it, it was not that we were insensible Capt. Whiff of what we suffer'd from the Insolence of the Indians: But all knew what we must expect from Bacon if that by Lawfull Authority he had Arriv'd to so great a Com∣mand
  8
as Generall, nor would we be huft out of our Commissions.



'Tis most certain that Bacon did not demand a Commission out of a design of serving us, but to satisfy his Ambition and his Love, it being no secret that he passionately Admires the Indian Queen, and under the pretext of a War, intends to kill the King her Husband, Establish himself in her heart, and on all occasions have himself a more formidable Enemy, than the Indians are.



Nay, nay, I ever foresaw he would prove a Villain.



Nay, and he be thereabout, my Nancy shall have no more to do with him.



But Gentlemen the People dayly flock to him, so that his Army is too Considerable for us to oppose by any thing but Policy.



We are sensible Gentlemen that our Fortunes, our Honours, and our Lives are at Stake, and therefore you are call'd together to con∣sult what's to be done in this Grand Affair, till our Governout and For∣ces arrive from England; The Truce he made with the Indians will be out to Morrow.



Ay, and then he intends to have another bout with the Indians. Let's have Patience I say till he has thrum'd their Jackets, and then to work with your Politicks as soon as you please.



Colonel Wellman has answer'd that point good Captain Whiff, 'tis the Event of this Battle we ought to dread, and if won or lost will be equally fatall for us, either from the Indians or from Bacon.



With the Permission of the Honourable Board I think I have hit upon an Expedient that may prevent this Battle, your Honours shall write a Letter to Bacon, where you shall acknowledge his Services, in∣vite him kindly home, and offer him a Commission for General 



Just my Nancys Counsell Doctor Dunce has spoken like a Cherubin, he shall have my voice for General, what say you Brother Whimsey?



I say, he is a Noble fellow, and fit for a General.



But conceive me right Gentlemen, as soon as he shall have ren∣der'd himself, seize him and strike off his Head at the Fort.



Hum! his head Brother



Ay, ay, Doctor Dunce speaks like a Cherubin:



Mr Dunce, your Counsell in extremity I confess is not amiss, but I should be loath to deal dishonourably with any man.



His Crimes deserve death, his life is forfeited by Law, but shall never be taken by my consent by Trechery: If by any Stratagem we could take him a-live, and either send him for England to receive there his Punishment, or keep him Prisoner here till the Governour arrive, I should agree to't, but I question his coming in upon our Invitation.



Leave that to me▪





Come, I'le warrant him, the Rogue's as stont as Hector, he fears neither Heaven nor Hell.



He's too Brave and Bold to refuse our summons, and I am for sending him for England and leaving him to the Kings Mercy.



In that you'l find more difficulty Sir, to take him off here will be more quick and sudden: for the people worship him.



I'le never yield to so ungenerous an expedient. The seizing him I am content in the Extremity wherein we are, to follow. What say you Collonell Downright? shall we send him a Letter now while this two days truce lasts, between him and the Indians?







And I, and I, and I.



If your Honours please to make me the Messenger, I'le use some arguments of my own to prevail with him.



You say well Mr. Dunce, and we'l dispatch you presently.



Ah Doctor, if you could but have persuaded Collonell Wellman & Collonel Downright to have hang'd him 

Ex. Wellm. Dow. and all but Whim. Whiff. & Dunce.



Why Brother Whiff you were for making him a Generall but now.



The Councills of wise States-men Brother Whimsey must change as causes do, d'ye see.



Your Honours are in the right, and whatever those two leading Councellors say, they would be glad if Bacon were dispatcht, but the pun∣ctillio of Honour is such a thing.



Honour, a Pox on't, what is that Honour that keeps such a Bustle in the world, yet never did good as I heard of.



Why 'tis a Foolish word only, taken up by great men, but rarely practic'd, but if you would be great men indeed 



If we would Doctor, name, name the way.



Why, you command each of you a company when Bacon comes from the Camp, as I am sure he will, (and full of this silly thing call'd Ho∣nour will come unguarded too,) lay some of your men in Ambush along those Ditches by the Sevana about a Mile from the Town, and as he comes by, seize him, and hang him upon the next Tree.



Hum hang him! a rare Plot.



Hang him we'l do't, we'l do't Sir, and I doubt not but to be made Generall for the Action I'le take it all upon my self.




If you resolve upon this, you must about it instantly Thus I shall at once serve my Country, & revenge my self on the Rascall for affronting my Dignity once at the Councell-Table, by calling me Farrier





Do you know Brother what we are to do?



To do, yes, to hang a Generall, Brother, that's all.



All, but is it Lawfull to hang any Generall?





Lawfull, yes, that •…is Lawfull to hang any G•…nerall that sights against Law.



But in what he has done, he has sorv'd the King and our Country, and preserv'd all our Lives and Fortunes.



That's all one, Brother, if there be but a Quirk in the Law of∣fended in this Case, tho' he fought like Alexander, and preserv'd the whole world from perdition, yet if he did it against Law, 'tis Lawful to hang him; why what Brother, is it fit that every impudent fellow that pretends to a lit∣tle Honour, Loyalty & Courage, should serve his King and Country ag•…inst the Law? no, no, Brother, these things are not to b•… suffer'd in a Civill Go∣vernment by Law Establish'd, wherefore let's about it 









Here Jesiry, ye D•…unken Dog, set your Coach and Horses up, 'le not go till the Cool of the Evening, I love to ride in Fresco




Yes after hard drinking  (aside) it shall be done, Madam.



how now Boy, is Madam Surelove at home?







Go tell her I am here, Sirrah.



Who are you pray, forsooth?



Why you Son of Baboone don't you know me?



No Madam, I came over but in the last Ship.



What from Newgate or Bridewell? from shovi•…g the Fu•…ler, Sir∣rah, Lifting or •…ing the Cly?



I don't understand this Country-Language for sooth, yet.



You Rogue, 'tis what we transport from England•…ost go ye D•…g, go tell your Lady, the Widow Ranter is come to dine with her I hope I shall not find that Rogue Dareing here. S•…ling after 



 My dear I w•…ll how do'st do? as for you Gentlewoman you are my Rivall, & I am in rancouragai•…st you till you have renounc'd my Dareing.



All the Interest I have in him Madam, I resign to you.



Ay •…ut your house lying so near the Camp, gives me Mortal sears but •…thee how thrives thy Amour with honest Friendly?



As well as a•… Amour can, that is absolutely forbid by a Father on one side, and pursu'd by a good resolution on the other.



Hay Gad, I'le warrant for Friendlys resolution, what, tho' his For∣tune be not answerable to yours, we are bound to help one another▪ here Boy some Pipes and a Bowle of Punch, you know my humour Madam, I must Smoke and Drink in a Morning, or I am Mauki•…h all day.





But will you drink Punch in a Morning▪



Punch, 'tis my Mornings draught, my Table-drink, my Treat, my Regalio, my every thing, ah my dear Surelove, if thou woud'st but refresh & Chear thy heart with Punch in a morning, thou wou'dst not look thus Clowdy all the Day.
Enter Pipes and a Great Bowl, she falls to smoaking



I have reason Madam to be Melancholy, I have receiv'd a Letter from my Husband, who gives t•…e an account that he is worse in England than when he was here, so that I fear I shall see him no more, the Doctors can do no good on him.



A yery good hearing. I wonder what the Devill thou hast done with him so long? an old fusty weather-beaten Skelleton, as dri'd as Stock-fish, and much of the Hue. come, come, here's to the next, may he be young, Heaven, I beseech thee.




You have reason to praise an old man, who dy'd and left you worth fifty thousand Pound.



Ay Gad and what's better Sweet-heart, dy'd in good time too, and left me young enough to spend this fifty thousand pound in better Company rest his Soul for that too.



I doubt 'twill be all laid out in Bacons Mad Lieutenant Generall Darling.



Faith I think I could lend it the Rogue on good Security.



What's that, to be bound Body for Body?



Rather that he should love no bodies Body besides my own, but my Fortune is too good to trust the Rogue, my money makes me an Infidell.



You think they all love you for that:



For that, Ay what else? if it were not for that, I might sit still and sigh, and cry out, a Miracle! a Miracle! at sight of a Man within my doors:




Madam here's a young Gentleman without would speak with you.



With me, sure thou'rt mistaken, is it not Friendly?



No Madam 'tis a Stranger;



'Tis not Dareing that Rogue, is it?







Is he handsome? does he look like a Gentleman?



He's handsome and seems a Gentleman.



Bring him in then, I hate a conversation without a Fellow, hah a good handsome Lad indeed:




With me Sir would you speak?



If you are Madam Surelove:



So I am call'd;



Madam I am newly arriv'd from England, and from your Husband my kinsman bring you this 




Please you to sit Sir;





She's extreamly handsome 




Come Sir will you Smoke a Pipe?



I never do Madam 



Oh fy upon't you must learn then, we all smoke here, 'tis a part of good breeding, well, well, what Cargo, what goods have ye? any Poynts, Lace, rich Stuffs, Jewells; if you have I'le be your Chafferer, I live hard by, any body will direct you to the widow Ranters.



I have already heard of you, Madam.



What you are like all the young Fellows, the first thing they do when they come to a strange place, is to enquire what Fortunes there are.



Madam I had no such Ambition:



Gad, then you're a fool, Sir, but come, my service to you; we rich Widdows are the best Commodity this Country affords, I'le tell you that.




Sir, my Husband has recommended you here in a most particular manner, by which I do not only find the esteem he has for you, but the desire he has of gaining you mine, which on a double score I render you, first for his sake, next for those Merits that appear in your self.



Madam, the endeavours of my life shall be to express my Grati∣tude for this great Bounty;




Madam Mr. Friendly's here:







Friendly, I had a dear Friend of that name, who I hear is in these Parts Pray Heaven it may be he.









Madam your Servant Hah! should not I know you for my dear friend Hazard.




Or you'rs too blame my Friendly:



Prethee what calm brought thee ashore?



Fortune de la gar•…, but prethee ask me no questions in so good Company; where a minute lost from this Conversation is a misfortune not to be retriev'd:



Do'st like her Rogue 




Like her! have I sight, or sense Why I adore her.



My Chrisante, I heard your Father would not be here to day, which made me snatch this opportunity of seeing you.



Come, Come, a Pox of this whining Love. It spoyls good company:



You know my dear friend, these opportunities comes but ser∣d•…m, and therefore I must make 〈◊〉 of '•…m▪



Come, come, I'le give you a better opportunity at my House to morrow, we are to eat a Buffilo there, and I'le secure the old Gentleman from coming.



Then I shall see Chrisanto once more before I go:





Go Heavens whether my Friendly?



I have received a Commission to go against the Indians, Bacon being sent for home.



But will he come when sent for?



If he refuse we are to Endeavour to force him.



I do not think he will be sorc'd, not even by Friendly.



And faith it goes against my Conscience to lift my Sword a∣gainst him, for he is truly brave, and what he has done, a Service to the Country, had it but been by Authority.



What pity 'tis there should be such false Maxims in the World, that Noble Actions how ever great, must be Criminall for want of a Law to Authorise 'em.



Indeed 'tis pity that when Laws are faulty they should not be mended or abolish•….



Hark'ye Charles, by Heaven if you kill my Dareing I'le Pistol you



No, widdow I'le spare him for your sake,





Oh she is all Divine, and all the Breath she utters serves but to blow my Flame,




Madam dinner's on the Table  



Please you Sir, to walk in come Mr. Friendly.





Prethee good wench bring in the Punch-Bowle:







Discovers the Indian King and Queen sitting in State, with Guards of Indians, Men and Women attending: to them Bacon richly dress'd, attended by Da∣ring, Fearless, and other Officers, he bows to the King and Queen, who rise to receive him.


I Am sorry Sir, we meet upon these terms, we who so often have embrac'd as friends.



How charming is the Queen?  War, Sir, is not my bus'ness, nor my pleasure: Nor was I bred in Arms; My Country's good has forc'd me to assume a Soldiers life: And 'tis with much regret that I Employ the sirst effects of it against my Friends; Yet whilst I may Whilst this Cessation lasts, I beg we may exchange those Friendships, Sir, we have so often paid in happier Peace.



For your part, Sir, you've been so Noble, that I repent the fatall difference that makes us meet in Arms. Yet tho' I'm young I'm sensible of Injuries; And oft have heard my Grandsire say That we were Mon∣archs once of all this spacious World; Till you an unknown People land∣ing here, Distress'd and ruin'd by destructive storms, Abusing all our Cha∣ritable Hospitality, Usurp'd our Right, and made your friends your slaves.



I will not justify the Ingratitude of my fore-fathers, but finding here my Inheritance, I am resolv'd still to maintain it so, And by my sword
  14
which first cut out my Portion, Defend each inch of Land with my last drop of Bloud.



Ev'n his threats have charms that please the heart:




Come Sir, let this ungratefull Theme alone, which is better dis∣puted in the Field.



Is it impossible there might be wrought an understanding be∣twixt my Lord and you? 'Twas to that end I first desired this truce, My self proposing to be Mediator, To which my Lord Cavarnio shall agree, Could you but Condescend- I know you're Noble: And I have heard you say our tender Sex could never plead in vain.



Alas! I dare not trust your pleading Madam? A few soft words from such a Charming mouth would make me lay the Conqueror at your feet as a Sacrifice for all the ills he has done you.



How strangely am I pleas'd to hear him talk




Se•…ernia see the Dancers do appear;
Sir will you take your seat?






Curse on his sports that interrupted me, My very soul was hover∣ing at my Lip, ready to have discover'd all its secrets. But oh! I dread to tell her of my pain, And when I wou'd, an Awfull trembling seizes me, And she can only 〈◊〉 my dying eyes, read all the Sentiments of my Cap∣tive heart.





The more I gaze upon this English Stranger, the more Confusion struggles in my Soul, Oft I have heard of Love, and oft this Gallant Man (When Peace had made him pay his idle Visits) 〈◊〉 told a thousand tales of dying Maids. And ever when he spoke, my panting heart, with a Pro∣phetick fear in sighs reply'd, I shall fall such a Victim to his Eyes.





Sir here's a Messenger from the English Council

Desires admittance to the General.



With your Permission Sir, he may advance.


Re-enter Indian with Dance. A Letter.


All health and Happyness attend your honour, This from the Honourable Council:




I'le leave you till you have dispatch'd the M•…ger, and then ex∣pect your precense in the Royal Tent.
Exeunt King, Queen, and Indians.



〈◊〉, read the Letter






SIR, the necessity of what you 〈◊〉〈◊〉 makes it pardona•…, and we could wish we had done the Country, and our selves so much Justice 〈◊〉 to have given you that Commission you desired We now finde it reason•…ble 〈◊〉 raise 〈◊〉 forces, to appose these Insolences, which possible yours may  15be 〈◊〉 weak to accomplish, to which end the Council is ordered to meet this Even∣ing, and destring you will come and take your place there, and be pleas'd to ac∣cept from us a Commission to Command in Chief in this War Therefore send those Soldiers under your Command to their respective houses, and hast, Sir, to your affectionate Friends 



Sir, I fear the hearts and Pen did not agree when this was writ



A plague upon their shallow Politicks! Do they think to play the old game twice with us?



Away, you wrong the Council, who of themselves are Honour∣able Gentlemen, but the base Coward fear of some of them, puts the rest on tricks that suit not with their nature.



Sir, 'tis For noble ends you're sent for, and for your safety I'le engage my life.



By Heaven and so you shall and pay it too with all the rest of your wise-headed Council.



Your zeal is too Officious now: I see no Treachery, and can fear no danger.



Treachery! now Heavens forbid, are we not Christians Sir, All Friends and Countrymen! believe me Sir, 'tis Honour calls you to increase your fame, and he who would dissuade you is your Enemy.



Go Cant, Sir to the Rabble for us we know you.



You wrong me when you but suspect for me, let him that acts dis∣honourably fear. My Innocence, and my good sword's my guard.



If you resolve to go, we will attend you.



What go like an Invader? No Daring, the Invitation's friendly, and as a friend, attended only by my menial Servants, I'le wait upon the Council, that they may see that when I could Command it I came an hum∣ble Suppliant for their favour You may return, and tell 'em I'le attend.



I kiss your Honour's hand▪ 




'Sdeath will you trust the saithless Council Sir, who have so long h•…ld you in hand with promises, That curse of States-men, that unlucky vice that renders even Nobility despis'd.



Perhaps the Council thought me too aspiring, and would not add Wings to my Ambitious flight.



A pox of their considering caps, and now they find that you can •…ar alone, they send for you to knip your spreading wings.
Now by my soul you shall not go alone.



Forbear, lest I suspect you for a mutineer; I am resolv'd to go.



What, and send your Army home? a pretty fetch:



By Heaven we'le not disband not till we see how fairly you are dealt with: if you have a Commission to be General, here we are ready to receive new orders: If no We'l ring 'em such a Thundring Peal shall beat the Town about their Treacherous Ears.



I do Command you not to stir a man, Till you're inform'd how I
  16
am treated by 'em: leave me all 




Now while my Lord's asleep in his Pavi•…ion I'le try my power with the General, for an Accomodation of a Peace: the very dreams of war fright my soft slumbers that us'd to be employ'd in kinder Bus'ness.



Ha! The Queen What happyness is this presents it self which all my Industry could never gain?








Prest with the great Extreams of Joy and Fear I trembling stand, unable to approach her:



I hope you will not think it fear in me, tho' tim'rous as a Dove, by nature fram'd: Nor that my Lord, whose youth's unskill'd in War can either doubt his Courage, or his forces, t•… makes me seek a Reconcilation on any honourable terms of Peace.



Ah Madam! if you knew how absolutely you command my Fate I fear but little honour wonld be left me, since what so e're you ask me I should grant.



Indeed I would not ask your Honour, Sir, That renders you too Brave in my esteem. Nor can I think that you would part with that. No not to save your Life.



I would do more to serve your least Commands than part with triviall Life.



Bless me! Sir, how came I by such a Power?



The Gods, and Nature gave it you in your Creation, form'd with all the Charms that ever grac'd your Sex.



I'st possible? am I so Beautifull?



As Heaven, or Angels there:



Supposing this, how can my Beauty make you so obliging?



Beauty has still a power over great Souls, And from the moment I beheld your eyes, my stubborn heart melted to compliance, and from a na∣ture rough and turbulent, grew Soft and Gentle as the God of Love.



The God of Love! what is the God of Love?



'Tis a resistless Fire, that's kinddl'd thus  takes her by the hand and gazes on her. at every gaze we take from fine Eyes, from such Bash∣full Looks, and such soft touches it makes us sigh and pant as I do now, and stops the Breath when e're we speak of Pain.



Alas, for me if this should be Love!




It makes us tremble, when we touch the fair one, And all the bloud runs shiv'ring thro' the veins, The heart's surrounded with a feeble Languishment, The eyes are dying, and the Cheeks are pale, The tongue is faltring, and the body sainting.



Then I'm undone, and all I feel is Love,

If Love be Catching Sir, by looks and touches, Let us at distance parley or
  17
rather let me fly, For within veiw, is too near 




Ah! she retires displeas'd I fear with my presumptious Love, Oh pardon, fairest creature:




I'le talk no more, our words exchange our Souls, and every look •…ades all my blooming honour, like Sun beams, on unguarded Roses take all our Kingdoms make our People Slaves, and let me fall be∣neath your Conquering Sword. But never let me hear you talk again or gaze upon your Eyes 




She Loves! by Heaven she Loves! And has not art enough to hide her Flame. tho' she have Cruel honour to suppress it. However I'le pursue her to the Banquet.










This Madam Ranter is so prodigious a Treater oh! I hate a room that smells of a great Dinner, and what's worse a desert of Punch and Tobacco what! are you taking leave so soon Cousin?



Yes Madam, but 'tis not fit I should let you know with what re∣gret I go, but business will be obey'd.



Some Letters to dispatch to English Ladies you have left behind come Cousin Confess:



I own I much admire the English Beauties, but never yet have put their Fetters on 



Never in Love oh then you have pleasure to Come.



Rather a Pain when there's no hope atrends it,



Oh such diseases quickly cure themselves,



I do not wish to find it so; For even in Pain I find a pleasure too.



You are infected then, and came abroad for cure.



Rather to receive my wounds Madam;



Already Sir. who e're sne be, she made good hast to Conquer, we have few here, boast that Dexterity.



What think you of Chrisante, Madam?



I must confess your Love & your Dispair are there plac•…d right, of which I am not fond of being made a Consident, since I'm assur'd she can Love none but Friendly.




Let her Love on, as long as life shall last, let Friendly take her, and the Universe, so I had my next wish, 

Madam it is your self that I adore, I should not be so vain to tell you this, bu•… that I know you've found the secret out already from my sighs.



Forbear Sir, and know me for your kinsmans wife, & no more:



Be Scornfull as you please, rail at my passion, and refuse to hear
  18
it; yet I'le Love on, and hope in spight of you, my Flame shall be so con∣stant and Submissive, it shall compell your heart to some return.



You're very Confident of your power I perceive, but if you chance to finde your self mistaken, say your opinion and your affectation were misapply'd, and not that I was Cruell,




Whate're denyalls dwell upon your Tongue, your eyes assure me that your heart is tender,





This is like the Noble Widdow all over I'faith,



Ay, Ay, the widdows Health in a full Ladle, Major, but a Pox on't what made that young Fellow here, that affronted us yesterday Major?





Some damn'd Sharper that wou'd lay his Knife aboard your Widdow Cornet.



Zoors if I thought so, I'd Arrest him for Salt and Battery, Lay him in Prison for a Swinging fine and take no Baile.



Nay, had it not been before my Mrs here, Mrs Chrisante, I had swing'd him for his yesterdays affront, ah my sweet Mistris Chrisante if you did but know what a power you have over me 



Oh you're a great Courtier Major:



Would I were any thing for your sake Madam.



Thou art any thing, but what thou shouldst be, prethee Major leave off being an old Buffoon, that is a Lover turn'd to ridicule by Age, consider thy self a Meer rouling Tun of Nants, a walking Chimney, ever Smoaking with Nasty Mundungus, and then thou hast a Counte∣nance like an old worm-eaten Cheese,



Well widdow, you will Joake, ha, ha, ha 



Gad', Zoors She's pure Company, ha, ha 



No matter for my Countenance Coll. Downright likes my Estate and is resolv'd to have it a Match.



Dear Widdow, take off your Damn'd Major, for if he speak a∣nother word to Chrisante, I shall be put past all my patience, and fall foul upon him.



S'life not for the world Major I bar Love-making within my Territories, 'tis inconsistent with the Punch-Bowle, if you'l drink, do, if not be gone:



Nay Gad's Zooks if you enter me at the Punch-Boule, you en∣ter me in Politicks well 'tis the best Drink in Christendom for a Statesman,






Come, now you shall see what my high Land-Vallet can do 




So I see let the world go which way it will, widdow, you are resolv'd for Mirth, but come to the conversation of the times.



The times, why what a Devill ailes the times, I see nothing in the times but a company of Coxcombs that fear without a Cause.



But if these fears were laid and Bacon were hang'd, I look upon Virginia to be the happiest part of the world, gads Zoors, why there's England 'tis nothing to't I was in England about 6. years ago, & was shew'd the Court of Aldermen, some were nodding, some saying nothing, and others very little to purpose, but how could it be otherwise, for they had neither Bowle of Punch, Bottles of wine or Tobacco before 'em to put Life & Soul into 'em as we have here: then for the young Gentlemen Their farthest Travels is to France or Italy, they never come hither.



The more's the Pitty by my troth,




Where they learn to Swear Mor-blew, Mor-Dee:



And tell you how much bigger the Louvre is then White-Hall; buy a sute A-la-mode, get a swinging Cap of some French Marquis, spend all their money and return just as they went.



For the old fellows, their bus'ness is Usury, Extortion, and un∣dermining young Heirs.



Then for young Merchants, their Exchange the is Tavern, their Ware-house the Play-house, and their Bills of Exchange Billet-Deaxs, where to sup with their wenches at the other end of the Town, now Judge you what a Condition poor England is in: for my part I look up∣on't as a lost Nation gads zoors.



I have consider'd it, and have found a way to save all yet:



As how I pray,



As thus, we have men here of great Experience and Ability now I would have as many sent into England as would supply all places, and Offices, both Civill and Military, de see, their young Gentry should all Travell hither for breeding, and to learn the misteries of State.



As for the old Covetous Fellows, I would have the Tradesmen get in their debts, break and turn Troupers.



And they'd be soon weary of Extortion gadz zoors;



Then for the young Merchants, there should be a Law made, none should go beyond Ludgate;



You have sound out the only way to preserve that great Kingdom,




Well, Gad zoors 'tis a fine thing to be a good Statesman,



Ay Cornet, which you had never been had you staid in old England.



Why Sir we were somebody in England,



So I heard Major,



You heard Sir, what have you heard, he's a kid-Naper that says
  20
he heard any thing of me and so my service to you I'le sue you Sir for spoiling my Marriage here, by your Scandalls with Mrs. Chrisante, but that shan't do Sir, I'le marry her for all that, & he's a Rascal that denies it.



S'death you Lye Sir I do.



Gad zoors Sir Lye to a Privy-Councellour, a Major of Horse, Brother, this is an affront to our Dignities, draw and I'le side with you.




If I disdain to draw, 'tis not that I fear your base and Cowardly force, but for the respect I bear you as Magistrates, and so I leave you 



An Arrant Coward Gad zoors.




A meer paultroon, and I scorn to drink in's Company.









Stand stand and hear the word of Command do ye see you Cops, and that Ditch that runs along Major Dullmans Plantation.







Place your Men there, and lye Flat on your Bellies, and when Bacon comes (if alone) seize him dy' see:



Observe the Command now, (if alone) for we are not for bloud-•…ned.



I'le warrant you for our Parts.





Now we have Ambusht our men, let's light our Pipes and sit down and take an Encouraging dram of the Bottle.




Thou art a Knave and hast Emptyed half the Bottle in thy Leathern Pockets, but come here's young Fright-all's health.



What, wilt drink a mans health thou'rt going to hang?



'Tis all one for that, we'le drink his health first, and hang him afterwards, and thou shalt pledge me de see, and tho' 'twere under the Gallows.



Thou'rt a Traytor for saying so, and I defy thee.







Prethee Brother Whiff, do not be so Villanous a Coward, for I hate a Coward.



Nay 'tis not that But my Whiff, my Nancy dreamt to night she saw me hang'd.



'Twas a Cowardly Dream, think no more on't, but as dreams
  21
are Expounded by Contraries, thou shalt hang the Generall.



Ay but he was my friend, and I owe him at this time a hun∣dréd Pounds of Tobacco.



Nay, then I m sure thoud'st hang him if he were thy brother.



But hark I think I hear the Neighing of horses, where shall we hide our selves, for if we stay here, we shall be Mawl'd damnably.





Let the Groom lead the Horses o're the Sevana we'le walk it on Foot, 'tis not a quarter of a Mile to the Town; & here the Air is cool.



The Breazes about this time of the day begin to take Wing and fan refreshment to the Trees and Flowers.



And at these hours how fragrant are the Groves:



The Country's well, were but the People so,



But come let's on 











Draws, Fearless and Foot•…n draw, the Soldiers after a while fighting take Bac. & Fear. they having laid 3 or 4 Dead.



So, so, he's taken
Now we may venture out.



But are you sure he's taken?



Sure can't you believe your Eyes, come forth, I hate a Coward Oh Sir, have we caught your Mightiness?



Are you the Authors of this Valliant Act? None but such Vil∣lainous Cowards dar'st have attempted it▪



Stop his railing tongue.



No, no, let him rail, let him rail now his hands are tyed, ha, ha, Why good Generall Fright-all, what was no body able d'ye think to tame the Roaring Lyon?



You'le be hang'd for this?



Come, come, away with him to the next Tree.



What mean you Villains?



Only to hang your Honour a little, that's all. We'le teach you Sir, to serve your Country against Law.




Hah My General betray'd this I suspected.
His Men come in, they fall on, Release Bacon and Fearless and his Man, who get Swords. Whim's Party put Whim and Whiff before 'em striking 'em as they Endeavour to run on this side or that, and forcing 'em to bear-up, th•…y are taken after some Fighting.



Did not the General tell you Rogues, you'd be all hang'd?



Oh Nancy, Nancy, how Prophetick are thy Dreams?





Come let's on 



S'death what mean you Sir?



As I design'd to present my self to the Council:



By Heavens we'le follow then to save you from their Treachery 'twas this that has befallen you that I fear'd, which made me at a distance follow you.



Follow me still, but still at such a distance as your Aids may be assisting on all occasion Fearless go back and bring your Regiment down, and Daring let your Sergeant with his Party Guard these Villains to the Council.





A Pox on your Worships Plot;



A Pox on your forwardness to come out of the hedge.










You heard Mr. Dunce's opinion Gentlemen, concerning Bacon's coming upon our Invitation. He believes he will come, but I rather think, tho' he be himself undaunted, yet the persuasions of his two Lieutenant-Generalls, Daring and Fearless may prevent him, Colonel, have you or∣der'd our Men to be in Arms?




I have, and they'l attend further order on the Sevana:



May it please your Honours, Bacon is on his way, he comes unat∣tended by any but his Footmen, and Coll. Fearless.



Who is this Fellow?



A spy I sent to watch Bacon's Motions.



But there is a Company of Soldiers in Ambush on this side of the Sevana to seize him as he passes by.



That's by no order of the Council.



No, no, no order;



Nay, 'twere a good design if true,



Gad zoors would I had thought on't for my Troup,



I am for no unfair dealing in any Extremity.
Enter a Messenger in hast.



An't please your Honours, the saddest news An Ambush being laid for Bacon, they rusht out upon him, on the Sevana, and after some fighting took him and Fearless 



Is this your sad News zoors would I had had a hand in't.



When on a sudden, Daring and his Party fell in upon us, turn'd the tide kill'd our men and took Capt. Whimsey, and Capt. Whiff Pris'∣ners,
  23
the rest run away, but Bacon fought like a fury.







Whim. and Whiff? they deserve death for Acting without order



I'm of the Colonels opinion, they deserve to hang for't.



Why Brother, I thought you had wisht the Plot had been yours but now?



Ay, but the Case is alter'd since that, good Brother,



Now he's Exasperared past all hopes of a Reconciliation.



You must make use of the Statesman's refuge, wise dissimulation.



For all this Sir, he will not believe but that you mean Honour∣ably, and no persuasions could hinder him from Coming, so he has dis∣mist all his Soldiers, and is Entring the Town on foot,



What pitty 'tis a brave Man should be Guilty of an ill Action.



But the noise of his danger has so won the hearts of the Mobile, that they encrease his Train as he goes, & follow him in the Town like a Victor.







I was ever of your mind Colonel.



Ay right or Wrong but what's your Counsell now?



E'en as it us'd to be, I leave it to wiser heads.





Bacon Sir is Entring.



Gad zoors wou'd I were safe in Bed,



Colonel keep in your heat and treat Calmly with him,



I rather wish you wou'd all follow me, I'd meet him at the head of all his noisy Rabble, and seize him from the rout.



What Men of Authority dispute with Rake-Hells? 'tis below us Sir.



To Stake our Lives and Fortunes against their nothing.
Enter Bacon, after him the Rabble with Staves and Clubs bringing in Whim. & Whiff. bound.



What means this Insolence What Mr. Bacon do you come in Arms?



I'de need Sir come in Arms, when men that should be Honour∣able can have so poor designs to take my life.



Thrust out his following Rabble.



We'le not Stirr till we have the General safe back again.



Let not your Loves be too Officious but retire 



At your Command we vanish 




I hope you'l pardon me, if in my own defence I seiz'd on these two Murderers.



You did well Sir, 'twas by no Order they Acted, stand forth and here your Sentence in time of war we need no Formall Tryalls to hang Knaves that Act without order.





Oh Mercy Mercy Collonell 'twas Parson Dunce's Plot.



Issue out a warrant to Seize Dunce Immediately you shall he carry'd to the Fort to Pray 



Oh Good your Honour I never Pray'd in all my Life,



From thence Drawn upon a Sledg to the Place of •…xecution, where you shall hang till you are dead and then be •…ut down and 



Oh hold hold we shall never be able to endure •…lf this:




I think th'offence needs not so great Punishment, their Crime Sir is but equall to your own, acting without Commission.



'Tis very well Explain'd Sir, had I been Murder'd by Com∣mission then, the Deed had been approv'd, and now perhaps, I am be∣holding to the Rable for my Life: 



A fine pretence to hide a Popular fault, but for this once we Pardon them and you,



Pardon, for what? by Heaven I Scorn your Pardon, I've not offended Honour nor Religion:



You have offended both in taking Arms,



Shou'd I stand by and see my Country ruin'd, my King disho∣nour'd, and his Subjects Murder'd hear the sad Crys of widdows and of Orphans, You heard it Lowd, but gave no pitying care to't▪ And till the war and Massacre was brought to my own door, my Flocks, and Heards surpriz'd, I bore it all with Patience, Is it unlawfull to defend my self against a Thief that breaks into my doors?



And call you this defending of your self?



I call it doing of my self that right, which upon Just demand the Councill did refuse me, If my Ambition as you're pleas'd to call it, made me demand too Much, I left my self to you:



Perhaps we thought it did,



Sir you affront my Birth, I am a Gentleman, And yet my thoughts were humble I wou'd have fought under the meanest of your Parasites 



There's a Bob for us Brother;





But still you put me off with promises And when compell'd to stir in my defence I call'd none to my aid, and those that came, 'twas their own wrongs that urg'd 'em:



'Tis fear'd Sir, under this pretence you aim at Government:



I scorn to answer to so base an accusation, the height of my Ambition is, to be an honest Subject.



An honest Rebell, Sir 



You know you wrong me, and 'tis basely urg'd but this is trifling here are my Commissions.






 To be General of the Forces against the Indians, and Blank Commissions for his Friends.



Tear them in peices are we to be imposed upon? De ye come in Hostile manner to compel us?



Be not to rough Sir, let us argue with him 



I am resolved I will not.



Then we are all Dead Men, Gudzoors! he will not give us time to say our Prayers.



We every day expect fresh Force from England, till then, we of our selves shall be sufficient to make Defence, against a sturdy Traytor.



Traytor, 'Sdeath Traytor I defie ye, but that my Ho∣nour's yet above my Anger; I'd make you answer me that Traytor dearly.




Hah am I threatned Guards secure the Rebel.




Is this your Honourable Invitation? Go Triumph in your short Liv'd Victory, the next turn shall be mine.






What means this Insolence!



We'l have our General, and knock that fellows brains out, and hang up Collonel Wellman.



Ay ay, Hang up Wlelman.
The Rabble seize Wellman, and Dullman, and the rest.



Hold, hold Gentleman, I was always for the General.



Let's Barbicu this Fat Rogue.



Begone, and know your dista•…ce to theCouncel.




I'd rather perish by the meanest hand, than owe my safety poor∣ly thus to Bacon




If you persist still in that mind I'le leave you, and Conquering, make you happy 'gainst your will.





Oh Villanous Cowards, who will trust his Honour with Syco∣phants so base? Let us to Arms by Heaven I will not give my Body rest, till I've Chastiz'd the boldness of this Rebel.




What is the Roystering Hector gone Brother?



Ay, ay, and the Devil go with him.




Was there ever such a Bull of Bash•…n? Why what if he should come down upon us and kill us all for Traytors?



I rather think the Councel will Hang us all for Cowards ah oh a Drum a Drum oh 






This is the misery of being Great,
We're Sacrific'd to every turn of State.









HOw now Major; what, they say Bacon scar'd you all out of the Council yesterday: What say the People?



Say? they Curse us all, and Drink young Frightall's Health, and swear they'll fight thro Fire and Brimstone for him.



And to morrow will hallow him to the Gallows, if it were his chance to come there.



'Tis very likely: Why I am forc'd to be guarded to the Court now, the Rabble swore they would De Wit me, but I shall hamper some of 'em. Wou'd the Governour were here to bear the brunt on't, for they call us the Evil Counsellors.
Enter Hazard, goes to Friendly.

Here's the young Rogue that drew upon us too, we have Rods in piss for him ifaith.
'Enter Timerous with Bayliffs, whispers to Dullman, after which to the Bailiffs.



Gadzoors that's he, do your Office.



We arrest you Sir, in the Kings name, at the suit of the Honou∣rable Justice Timerous.



Justice Timerous, who the Devil's he?



I am the man Sir, de see, for want of a better; you shall repent Gud•… zoors your putting of tricks upon persons of my Rank and Quality.
After he has spoke he runs back as afraid of him.



Your Rank and Quality!



Ay Sir, my Rank and Quality; first I am one of the Honourable Council, next a Justice of Peace in Quorum, Cornet of a Troop of Horse de see, and Church-warden.



From whence proceeds this Mr. Justice, you said nothing of this at Madam Ranters Yesterday; you saw him there, then you were good Friends?



Ay, however I have carried my Body swimmingly before my Mistress, de see, I had rancour in my Heart, Gads zoors.



VVhy, this Gentleman's a stranger, and but lately come a shore.



At my first Landing I was in company with this Fellow and two
  27
or three of his cruel Brethren, where I was affronted by them, some words past and I drew 



Ay ay Sir, you shall pay for't, why what Sir, cannot a Civil Magistrate affront a Man, but he must be drawn upon presently?



Well Sir, the Gentleman shall answer your Sute, and I hope you'l take my Bail for him.



'Tis enough I know you to be a Civil Person.

Timerous and Dullman take their Places, on a long Bench placed behind the Table, to them Whimsey an Whiff, they seat themselves, then Boozer and two or three more; who seat themselves: Then enter two bearing a Bowl of Punch, and a great Ladle or two in it; the rest of the Stage being filled with People.



Brothers it has been often mov'd at the Bench, that a new Punch Bowl shou'd be provided, and one of a larger Circumference, when the Bench sits late about weighty affairs, oftentimes the Bowl is emptyed before we end.



A good Motion, Clark set it down.



Mr. Justice Boozer the Council has ordered you a writ of Ease, and dismiss your Worship from the Bench.



Me from the Bench, for what?



The Complaint is Brother Boozer, for Drinking too much Punch in the time of hearing Tryals.



And that you can neither write nor read, nor say the Lords Prayer.



That your Warrants are like a Brewers Tally a Notch on a Stick; if a special Warrant, then a Couple. Gods Zoors, when his Excellency comes he will have no such Justices.



Why Brother, tho I can't read my self; I have had Dol•…ns Coun∣try-Justice read over to me two or three times, and understand the Law; this is your Malice Brother Whiff, because my Wife does not come to your Ware-House to buy her Commodities, but no matter, to show I have no Malice in my heart, I drink your Health I care not this, I can turn Lawyer and plead at the Board.




Mr. Clark, come, to the Tryals on the Docket.




The first is between his Worship Justice Whiff, and one Grubb.



Ay, that Grubb's a Common Disturber, Brother your Cause, is a good Cause if well manag'd, here's to't.




I thank you Brother Dullman, read my Petition.




The Petition of Captain Thomas Whiff Sheweth, whereas Gilbert. Grubb, calls his Worships Wife Ann Grabb Whore, and said he would prove it; your Petitioner desires the Worshipful Bench to take it into Con∣sideration, and your Petitioner shall pray, &c. Here's two wit∣nesses have made Affidavit Vive voce, an't like your Worships.









Gilbert Grubb, come into the Court.







Well, what can you say for your self Mr. Grub.



Why an't like your Worship, my wife invited some Neighbours wives to drink a Cagg of Syder, now your worships wife Madam Whiff being there fuddl'd, would have thrust me out of doors, and bid me go to my old Whore Madam Whimscy, meaning your Worships wife.





Hah! My wife called Whore, she's a Jude, & I'le arrest her Husband here in an Action of debts.



Gads zoures she's no better than she should be I'le warrant her,



Look ye Brother Whimsey, be patient, you know the Humour of my Nancy when she's drunk, but when she's sober, she's a civil Person, and shall ask your pardon.



Let this be done and I am satisfied. And so here's to you




Go on to the Tryal.



I being very angry said indeed, I would prove her a greater Whore than Madam Whimsey.



An't like your Whrships, he confesses the words in open Court.



Why, an't like your Worships, she has had two Bastards I'le prove it.



Sirrah, Sirrah, that was when she was a Maid, not since I mar∣ried her, my marrying her made her Honest.



Let there be an order of Court to Sue him, for Scandalum Mag∣natum.



Mr. Clark, let my Cause come next.



The Defendant's ready Sir.





Brothers of the Bench take notice, that this Hector here coming into Mrs. Flirts Ordinary where I was, with my Brother Dullman and Lieutenant Boozer; we gave him good Councel to fall to Work, now my Gentleman here was affronted at this Forsooth, and makes no more to do but calls us Scoundrels, and drew his Sword on us, and had not I defended my self by running away, he had Murdered me, and Assassinated my two Brothers.



What witness have you Brother?



Here's Mrs. Flirt and her Maid Nell, besides we may be wit∣ness for one another I hope; our words may taken.



Mrs. Flirt and Nell are Sworn.




By the Oaths that you have taken, speak nothing but the Truth.



An't please your Worships, your Honours came to my House, where you found this Young Gentleman; and your Honours invited him to Drink with your Honours: Where after some opprobrious words given
  29
him, Justice Dullman, and Justice Boozer struck him over the head; and after that indeed the Gentleman drew.



Mark that Brother he drew.



If I did, it was se defendendo.



Do you hear that Brothers, he did in defiance.



Sir, you ought not to sit Judge and Accuser too.



The Gentlemans i'th' right Brother, you cannot do it according to Law.



Gads Zoors, what new tricks, new querks?



Gentlemen take notice, he swears in Court.



Gads Zoors what's that to you Sir.



This is the second time of his swearing.



What do you think we are Deaf Sir? Come, come proceed.



I desire he may be bound to his Good behaviour, Fin'd and de∣liver up his Sword, what say you Brot her?




He's asleep, drink to him and waken him, you have have mist the Cause by sleeping Brother.




Justice may nod, but never sleeps Brother you were at Deliver his Sword a good Motion, let it be done.




No Gentlemen, I wear a Sword to right my self.



That's fine i'faith, Gads Zoors, I have worn a Sword this Duzen year and never cou'd right my self.



Ay, 'twou'd be a fine World if Men shou'd wear Swords to right themselves, he that's bound to the Peace shall wear no Sword.



I say he that's bound to the Peace ought to wear no Peruke, they may change 'em for black or white, and then who can know them.



I hope Gentlemen I may be allowed to speak for my self.



Ay, what can you say for your self, did you not draw your Sword Sirrah?







'Tis sufficient he confesses the Fact, and we'l hear no more.



You will not hear the Provocation given.



'Tis enough Sir, you drew 



Ay, Ay, 'tis enough he drew let him be Fin'd.



The Gentleman shou'd be heard, he's a Kinsman too, to Collonel John Surelove.



Hum Collonel Sureloves Kinsman.



Is he so, nay, then all the reason in the VVorld he should be heard, Brothers.



Come, come Cornet, you shall be Friends with the Gentleman, this was some Drunken bout I'le warrant you.



Ha, ha, ha so it was Gads Zoors.



Come drink to the Gentleman, and put it up.





Sir, my Service to you, I am heartily sorry for what's past, but it was in my Drink.




You hear his acknowledgements Sir, and when he is sober he never quarrels, come Sir sit down, my Service to you.



I beg your Excuse Gentlemen I have earnest business.



Let us adjourn the Court, and prepare to meet the Regiments on the Sevana.





Is this the best Court of Judicature your Country affords?



To give it its due it is not. But how does thy Armour thrive?



As well as I can wish, in so short a time.



I see she regards thee with kind Eyes, Sighs and Blushes.



Yes, and tells me I am so like a Brother she had to Excuse her kind concern, then blush so prettily, that Gad I cou'd not for∣bear making a discovery of my Heart.



Have a care of that, come upon her by slow degrees, for I know she's Vertuous; but come let's to the Sevana, where I'le pre∣sent you to the two Collonels, Wellman and Downright, the Men that manage all till the Carrival of the Governour.







Have you dispatcht the Scouts, to watch the Motions of the Enemies? I know that Bacon's Violent and Haughty, and will resent our vain attempts upon him; therefore we must be speedy in prevention.



What forces have you raised since our last order.



Here's a list of em, they came but slowly in, till we promised every one a Bottle of Brandy.





We have brought Mr. Dunce here, as your Honour commanded us after strict search we found him this morning in Bed with Madam Flirt.



No matter he'l exclaim no less against the vices of the Flesh, the next Sunday.



I hope Sir, you will not credit the Malice of my Enemies.



No more, you are free, and what you councell'd about the Am∣bush was both prudent and seasonable, and perhaps I now wish it had ta∣ken effect.
Enter Friend. and Haz.




I have brought an English Gentleman to kiss your hands, Sir, and offer you his service, he is young and brave, and Kinsman to Col. Surelove.



Sir, you are welcom and to let you see you are so, we will give you your Kinsmans command, Captain of a Troop of Horse-Guards, and which I am sure will be continued to you when the Governour arrives.



I shall endeavour to deserve the Honour, Sir.
Enter Dull. Tim. Whim. and Whiff, all in Buff, Scarf and Feather•…






So Gentlemen, I see you're in a readiness.



Readiness! What means he, I hope we are not to be drawn out to go against the Enemy, Major?



If we are, they shall look a new Major for me.



We were debating, Gentlemen, what course were best to pursue against this Powerful Rebel.



Why, Sir, we have Forces enough, let's charge him instantly, delays are dangerous.



Why, what a damn'd fiery Fellow's this?



But if we drive him to Extremities, we fear his siding with the Indians.



Collonel Downright has hit it; why should we endanger our Men against a desperate Termagant? If he love Wounds and Scars so well, let him exercise on our Enemies  but if he will needs fall upon us, 'tis then time for us enough to venture our lives and fortunes.



How, we go to Bacon, under favour I think 'tis his Duty to come to us, an you go to that Gads Zoores.



If he do, 'twill cost you dear, I doubt Cornet. I find by our List, Sir, we are four thousand men.



Gads Zoores, not enough for a Breakfast for that insatiate Bacon, and his two Lientenant Generals Fearless and Daring.





A Morsel, a Morsel.



I am for an attack, what say you Gentlemen to an attack? What, silent all? What say you Major?



I say, Sir, I hope my courage was never in dispute. But, Sir, I am going to Marry Collonel Downright's Daughter here and should I be slain in this Battel 'twou'd break her heart;  besides, Sir, I should lose her Fortune.




I'm sure here's a Captain will never Flinch.





Who I, an't like your Honour?







Who I? ha, ha, ha,: Why did your Honour think that I would fight?



Fight, yes? Why else do you take Commissions?



Commissions! O Lord, O Lord, take Commissions to fight? ha ha ha; that's a jest, if all that take Commissions should fight 



Why do you bear Arms then?



Why sor the Pay; to be called Captain, noble Captain, to show, to cock and look big and bluff as I do; to be bow'd to thus as we pass, to domineer, and beat our Souldiers: Fight quoth a, ha ha ha.



But what makes you look so simply Cornet?



VVhy a thing that I have quite forgot, all my accounts for England are to be made up, and I'm undone if they be neglected else
  32
I wou'd not flinch for the stoutest he that wears a Sword 




VVhat say you Captain Whiff?





I am trying Collonel what Mettle I'm made on; I think I am Valiant, I suppose I have Courage, but I confess 'tis a little of the D breed, but a little inspiration from the bottle, and the leave of my Nancy, may do wonders.
Enter Seaman in hast.



An't please your Honours, Frightall's Officers have seiz'd all the Ships in the River, and rid now round the Shore, and had by this time secur'd the Sandy Beach, and Landed men to Fire the Town, but that they are high in Drink aboard the Ship call'd the Good Subject; the Master of her sent me to let your Honours know, that a few men sent to his assistance will surprize them, and retake the Ships.



Now, Gentlemen, here's a brave occasion for Emulation why writ not the Master?



Ay, had he writ, I had soon been amongst them i'faith; but this is some Plot to betray us.



Keep me here, and kill me if it be not true.



He says well there's a Brigan•…ine and a Shallop ready, I'le Embark immediately.



No Sir, your presence is here more necessary, let me have the Honour of this Expedition.



I'le go your Volentier Charles.



VVho else offers to go.



A meer trick to Kidnap us, by Bacon, if the Captain had writ 



Av, ay, if he had writ 



I see you're all base Cowards, and here Cashier ye from all Commands and Offices.



Look ye Collonel, you may do what you please, but you lose one of the best drest Officers in your whole Camp, Sir 



and in me, such a Head Piece.



I'le say nothing, but let the State want me.



For my part I am weary of weighty Affairs.




Command what Men you please, but Expedition makes you half a Conquerour.






Look ye now Gentlemen the Master has writ.



Has he he might have writ sooner, while I was in Com∣mand, if he had 



Ay Major if he had but let them miss us 



Collonel hast with your Men and Reinforce the Beach, while I
  33
follow with the Horse; Mr. Dunce pray let that Proclamation be Read concerning Bacon, to the Souldiers.



It shall be done Sir,

Gentlemen how simply you look now.



 VVhy Mr. Parson I have a scruple of Conscience upon me▪ I am considering whether it be Lawful to Kill, tho it be in VVar; I have a great aversion to't, and hope it proceeds from Religion.



I remember the Fit took you just so, when the Dutch Besieged us, for you cou'd not then be perswaded to strike a stroke.



Ay, that was because they were Protestants as we are, but Gads Zoors had they been Dutch Papists I had maul'd them? but Conscience 



I have been a Justice of Peace this six years and never had a con∣science in my Life.



Nor I neither, but in this damn'd thing of Fighting.



Gentlemen I am Commanded to read the Declaration of the Honourable Council to you.




Hum hum hum 









By an order of Council Dated May the 10th 1670: To all Gen∣tlemen Souldiers, Marchants, Planters, and whom else it may concern. VVhereas Bacon, contrary to Law and Equity, has to satisfie his own Ambition taken up Arms, with a pretence to fight the Indians, but indeed to molest and enslave the whole Colony, and to take away their Liberties and Properties; this is to declare, that whoever shall bring this Traytor Dead or alive to the Council shall have three hundred Pounds reward. And so God save the King.



A Councel, a Councel! Hah 




Stand to your Arms Gentlemen, stand to your Arms, Bacon is Marching this way.



Hah what numbers has he?



About a hundred Horse, in his March he has surpriz'd Collonel Downright, and taken him Prisoner.



Let's fall on Bacon let's fall on Bacon hay 




VVe'll hear him speak first and see what he can say for him∣self.



Ay, ay, we'l hear Bacon speak 





VVell Major I have found a Stratagem shall make us four the Greatest Men in the Colony, we'll surrender our selves to Bacon, and say we Disbanded on purpose.







VVhy, I had no other design in the VVorld in refusing to •…ight.



Nor I, d'e think I wou'd have excus'd it with the fear of disor∣dering my Cravat String else 





VVhy Gentlemen, he designs to Fire James Town; Murder you all, and then lye with your VVives, and will you slip this opportunity of seizing him?



Here's a Tarmagant Rogue Neighbours we'll Hang the Dog. All, Ay, Ay, hang Bacon, hang Bacon.
Enter Bacon, and Fearless, some Souldiers leading in Downright bound; Bacon stands and stares a while on the Regiments, who are silent all.



VVell Gentlemen in order to your fine Declaration you see I come to render my self 



How came he to know of our Declaration?



Rogues, Rogues among our selves that inform.



VVhat are ye silent all, not a Man lift his Hand in Obedience to the Council to Murder this Traytor, that has exposed his Life so often for vou? Hah what not for three hundred Pound, you see I've left my Troops behind, and come all wearied with the Toyles of VVar, worn out by Summers heats and VVinters colds, March'd tedious Days and Nights thro •…ogs and Fens as dangerous as your Clamors, and as Faithless, what tho 'twas to preserve you all in safety, no matter, you shou'd obey the Grateful Council, and Kill this honest Man that has defended you?







The General speaks like a Gorgon.



Like a Cherubin, Man.



All silent yet where's that mighty Courage that cryed so loud but now? A Council a Council, where is your Resolution, cannot three hundred Pound Excite your Valour, to seize that Traytor Bacon who has bled for you? 



A Bacon, a Bacon, a Bacon. 




Oh Villanous Cowards Oh the Faithless Multitude!



VVhat say you Parson you have a forward Zeal?



I wish my Coat Sir did not hinder me, from acting as becomes my Zeal and Duty.



A Plaguy Rugid Dog that Parson 



Fearless seize me that canting Knave from out the Herd, and next those Honourable Officers.



Fearless seizes them, and gives them to the Souldiers, and takes the Pro∣clamation from Dunce and shews Bacon, they read it.



Seize us, Sir, you shall not need, we laid down our Commissi∣ons on purpose to come over to your Honour.



We ever lov'd and honour'd your Honour.



So intirely, Sir that I wish I were safe in James Town for your sake, and your Honour were hang'd.




This fine Piece is of your Penning Parson though it be coun∣tenanc'd
  35
by the Councils Names Oh in gratitude Burn Burn the Treacherous Town Fire it immediately 



We'll obey you, Sir 



Ay, ay, we'll make a Bonfire on't, and Drink your Honours Health round about it.




Yet hold, my Revenge shall be more Merciful, I ordered that all the Women of Rank shall be seiz'd and brought to my Camp. I'll make their Husbands pay their Ransoms dearly; they'd rather have their Hearts bleed than their Purses.



Dear General, let me have the seizing of Collonel Downright's Daughter; I would fain be Plundering for a Trifle call'd a Maiden-head.



On pain of Death treat them with all respect; assure them of the safety of their Honour. Now, all that will follow me, shall find a welcom, and those that will not may depart in Peace.



Hay, a General, a General, a General.






Successful Dareing welcome, what Prizes have ye?



The Fairest in the VVorld Sir, I'm not for common Plunder.



Hah, my Daughter and my Kinswoman! 



'Tis not with Women Sir, nor honest Men like you that I in∣tend to Combat; not their own Parents shall not be more indulgent, nor better safeguard to their Honours Sir: But 'tis to save the Expence of Blood, I seize on their most valu'd Prizes



But Sir, I know your wild Lieutenant General has long lov'd my Chrisante, and perhaps, will take this time to force her to consent.



I own I have a Passion for Chrisante, yet by my Generals Life or her fair self what now I Act is on the score of War, I scorn to force the Maid I do adore.



Believe me Ladies, you shall have Hon ourable Treatment here.



We do not doubt it Sir, either from you or Dareing, If he Love me  that will secure my Honour, or if he do not, he's to brave to injure me.



I thank you for your just opinion of me, Madam.



But Sir, 'tis for my Father I must plead; to see his Reverend Hands in Serval Chains and then perhaps if stubborn to your will, his Head must fall a Victim to your Anger.



No my good Pious Girl, I cannot fear Ignoble usage from the General And if thy Beauty can preserve thy Fam•…, I shall not mourn in my Captivity.



I'le ne're deceive your kind opinion of me Ladies I hope you're all of that opinion to.





If seizing us Sir can advance your Honour, or be of any use considerable to you, I shall be proud of such a slavery.



I hope Sir we shan't be Ravish'd in your Camp.



Fie Mrs. Whimsey, do Souldiers use to Ravish?



Ravish marry I fear 'em not, I'de have em know I scorn to be Ravish'd by any Man!



Ay a my Conscience Mrs Whiff, you are too good natur'd



Madam, I hope: you'l give me leave to name Love to you, and try by all sub misive ways to win your heart?



Do your worst Sir, I give you leave, if you assail me only with your Tongue.



That's generous and brave, and Ple requite it.
Enter Souldier in haste.



The Truce being ended, Sir, the Indians grow so insolent as to attack us even in our Camp, and have kill'd several of our Men.



'Tis time to check their boldness, Dareing haste draw up our Men in order, to give 'em Battel, I rather had expected their submission.
The Country now may see what they're to fear,
Since we that are in Arms are not secure.








After this soft Musick plays again, then they Sing something fine, after which the Priests lead the King to the Altar, and the Priestessess, the Queen, they take off little Crowns from their Heads, and offer them at the Alter.


Invoke the God, of our Quiocto to declare, what the Event shall be of this our last War against the English General.



The Musick changes to confused Tunes, to which the Priest and Priestess Dance Antickly Singing between; the same Incantation as before, and then Dance again, and so invoke again alternately: Which Dance ended a Voice behind the Alter cries, while soft Musick Play 

The English General shall be,
A Captive to his Enemy;
And you from all your Toyls be freed,
When by your hand the Foe shall bleed
And ere the Sun's swift course be run,
This mighty Conquest, shall be won.




I thank the Gods for taking care of us, prepare new Sacrifice against the Evening, when I return a Conqueror, I will my self perform the Office of a Priest.



Oh Sir, I fear you'l fall a Victim first.



What means Semernia, why are thy looks so Pale?



Alas the Oracles have double meanings, their sence is doubtful, and their words Inigma's, I fear Sir I cou'd make a truer interpritation 



How Semernia! by all thy Love I charge thee as you respect my Life, to let me know your thoughts.



Last Night I Dream'd a Lyon fell with Hunger, spight of your Guards slew you, and bore you hence.



This is thy Sexes fear, and no interpretation of the Oracle.



I cou'd convince you farther.



Hast thou a secret thou canst keep from me? Thy Soul a thought that I must be stranger too? This is not like the Justice of Semernia, come unriddle me the Oracle.



The English General shall be, a captive to his Enemy; he is so Sir already to my Beauty, he says he languishes for Love of me.



Hah the General my Rival but go on 



And you from all your War be freed: Oh let me not explain that fatal line, for fear it mean, you shall be freed by Death.



What, when by my hand the Foe shall bleed? away  it cannot be 



No doubt my Lord, you'l bravely sell your Life, and deal some wounds where you'l receive so many.



'Tis Love Semernia makes thee Dream, while waking I'le trust the Gods, and am resolved for Battel.
Enter an Indian.




Hast, Hast Great Sir to Arms, Bacon with all his Forces is pre∣par'd, and both the Armies ready to engage.



Hast to my General bid him charge em instantly, I'le bring up the supplys of stout Teroomians, those so well skill'd in the Envenom'd Arrow, 
 Semernia words but poorly do express
  38
the griefs of parting Lovers 'tis with dying Eyes, and a Heart tremb∣ling  thus   They take a heavy leave, one parting Kiss, and one Love pressing sigh, and then farewel but not a long farewel; I shall return Victorious to thy Arms, com∣mend me to the Gods and still remember me.




Alas! What pitty 'tis I saw the General, before my Fate had given me to the King but now like those that change their Gods, my faithless mind 'twixt two opinions wavers; while to the Gods my Monarch I commend; my wandring thoughts in pitty of the General makes that zeal cold, declin'd ineffectual; If for the General I, implore the Deieties, methinks my Prayers shou'd not ascend the Skies since Honour tells me 'tis an impious zeal.
Which way so ever my Devotions move,
I am too wretched to be heard above.









Hast, hast Sir to the Entrance of the Wood, Dareings Engaged past hope of a retreat, ventring too far, persuing of the Foe; the King in Ambush with his Poyson'd Archers, fell on and now we're danger∣ously distrest.



Dareing is Brave, but, he's withal, too rash, come on and sol∣low me to his Assistance 






Turn, turn ye fugitive Slaves, and face the Enemy; Oh Villains, Cowards, Deaf to all Command, by Heaven I had my Rival my in view and Aim'd at nothing but my Conquering him now like a Coward I must fly with Cowards, or like a desperate Mad-Man fall, thus singly midst the numbers.






 Where is the King, Oh ye perfidious Slaves, how have you
  39
hid from my just Revenge search all the Brakes, the Fuzes and the Trees; and let him not escape on Pain of Death.



We cannot do wonders Sir.



But you can run away 



Yes, when we see occasion yet shou'd any but my Ge∣neral tell me so  by Heaven he shou'd find I were no starter.



Forgive me, I'm Mad the Kings escap'd, hid like a tremb∣ling slave in some close Ditch, where he will sooner starve than Fight it out.
Re-enter Indians running over the Stage, pursued by the King who shoots them as they Fly, some few follow him.



All's lost the day is lost and I'm betray'd Oh Slaves, that even Wounds can't Animate.








The General here, by all the Powers betray'd by my own Men.



Abandon'd as thou art I scorn to take thee basely, you shall have Souldiers chance Sir for your Life, since chance so luckily has brought us hither; without more aids we will dispute the day: this spot of Earth bears both our Armies Fates, I'le give you back the Victory I have won, and thus begin a new, on equal terms.



That's Nobly said the Powers have heard my wish! You Sir first taught me how to use a Sword, which heretofore has serv'd me with success, but now 'tis for Semernia that it draws, a prize more valu'd than my Kingdom, Sir 







Your Blushes do betray your Passion for her.



'Sdeath have we Fought for this, to expose the Victor to the Conquer'd Foe?



What Fight a single Man our Prize already.



Not so young Man while I command a Dart.



Fight him, by Heaven no reason shall disswade me, and he that interrupts me is a Coward, whatever be my Fate, I do command ye to let the King pass freely to his Tents.



The Devils in the General.



'Sdeath his Romantick humour will undo us.




You Fight as if you meant to outdo me this way, as you have done in Generosity.



You're not behind hand with me Sir in courtesie, come here's to set us even 








You've only Breath'd a Vein, and given me new Health and Vi∣gour by it.


How do you Sir?



Like one that's hovering between Heaven and Earth, I'm mounting somewhere upwards but giddy with my flight, I know not where.



Command my Surgions, instantly make haste Honour returns and Love all Bleeding's fled.





Oh Semernia, how much more truth had thy Divinity than the Predictions of the flattering Oracles. Commend me to her I know you'l visit your Fair Captive Sir, and tell her oh but Death pre∣vents the rest.






He's gone and now like Caesar I cou'd weep over the Hero I my self destroy'd.



I'm glad for your repose I see him there 'twas a Mad hot Brain'd Youth and so he dy'd.



Come bear him on your Shoulders to my Tent, from whence with all the solemn state we can, we will convey him to his own Pavillion.
Enter a Souldier.



Some of our Troops pursuing of the Enemy even to their Temples, which they made their Sanctuary, finding the Queen at her Devotion there with all her Indian Ladies, I'd much ado to stop their violent rage from setting fire to the Holy Pile.



Hang em immediately that durst attempt it, while I my self will flye to rescue her.





Nay I'm resolv'd to keep thee here till his Honour the General comes, what to call him Traytor, and run away after he had so generously given us our freedom, and Listed us Cadees for the next com∣mand that fell in his Army; I'm resolv'd to Hang thee 



Wilt thou betray and Peach thy Friend: Thy Friend that kept thee Company all the while thou wert a Prisoner Drinking at my own charge. 



No matter for that, I scorn Ingratitude and therefore will Hang thee but as for thy drinking with me I scorn to be hehind hand with thee in Civility and therefore here's to thee.








A certain sign thou wo't be Hang'd.



You us'd to be a my side when a Justice, set the cause be how it wou'd.




Ay when I was a Justice I never minded Honesty, but now I'le be true to my General, and Hang thee to be a great man. 





If I might but have a fair Tryal for my Life 



A fair Tryal come I'le be thy Judge and if thou can'st clear thy self by Law I'le acquit thee, Sirrah, Sirrah, what can'st thou say for thy self for calling his Honour Rebel?




'Twas when I was Drunk an't like yourHonour.



That's no Plea, for if you kill a Man when you are Sober you must be Hang'd when you are Drunk, hast thou any thing else to say for thy self, why Sentence may not pass upon thee?



I desire the Benefit of the Clergy.



The Clergy, I never knew any body that ever did benefit by em, why thou canst not read a word?







It shall be to England then but hold who's this?





So the dangers over, I may venture out, Pox on't I would not be in this fear again, to be Lord Chief Justice of our Court. Why how now Cornet what in dreadful Enter Timerous with Battle Ax, Bow and Arrows, and Feathers on his Head. Equipage? Your Battle Ax Bloody, with Bow and Arrows?



I'm in the posture of the times Major I cou'd not be Idle where so much Action was, I'm going to present my self to the General with these Trophies of my Victory here 



Victory what Victory did not see thee creeping out of yonder Bush, where thou weret hid all the Fight stumble on a Dead Indian, and take away his Arms?



Why, didst thou see me?



See thee Ay and what a fright thou wert in, till thou wert sure he was Dead.



Well, well, that's all one Gads zoors if every Man that pass for Valiant in a Battel, were to give an account how he gain'd his Reputa∣tion, the World wou'd be but thinly stock'd with Heroes, I'le say he was a great War Captain, and that I kill'd him hand to hand, and who can disprove me?



Disprove thee why that Pale face of thine, that has so much of the Coward in't.



Shaw that's with loss of Blood Hah I am overheard I doubt who's yonder  
 how Brother Whiff in a Hempen Cravat-String?



He call'd the General Traytor and was running away, and-I'm resolved to Peach.



Hum and one witness will stand good in Law, in case of Treason 



Gads zoors in case of Treason he'l beHang'd if it be proved against
  42
him, were there ne're a witness at all, but he must try'd by a Councel of War Man come, come let's disarm him 




What, I hope you will not take away my Brandy Gentlemen, my last comfort.



Gads zoors it's come in good time we'l Drink it off, here Major 




Hark ye Cornet you are my good Friend, get this matter made up before it come to the General.



But this is Treason Neighbour.



If I Hang I'le declare upon the Ladder, how you kill'd your War Captain



Come Brother Whimsey we have been all Friends and loving Magistrates together, let's Drink about, and think no more of this business.



Ay, ay, if every sober man in the Nation, should be call'd to account of the Treason he speaks in's Drink the Lord have mercy upon us all put it up and let us like loving Brothers take an honest resolution to run away together; for this same Frightal minds nothing but Fighting.



I'm content, provided we go all to the Council and tell them (to make our Peace) we went in obedience to the Proclamation to kill Bacon, but the Traytor was so strongly guarded we could not effect it, but Mum who's here 




Hah, our four Reverend Justices I hope the Blockheads will not know me Gentlemen, can you direct me to Lieutenant General Dareings Tents.



Hum, who the Devil's this that's he that you see coming this way, 'Sdeath yonders Dareing Let's slip away before he ad∣vances.





I am scar'd with those dead Bodies we have past over, for God's sake Madam, let me know your design in coming.



Why? now I'le tell thee my damn'd mad Fellow Dareing who has my heart and soul Loves Chrisante, has stolen her, and car∣ryed her away to his Tents, she hates him, while I am dying for him.



Dying Madam! I never saw you melancholy.



Pox on't no, why should I sigh and whine, and make my self an Ass. and him conceited, no, instead of snevelling I'm resolv'd 







Gad to beat the Rascal, and bring of Crisante.



Beat him Madam? What a woman beat a Lieutenant General.



Hang 'em, they get a name in War, from command, not courage; how know I but I may fight, Gad I have known a Fellow kickt
  43
from one end of the Town to t'other, believing himself a Coward, at last forc'd to fight, found he could, got a Reputation and bullyed all he met with, and got a name, and a great Commission.



But if he should kill you Madam?



I'le take care to make it as Comical a Duel as the best of 'em, as much in Love as I am, I do not intend to dy it's Martyr.
Enter Dareing and Fearless.




Have you seen Crysante since the fight?



Yes, but she is still the same, as nice and coy as Fortune, when she's courted by the wretched, yet she denys me, so obligingly she keeps my Love still in its humble Calm.



Can you direct me Sir, to one Dareings Tent:




One Dareing he has another Epithet to his name?



What's that, Rascal, or Coward?



Hah, which of thy Stars young man has sent thee hither, to find that certain Fate they have decreed.



I know not what my Stars have decreed, but I shall be glad if they have ordain'd me to Fight with Dareing, by thy concern thou shou'dst be he?



I am, prithee who art thou?



Thy Rival, tho newly arriv'd from England, and came to Marry fair Chrisante, whom thou hast Ravish'd, for whom I hear another Lady Dies.







Therefore resign her fairly or fight me fairly 



Come on Sir but hold before I kill thee, prithee inform me who this Dying Lady is?



Sir I owe ye no Courtesie, and therefore will do you none by telling you come Sir for Chrisante draws.




Hold what mad Frolicks this? Sir you Fight for one you never saw  and you for one that Loves you not. 




Perhaps she'l Love him as little.



Gad put it to the Tryal, if you dare if thou be'st Generous bring me to her, and whom she does neglect shall give the other Place.



That's fair put up thy Sword I'le bring thee to her In∣stantly.










I'm not so much afflicted for my confinement as I am, that I cannot hear of Friendly.



Art not persecuted with Dareing?



Not at all, tho he tells me daily of his Passion I rally him, and give him neither hope nor despair, he's here.





Madam, the Complaisance I show in bringing you my Rival, will let you see how glad I am to oblige you every way.



I hope the danger I have expos'd my self too for the Honour of kissing your hand Madam, will render me something acceptable here are my Credentials 





Dear Creature, I have taken this habit to free you from an impertinent Lover, and to secure the Damn'd Rogue Dareing to my self, receive me as sent by Collonel Surelove from England to Marry you favour me no more your Ranter Hah Ranter? Sir you have too good a Character from my Cousin Collonel Surelove, not to receive my welcome.




Stand by General 




'Sdeath Sir there's room enough at first sight so kind? Oh Youth Youth and Impudence, what Temptations are you to Villanous Woman.



I confess Sir we Women do not Love these rough Fighting Fel∣lows, they're always scaring us with one Broil or other.



Much good may do you with your tame Coxcomb.



Well Sir, then you yield the Prize?



Ay Gad, were she an Angel, that can prefer such a callow Fop as thou before a man take her and domineer.

 'Sdeath am I grown Ridiculous.



Why hast thou not found the Jest? by Heaven 'tis Ranter, 'tis she that loves you, carry on the humour. (aside.) Faith Sir, if I were you, I would devote my self to Madam Ranter.



Ay, she's the fittest Wife for you, she'll fit your Humour.



 Gad I'd sooner marry a She Bear, unless for a Pennance for some horrid Sin, we should be eternally challenging one another to the Field, and ten to one she beats me there; or if I should escape there, she would kill me with Drinking.



Here's a Rogue does your Country abound with such Ladies?



The Lord forbid, half a dozen wou'd ruine the Land, debauch all the men, and scandalize all the women.



No matter, she's rich.



Ay that will make her Insolent.



Nay she's generous too.



Yes when she's Drunk, and then she'l lavish all.



A Pox on him how he vexes me.



Then such a Tongue she'l rail and smoak till she choak again then six Gallons of Punch hardly recovers her, and never but then is she' good Natur'd.





I must lay him on 



There's not a Blockhead in the Country that has not 







 Been Drunk with her.



I thought you had meant something else Sir.




Nay as for that I suppose there's no great difficulty.



'Sdeath Sir you lye and you're a Son of a Whore.




Hold hold Virago dear Widow hold, and give me thy hand.







'Sdeath I knew thee by instinct Widow tho I seem'd not to do so, in revenge for the trick you put on me in telling me a Lady dy'd for me.



Why, such an one there is, perhaps she may dwindle forty or fifty years or so but will never be her own Woman again that's certain.



This we are all ready to testifie, we know her.



Upon my Life tis true.



Widow I have a shrewd suspicion, that you your self may be this dying Lady.







Because you took such pains to put your self into my hands.



Gad if your heart were but half so true as your guess, we should conclude a Peace before Bacon and the Council will besides this thing whines for Friendly and there's no hopes.





Give me thy hand Widow, I am thine and so intirely, I will never be drunk out of thy Company Dunce is in my Tent prithee let's in and bind the bargain.



Nay, faith, let's see the Wars at an end first.



Nay, prithee, take me in the humour, while thy Breeches are on for I never lik'd thee half so well in Petticoats.



Lead on General, you give me good incouragement to wear them.









WE we are now in the sight of the Tents.



Is not this a rash attempt, Gentlemen, with so small Force to set upon Bacons whole Army?



Oh, they are drunk with Victory and Wine; there will be naught but Revelling to Night.



Would we cou'd learn in wha Quarter the Ladies are lodg'd, for we have no other business but to release them but hark who comes here?



Some Scouts, I fear, from the Enemy.
Enter Dullman, Tim. Whim. and Whiff, creeping as in the dark.



Let's shelter our selves behind yonder Trees lest we be surpriz'd.



Wou'd I were well at home Gad Zoors if e're you catch me a Cadeeing again, I'll be content to be set in the fore front of the Bat∣tel for Hawks Meat.



Thou'rt affraid of every Bush.



Ay, and good Reason too: Gad Zoors, there may be Rogues hid prithee Major, do thou advance.



No, no, go on no matter of ceremony in these cases of run∣ning away.




They approach directly to us, we cannot escape them their numbers are not great let us advance.




Oh, I am annihilated.



Some of Frightall's Scouts; we are lost men.








Oh, they'll give us no Quarter; 'twas long of you Cornet, that we ran away from our Colours.



Me 'twas the Majors Ambition here to make himself a great Man with the Council again.



Poxo' this Ambition, it has been the ruin of many a Gallant Fellow.



If I get home again, the height of mine shall be to top Tobacco; would l'd some Brandy.





Gads Zoors, would we had, 'tis the best Armour against fear hum I hear no body now prithee advance a little.



What, before a Horse Officer?



Stand on your Lives 



Oh, 'tis impossible I am dead already.



What are ve speak or I'll shoot?



Friends to thee who the Devil are we friends too?



E'ne who you please, Gad Zoors.



Hah Gad Zoors who's there, Timerous?



Hum I know no such Scoundrel 




Hah that's Friendly's Voice.



Right thine's that of Dullman who's with you?



Only Timerous, Whimsey and Whiff, all Valiantly running away from the Arch Rebel that took us Prisoners.



Can you inform us where the Ladies are lodg'd?



In the hither Quarter in Dareings Tents; you'll know them by Lanthorns on every corner there was never better time to surprize them for this day Dareing's Marry'd, and there's nothing but Dan∣cing and Drinking.







That I ne'r inquir'd.



'Tis to Crisante, Friend and the reward of my attempt is lost. Oh, I am mad, I'll fight away my life, and my dispair shall yet do greater wonders, than even my Love could animate me too. Let's part our Men, and beset his Tents on both sides.





Come, Gentlemen, let's on 



On Sir we on Sir? 



Ay, you on, Sir to redeem the Ladies



Oh, Sir, I am going home for money to redeem my Nancy.



So am I, Sir.



I thank my Stars I am a Batchellor Why, what a plague is a Wife?



Will you March forward?



We have atchiev'd Honour enough already, in having made our Campaign-here 




'Sdeath, but you shall go put them in the front, and prick them on if they offer to turn back run them through.








Oh, Nancy, thy Dream will yet come to pass.



Will you advance, Sir?





Why, so we do, Sir; the Devil's in these fighting Fellows.





To Arms, to Arms, the Enemy's upon us.


A noise of fighting, after which enters Friendly with his Party, retreating and fighting, from Dareing and some Souldiers, Ranter fighting like a Fury by his side, he putting her back in vain; they fight out. Re-enter Daring with Friendly all bloody. Several Souldiers enter with Flambeaux.



Now, Sir what injury have I ever done you, that you should use this Treachery against me?



To take advantage any way in War, was never counted Trea∣chery and had I Murder'd thee, I had not paid thee half the Debt I owe thee.



You bleed too much to hold too long a Parley come to my Tent, I'll take a charitable care of thee.



I scorn thy Courtesie, who against all the Laws of Honour and of Justice, hast ravish'd innocent Ladies.



Sir, your upbraiding of my Honour shall never make me for∣feit it, or esteem you less Is there a Lady here you have a Passion for?



Yes, on a Nobler score than thou darest own.



To let you see how you're mistaken, Sir, who e're that Lady be whom you affect, I will resign, and give you both your Freedoms.



Why, for this Courtesie, which shows thee brave, in the next Fight I'le save thy Life, to quit the obligation.



I thank you, Sir come to my Tent and when we've drest your Wounds, and yielded up the Ladies, I'll give you my Pass∣port for your safe conduct back, and tell your Friends i'th' Town we'll Visit them i'th' Morning.



They'll meet you on your way, Sir 



Come, my young Souldier, now thou'st won my Soul.
An Alarm beats: Enter at another passage Boozer with all the Ladies; they pass over the Stage, while Hazard, Downright, beating back a Party of Souldiers. Dull. Tim. Whim and Whiff, prickt on by their Party to fight, so that they lay about them like Madmen. Bacon, Fearless and Dareing come in, rescue their men, and fight out the other Party, some falling dead. Bacon, Fearless and Dareing return tired, with their Swords drawn. Ent•… Souldier running.



Return, Sir, where your Sword will be more useful a Party of Indians, taking advantage of the Night, have set Fire on your Tents, and born away the Queen.



Hah, the Queen! By Heaven this Victory shall cost them dear; come, let us fly to rescue her.






I cannot sleep my Impatience is so great, to ingage this haughty Enemy, before they have reposed their weary Limbs Is not you Ruddy Light the Mornings Dawn.





'Tis, and please your Honour.



Is there no News of Friendly yet, and Hazard?



Not yet 'tis thought they left the Camp to Night, with some design against the Enemy.



What Men have they?



Only Boozers Party, Sir.



I know they are brave, and mean to surprize me with some handsom Action.





I ask a thousand Pardons, Sir, for quitting the Camp without your leave.



Your Conduct and your Courage cannot Err; I see thou'st been in action by thy Blood.



Sir I'm ashamed to own these slender wounds, since without more my luck was to be taken, while Hazard did alone effect the business; the rescuing of the Ladies.



How got ye Liberty?



By Dareings generosity, who sends you word he'l visit you this Morning.



We are prepared to meet him.





My worthy Friend how am I joyed to see you?



We owe our Liberties to these brave Youths, who can do won∣ders when they Fight for Ladies.



With our assistance Ladies.



For my part I'le not take it as I have done, Gad I find when I am Damnable Angry I can beat both Friend and Foe.



When I fight for my Nancy here adsfish I'm a Dragon.



Lord you need not have been so hasty:



Do not upbraid me with your Eyes Chrisante, but let these wounds assure you I endeavour'd to serve you, tho Hazard had the Honour on't.



But Ladies we'l not expose you in the Camp, a Party of our Men shall see you safely conducted to Madam Sureloves; 'tis but a little Mile from our Camp.



Let me have that Honour Sir.



No, I conjure you let your wounds be drest, obey me if you Love me, and Hazard shall conduct us home.



He had the Toyl, 'tis fit he have the recompence.



He the Toyl Sir, what did we stand for Cyphers?



The very appearance I made in the front of the Battle, aw'd the Enemy.



Ay, Ay, Let the Enemy say how I maul'd 'em but Gads zoors I scorn to brag.



Since you've regain'd your Honour so Gloriously I restore you to your Commands, you lost by your seeming Cowardise.





Valour is not always in Humour Sir.



Come Gentlemen since they're resolv'd to engage us, let's set our Men in order to receive 'em.




Our Commissions again you must be bragging, and see what comes on't; I was modest ye see and said nothing of my Prowess.



What a Devil, does the Collonel think we are made of Iron, con∣tinually to be beat on the Anvil?



Look Gentlemen here's two Evils if we go we are dead Men if we stay we are hang'd and that will disorder my Cravat-string therefore the least Evil is to go and set a good Face on the matter as I do 






I tremble yet, dost think we're safe Cavaro.



Madam these Woods are intricate and vast; and 'twill be difficult to find us out or if they do, this habit will secure you from the fear of being taken.



Dost think if Bacon find us he will not know me? Alas my fears and blushes will betray me.



'Tis certain Madam if we stay we Perish; for all the Wood's surrounded by the Conqueror.



Alas 'tis better we shou'd Perish here, than stay to expect the violence of his Passion; Towhich my heart's too sensibly inclin'd.



Why do you not obey it's dictates then, why do you fly the Conqueror?



Not fly not fly the Murderer of my Lord?



VVhat world, what resolution can preserve you, and what he cannot gain by soft submission, force will at last o'recome.



I wish there were in Nature one excuse either by force or Reason to compel me: For oh Anaria I adore this General, take from my Soul a Truth till now conceal'd at twelve years Old at the Pauwmungian Court I saw this Conqueror. I saw him young and Gay as new born Spring, Glorious and Charming as the Mid-days Sun, I watch't his looks, and listned when he spoke, and thought him more than Mortal.



He has a graceful Form.



At last a Fatal Match concluded was, between my Lord and me I gave my Hand, but oh how far my heart was from consenting, the angry Gods are witness.







Twelve teadious Moons I past in silent languishment; Honour endeavouring to destroy my Love, but all in vain, for still my pain re∣turn'd when ever I beheld my Conqueror, but now when I consider him
  51
as Murderer of my Lord  I sigh and wish some other fatal hand had given him his Death but now there's a necessity I must be brave and overcome my Heart: VVhat if I do? ah whether shall I fly, I have no Amazonian fire about me, all my Artillery is sighs and Tears, the Earth my Bed, and Heaven my Canopy.


Hah, we are surpris'd, oh whether shall I fly? And yet methinks a certain trembling joy, spight of my Soul, spight of my boasted Honour, runs shivering round my heart..





Madam your out guards are surpriz'd by Bacon, who hews down all before him, and demands the Queen with such a voice and Eyes so Feirce and Angry, he kills us with his looks.



Draw up your Poyson'd Arrows to the head, and aim them at his Heart, sure some will hit.



Cruel Cavaro, wou'd 'twere fit for me to contradict thy Justice.





The Queen ye slaves, give me the Queen and live!
He Enters furiously beating back some Indians, Cavaro's Party going to shoot, the Queen runs in.



Hold, hold, I do Command ye 





Hah a Womans Voice, what art thou? Oh my fears!



Thy hand has been too cruel to a Heart whose Crime was only tender thoughts for thee.



The Queen! VVhat is't my Sacreligious hand has done?



The noblest office of a Gallant Friend, thou'st sav'd my Honour and hast given me Death.



Is't possible! ye unregarding Gods is't possible?



Now I may Love you without Infamy, and please my Dying Heart by gazing on you.



Oh I am lost for ever lost I find my Brain turn with the wild confusion.



I faint oh lay me gently on the Earth.










Hah on the Earth how do you Sir?







Wellman with all the Forces he can gather attacks us even in our very Camp, assist us Sir or all is lost.





Why prithee let him make the World his Prize, I have no business with the Trifle now; it now contains nothing that's worth my case, since my fair Queen is Dead, and by my Hand.



So charming and obliging is thy mone, that I cou'd wish for Life to recompence it; but oh, Death falls all cold upon my Heart like Mildews on the Blossoms.



By Heaven Sir, this Love will ruin all rise, rise and save us yet.



Leave me, what e're becomes of me loose not thy share of Glory prithee leave me.



Alas, I fear, thy Fate is drawing on, and I shall shortly meet thee in the Clouds; till then farewel even Death is pleasing to me, while thus I find it in thy Arms 




There ends my Race of Glory and of Life:




Hah Why should I idly whine away my life, since there are Nobler ways to meet with Death? Up, up, and face him then Hark there's the Souldiers knell and all the Joys of Life with thee I bid farewel 





They fight like men possest I did not think to have found them so prepar'd.



They'ye good intelligence but where's the Rebel?



Sure he's not in the fight, oh that it were my happy chance to meet him, that while our men look on, we might dispatch the business of the War. Come, let's fall in again now we have taken breath.
They go out: Enter Dareing and Fearless hastily, with their Swords drawn, meet Whim, Whiff, with their Swords drawn, running away.



How now, whether away?




Hah, Dareing here we are pursuing of the Enemy, Sir, stop us not in the pursuit of Glory.




Stay I have not seen you in my ranks to day.



Lord, does your Honour take us for Starters?



Yes, Sirrah, and believe you are now rubbing off confess, or I'll run you through.



Oh Mercy, Sir, Mercy, we'll confese.



VVhat will you confess we were only going behind you Hedge to untruss a point; that's all.



Ay, your Honours will smell out the truth if you keep us here long.











A Pox of all ill luck, how came •…to •…ese Dareing in the fight?
  53
Ha who's here? Dullman and Timerous Dead the Rogues are Counterfeits I'll see what Moveables they have about them, all's Lawful Prize in VVar.




VVhat, Rob the Dead? VVhy, what will this Villanous World come to.






Thou cou'dst expect no other Fate Young man, thy hands are yet too tender for a Sword.



Thou look'st like a good natur'd Fellow, use me civilly, and Dareing shall Ransom me.



Doubt not a Generous Treatment.




So, the Coast is clear, I desire to remove my Quarters to some place of more safety  










'Tis Just, ye Gods! That when you took the Prize for which I fought, Fortune and you should all abandon me.



Oh fly Sir to some place of safe retreat, for there's no mercy to be hop't if taken. What will you do, I know we are pursu'd, by Hea∣ven I will not dye a shameful Death.



Oh they'll have pitty on thy Youth and Bravery, but I'm above their Pardon.
A noise is heard.
Within.
This way this way hay hallow.



Alas Sir we're undone I'll see which way they they take.
Exit:



So near! Nay then to my last shift. Undoes the Pomel of his Sword. Come my good Poyson, like that of Hannibal, long I have born a noble Remedy for all the ills of Life. Takes Poyson. I have too long sur∣viv'd my Queen and Glory, those two bright Stars that influenc'd my Life are set to all Eternity.
Lyes down.
Enter Fearless, runs to Bacon and looks on his Sword.



 Hah what have ye done?



Secur'd my self from being a publick Spectacle upon the com∣mon Theatre of Death.
Enter Dareing and Souldiers.



Victory, victory, they fly, they fly, where's the Victorious Ge∣neral?



Here taking his last Adieu.



Dying? Then wither all the Laurels on my Brows, for I shall never Triumph more in War, where is the wounds?



From his own hand by what he carried here, believing we had lost the Victory.



And is the Enemy put to flight my Hero?






All routed Horse and Foot, I plac'd an Ambush, and while they were pursuing you, my Men fell on behind and won the day.



Thou almost makes me wish to Live again, If I cou'd live now Fair Semernia's Dead, But oh the baneful Drug is just and kind and hastens me away now while you are Victors make a Peace with the English Councel and never let Ambition Love or Interest make you forget as I have done your Duty and Allegiance farewel a long farewel 




So fell the Roman Cassius by mistake 
Enter Souldiers with Dunce, Tim. and Dullman.




An't please your Honour we took these Men running away.



Let 'em loose the VVars are at an end, see where the General lyes that great Soul'd Man, no private Body e're contain'd a Nobler, and he that cou'd have conquer'd all America, finds only here his scanty length of Earth, go bear the Body to his own Pavillion   Tho we are Conquerers we submit to treat, and yeild upon conditions, you Mr. Dunce shall bear our Articles to the Councel 



VVith joy I will obey you.



Good General let us be put in the agreement.



You shall be oblig'd 




VVhat does your Honour intend to do with Whim and Whiff, who are Condemn'd by a Councel of VVar.






You come too late Gentlemen to be put into the Articles, nor am I satisfy'd you're worthy of it.



VVhy did not you Sir see us ly Dead in the Field.



Yes, but I see no wound about you.



VVe were stun'd with being knock'd down, Gads zoors a Man may be kill'd with the But end of a Musquet, as soon as with the point of a Sword.





The Council Sir wishes you Health and Happiness, and •…sends you these Sign'd by their Hands 





That you shall have a general Pardon for your self and Friends, that you shall have all new Commissions, and Dareing to Com∣mand as General; that you shall have free leave to Inter•… your Dead General, in James Town, and to ratifie this we will meet you at Madam Sureloves House which stands between the Armies, attended by only by our Officers. The Councels noble and I'le wait upon them.
Exit Dunce.






How long Madam have you heard the news of Collonel Su•…ve's Death?





By a Vessel last Night arriv'd.



You shou'd not grieve when men so old pay their debt to Nature, you are too Fair not to have been reserved for some young Loves Arms.



I dare not speak but give me leave to hope.



The way to oblige me to't, is never more to speak to me of Love till I shall think it fit 




Come you shan't grant it 'tis a hopeful Youth.



You are too much my Friend to be deny'd Crisante do you Love Friendly? nay do not blush till you have done a fault, your Loving him is none here take her young Man and with her all my Fortune when I am Dead Sirrah not a Groat before unless to buy ye Baby Clouts.



He merits not this Treasure Sir, can wish for more.
Enter Dareing, Fearless, Dunce and Officers, they meet VVell: and Down. who Embrace em. Dull. and Tim. stand.



Can you forgive us Sir our disobedience.



Your offering peace while yet you might command it, has made such kind impressions on us, that now you may command your Propo∣sitions; your Pardons are all Seal'd and new Commissions.



I'm not Ambitious of that Honour Sir, but in obedience will ac∣cept your goodness, but Sir I hear I have a young Friend taken Prisoner by Captain Hazard whom I intreat you'l render me,



Sir here I resign him to you.





Faith General you left me but scurvily in Battel.



That was to see how well you cou'd shift for your self, now I find you can bear the brunt of a Campaign you are a fit VVife for a Souldier.



A VVoman Ranter 



Faith Madam I shou'd have given you kinder. Quarter if I had known my Happiness.



I have an humble Petition to you Sir.



In which we all joyn.



An't please you Sir, Mr. Dunce has long made Love to me and on promise of Marriage has 




VVhat has he Mrs. Flirt.



Only been a little familiar with my Person Sir 



Do you hear Parson you must Marry Mrs. Flirt.



How Sir, a Man of my Coat Sir, Marry a Brandy-munger.



Of your calling you mean a Farrier and no Parson   she'l leave her Trade and spark it above all the Ladies at Church, no more take her and make her honest.
Enter Whim and Whiff stript.



Bless me, what have we here?



Why, an't like your Honours, we were taken by the Enemy. hah Dareing here and Fearless?





How now Gentlemen were not you two Condemn'd to be Shot for running from your Colours.







Yes Sir, they were both listed in my Regiment.



Then we must hang them for deserting us.



So out of the Frying Pan you know where Brother 



Ay he that's Born to be Hang'd you know the rest, a Pox of these Proverbs.



I know ye well you're all rank Cowards, but once more we forgive ye, your Places in the Councel shall be supply'd by these Gentlemen of Sence and Honour. The Governour when he comes shall find the Country in better hands than he expects to find it.



A very fair discharge,



I'm glad 'tis no worse, I'le home to my Nancy.



Have we expos'd our Lives and Fortunes for this?



Gads zoors I never thriv'd since I was a States-man, left Planting, and fell to promising and Lying, I'le to my old Trade again, bask un∣der the shade of my own Tobacco, and Drink my Punch in Peace.



Come my brave Youths let all our Forces meet,
To make this Country Happy, Rich, and great;
Let scanted Europe see that we enjoy
Safer Repose, and larger Worlds than they.


