



and Footman with a Cloak.



TRouble me no more: for I am resolv'd, deaf and obdurate, d•
see, and so forth.



I beseech ye, Uncle, hear me.















You will be mortifi'd 







At least hear me out, Sir.



No, I have heard you out too often, Sir, till you have talkt me out of ma•
a fair thousand; have had ye out of all the Bayliffs, Serjeants, and Constables clutches
bout Town, Sir; have brought ye out of all the Surgeons, Apothecaries, and Po•
Doctors hands, that ever pretended to cure incurable Diseases; and have crost ye ou•
the Books of all the Mercers, Silk-men, Exchange-men, Ta•lors, Shoemakers, and S•
strisses; with all the rest of the unconscionable City-tribe of the long Bill, that had
Faith enough to trust, and thought me Fool enough to pay.



But, Sir, consider, he's your own Flesh and Bloud.



That's more than I'll swear.







That's more than you or any of his wise Associates can t•ll, Sir.



Why his wise Associates? have you any exception to the Company he
keeps? This reflects on me and young Dresswell, Sir, men both of Birth and Fortune.



Why, good Sir Charles Meriwill, let me tell you, since you'll have it out,
That you and young Dresswell are able to debauch, destroy, and confound all the young
imitating Fops in Town.







Nay, never huff, Sir; for I have six thousand pound a year, and value no
man: Neither do I speak so much for your particular, as for the Company you keep, such
Tarmagant Tories as these,  who are the very Vermine of a young Heir,
and for one Tickling give him a thousand Bites.



Death! meaning me, Sir?



Yes, you, Sir. Nay, never stare, Sir; I fear you not: no mans hectoring
sig•ifies this in the City, but the Constable's; no body dares be sawcy here, except it
be in the Kings name.



Sir, I confess he was to blame.



Sir Charles, thanks to Heaven, you may be lewd, you have a plentiful Estate,
may whore, drink, game, and play the Devil; your Uncle Sir Anthony Meriwill intends to
give you all his Estate too: But for such Sparks as this, and my Fop in fashion here,
why with what Face, Conscience, or Religion, can they be lewd and vitious, keep their
Wenches, Coaches, rich Liveries, and so forth, who live upon Charity, and the Sins of
he Nation?



If he have Youthful Vices, he has Vertues too.



Yes, he had; but I know not, you have bewitcht him amongst ye •efore he fell to Toryism, he was a sober civil Youth, and had some Religion in him,
•ou'd read ye Prayers night and morning with a laudable voice, and cry Amen to 'em;
wou'd have done ones heart good to have heard him: Wore decent Cloaths; was
•unk but upon Fasting-nights, and swore but on Sundays and Holy-days: and then I
•d hopes of him.




Aye, Heaven forgive me.



But, Sir, he's now become a new man, is casting off all his Women, is
•unk not above five or six times a week, swears not above once in a quarter of an hour,
•r has not gam'd this two days. 



'Twas because the Devil was in's Pocket then.



 Begins to take up at Coffee-houses, talks gravely in the City, speaks
indalous•y of the Government, and rails most abominably against the Pope and the
ench King.



Aye, aye, this shall not wheedle me out of one English Guinny; and so I told
•n yesterday.



You did so, Sir.



Yes; by a good token you were witty upon me, and swore I lov'd and ho∣•r'd
the King nowhere but on his Coin.



Is it possible, Sir?



God forgive me, Sir; I confess I was a little overtaken.



Aye, so it shou'd seem: for he mistook his own Chamber, and went to bed to
Maids.



How! to bed to your Maids! Sure, Sir, 'tis scandal on him.



No, no, he makes his brags on't, Sir. Oh that crying sin of Boasting!
Well fare, I say, the days of old Oliver; he by a wholsome Act, made it death to
boast; so that then a man might whore his heart out, and no body the wiser.



Right, Sir, and then the men pass'd for sober religious persons, and the
women for as demure Saints 



Aye, then there was no scandal; but now they do not onely boast what
they do, but what they do not.



I'll take care that fault shall be mended, Sir.



Aye, so will I, if Poverty have any feats of Mortification; and so farewel
to you, Sir.




Stay, Sir, are you resolved to be so cruel then, and ruine all my Fortunes
now depending?



















Do and be hang'd.



Nay, I'll turn Papist.



Do and be damn'd.



Bless me, Sir, what a scandal would that be to the Family of the Treat∣alls!



Hum! I had rather indeed he turn'd Turk or Jew, for his own sake;
but as for scandalizing me, I defie it: my Integrity has been known ever since Forty
One; I bought three thousand a year in Bishops Lands, as 'tis well known, and lost
it at the Kings return; for which I'm honour'd by the City. But for his farther
satisfaction, consolation, and distruction, know, That I Sir Timothy Treat-all, Knight
and Alderman, do think my self young enough to marry, d'ye see, and will wipe your
Nose with a Son and Heir of my own begetting, and so forth.








Patience, dear Tom, or thou't spoil all.



Damn him, I've lost all Patience, and can dissemble no longer, though I lose
all, Very good, Sir; heark ye, I hope she's young and handsome; or if she be
not, amongst the numerous lusty-stomacht Whigs that dayly nose your publick Din∣ners,
some may be found that either for Money, Charity, or Gratitude, may requite
your Treats. You keep open house to all the Party, not for Mirth, Generosity, or
good Nature, but for Roguery. You cram the Brethren, the pious City-Gluttons,
with good Cheer, good Wine, and Rebellion in abundance, gormandizing all Comers
and Goers, of all Sexes, Sorts, Opinions, and Religions, young half-witted Fops, hot-headed
Fools, and Malecontents: You guttle and fawn on all, and all in hopes of
debauching the Kings Liege-people into Commonwealths-men; and rather than
lose a Convert, you'll pimp for him. These are your nightly Debauches. Nay,
rather than you shall want it, I'll cuckold you my self in pure Revenge.



How! Cuckold his own natural Uncle!



Oh, he cannot be so prophane.



Prophane! why he deni'd but now the having any share in me; and there∣fore
'tis lawful. I am to live by my wits, you say, and your old rich good-natur'd
  4
Cuckold is as sure a Revenue to a handsome young Cadet, as a thousand pound a
year. Your tolerable face and shape is an Estate in the City, and a better Bank than
your Six per Cent. at any time.



Well, Sir, since Nature has furnisht you so well, you need but up and
ride, show and be rich; and so your Servant, witty Mr. Wilding.




Whilst I am labouring anothers good, I quite neglect my own. This
cursed, proud, disdainful Lady Galliard, is ever in my head; she's now at Church,
I'm sure, not for Devotion, but to shew her Charms, and throw her Darts amongst
the gazing Crowd, and grows more vain by Conquest I'm near the Church, and
must step in, though it cost me a new Wound.




I am resolv'd Well, dear Charles, let's sup together to night, and con∣trive
some way to be reveng'd of this wicked Uncle of mine. I must leave thee now,
for I have an assignation here at Church.







Aye, Charles, with the dearest she-Saint, and I hope sinner.



What at Church? Pox, I shall be discovered now in my Amours. That's
an odde place for Love-Intrigues.



Oh, I am to pass for a sober discreet person to the Relations; but for my
Mistriss, she's made of no such sanctified Materials; she is a Widow, Charles, young,
rich, and beautiful.



Hah! if this should prove my Widow now!




And though at her own dispose, yet is much govern'd by Honour, and a
rigid Mother, who is ever preaching to her against the Vices of Youth, and t'other
end of the Town Sparks; dreads nothing so much as her Daughters marrying a vil∣lanous
Tory: So the young one is forc'd to dissemble Religion, the best Mask to
hide a kind Mistriss in.



This must be my Lady Galliard.




There is at present some ill understanding between us; some damn'd Ho∣nourable
•op lays siege to her, which has made me ill received; and I having a new
Intrigue elsewhere, return her cold disdain, but now and then she crosses my Heart
too violently to resist her. In one of these hot fits I now am, and must find some
occasion to speak to her.



By Heaven, it must be she! I am studying now, amongst all our she-Acquaintance,
who this shou'd be.



Oh, this is of quality to be conceal'd: but the dearest loveliest Hypocrite,
white as Lillies, smooth as Rushes, and plump as Grapes after showers, haughty her
Meen, her Eyes fu•l of disdain, and yet bewitching sweet; but when she loves, soft,
witty, wanton, all that charms a Soul, and but for now and then a fit of Honour!
Oh, damn the Nonsence, wou'd be all my own.



'Tis she, by Heaven!  Methinks this Widow shou'd prove a good
Fortune to you, as things now stand between you and your▪ Uncle.



Ah, Charles, but I am otherways dispos'd of. There is the most charming
young thing in nature f•llen in love with this person of mine, a rich City-Heiress,
Charles; I have her in possession.



How can you love two at once? I've been as wild, and as extravagant,
  5
as Youth and Wealth cou'd render me; but ne'er arriv'd to that degree of Lewd∣ness,
to deal my Heart about: my Hours I might, but Love should be intire.



Ah, Charles, two such bewitching Faces wou'd give thy Heart the lye: 
But Love divides us, and I must into Church. Adieu till night.



And I must follow to resolve my heart in what it dreads to learn. Here,
my Cloak.  Hah, Church is done! See,
they are coming forth!
Enter People cross the Stage, as from Church; amongst 'em Sir Anthony Meriwill,
follow'd by Sir Tim. Treat-all.

Hah, my Uncle! He must not see me here.




What my old Friend and Acquaintance, Sir Anthony Meriwill!







Whe! How long have you been in Town, Sir?



About three days, Sir.



Three days, and never came to dine with me! 'tis unpardonable! What,
you keep close to the Church, I see: You are for the Surplice still▪ old Orthodox
you: the Times cannot mend you, I see.



No, nor shall they mar me, Sir.



They are discoursing; I'll pass by.





As I take it, you came from Church too.



Aye, needs must, when the Devil drives. I go to save my Bacon, as they
say, once a month, and that too, after the Porrage is serv'd up.



Those that made it, Sir, are wiser than we. For my part, I love good
wholsome Doctrine, that teaches Obedience to my King and Superiours, without
railing at the Government, and quoting Scripture for Sedition, Mutiny, and Rebel∣lion.
Why here was a jolly Fellow this morning made a notable Sermon. By
George, our Country-Vicars are meer Scholars to your Gentlemen Town-Parsons!
Hah, how he handled the Text, and run Divisions upon't! 'twou'd make a man sin
with moderation, to hear how he claw'd away the Vices of the Town, Whoring,
Drinking, and Conventicling, with the rest of the deadly number.



Good lack! an he were so good at Whoring and Drinking, you'd best
carry your Nephew, Sir Charles Meriwill, to Church; he wants a little Documenti∣zing
that way.



Hum! You keep your old wont still; a man can begin no discourse to
you, be it of Prester Iohn, but you still conclude with my Nephew.



Good Lord! Sir Anthony, you need not be so purty; what I say, is the
Discourse of the whole City, how lavishly you let him live, and give ill Examples to
all young Heirs.



The City! the City's a grumbling, lying, dissatisfi'd City, and no wise
or honest man regards what it says. Do you, or any of the City, stand bound to his
Scrivener or Taylor? He spends what I allow him, Sir, his own; and you're a Fool
or Knave, chuse ye whether, to concern your self.



Good lack! I speak but what wiser men discourse.



Wiser men! wiser Coxcombs. What, they wou'd have me train my
Nephew up, a hopeful Youth, to keep a Merchants Book, or send him to chop Logick
in a University, and have him return an •rrant learned Ass, to simper, and look de∣mure,
  6
and start at Oaths and Wenches, whilst I fell his Woods, and grant Leases;
and lastly, to make good what I have cozen'd him of, force him to marry Mrs. Crump,
the ill-favour'd Daughter of some Right Worshipful. A Pox of all such Guar∣dians.



Do, countenance Sin and Expences, do.



What sin, what expences? He wears good Cloaths, why Trades-men
get the more-by him; he keeps his Coach, 'tis for his ease; a Mistriss, 'tis for his
pleasure; he games, 'tis for his diversion: And where's the harm of this? is there
ought else you can accuse him with?



Yes; a Pox upon him, he's my Rival too.  Why then I'll
tell you, Sir, he loves a Lady.



If that be a sin, Heaven help the Wicked!



But I mean honourably. 



Honourably! Why do you know any Infirmity in him, why he shou'd
not marry?








Not you, Sir? why then you're an Ass, Sir. But is the Lady young
and handsome?



A•e, and rich too, Sir.



No matter for Money, so she love the Boy.



Love him! no, Sir, she neither does, nor shall love him.



How, Sir, nor shall love him! By George, but she shall, and lie with him
too, if I please, Sir.



How, Sir! lie with a rich City-widow, and a Lady, and to be married
to a fine Reverend old Gentleman within a day or two?



His name, Sir, his name; I'll dispatch him presently.




How, Sir, dispatch him! Your Servant, Sir.




Hold, Sir! by this abrupt departure, I fancy you the Boy's Rival:
Come, draw.








Aye draw, Sir: Not my Nephew have the Widow!



With all my soul, Sir; I love and honour your Nephew. I his Rival!
alas, Sir, I'm not so fond of Cuckoldom. Pray, Sir, let me see you and Sir Charles
at my house, I may serve him in this business: and so I take my leave, Sir. 
Draw quoth a! a Pox upon him for an old Tory-rory.




by her, Sir Charles Meriwill following wrapt in his Cloak.



Who's here? Charles muffled in a Cloak, peering after a woman? My
own Boy to a hair. She's handsome too. I'll step aside: for I must see the mean∣ing
on't.





Bless me! how unconcern'd he pass'd!



He bow'd low, Madam.




But 'twas in such a fashion, as exprest Indifferency, much worse than Hate
from Wilding.



Your Ladyship has us'd him ill of late; yet if your Ladyship please, I'll call
him back.




I'll die first. Hah, he's going! Yet now I think on't, I have a Toy
of his, which to express my scorn, I'll give him back now: this Ring.



Shall I carry it, Madam?




You'll not express disdain enough in the delivery; and you may call
him back.




By Heaven, she's fond of him.




Oh, Mrs. Closet! is it you? Madam, your Servant: By this disdain, I
fear your Woman, Madam, has mistaken her Man. Wou'd your Ladyship speak
with me?




Yes. But what? the God of Love instruct me.




Command me quickly, Madam: for I have business.




Nay, then I cannot be discreet in Love.

 Your business once was Love, nor had no idle hours
To throw away on any other thought.
You lov'd as if you'd had no other Faculties,
As if you'd meant to gain Eternal Bliss
By that Devotion onely: And see how now you're chang'd.



Not I, by Heaven; 'tis you are onely chang'd.
I thought you'd love me too, curse on the dull mistake;
But when I beg'd to reap the mighty Joy
That Mutual Love affords,
You turn'd me off for Honour,
That nothing fram'd by some old sullen Maid,
That wanted Charms to kindle flames when young.



By George, he's i'th' right.




Death! can she hear this Language?





How dare you name this to me any more?
Have you forgot my Fortune, and my Youth?
My Quality, and Fame?



No, by Heaven, all these increase my Flame.




Perhaps they might, but yet I wonder where
You got the boldness to approach me with it.



Faith, Madam, from your own encouragement.




From mine! Heavens, what contempt is this!



When first I paid my Vows, (good Heaven forgive me)
They were for Honour all;
But wiser you, thanks to your Mothers care too,
Knowing my Fortune an uncertain hope,
My Life of scandal, and my lewd Opinion,
Forbid my Wish that way: 'Twas kindly urg'd;
You cou'd not then forbid my Passion too,
Nor did I ever from your Lips or Eyes,
Receive the cruel sentence of my Death.



Gad, a fine fellow this!




To save my life, I wou'd not marry thee.





  8But to save mine, thou't do a kinder thing;
 I know thou wo't.




What, yield my Honour up!
And after find it sacrific'd anew,
And made the scorn of a triumphing Wife!



Gad, she's i'th' right too; a noble Girl I'll warrant her.




But you disdain to satisfie those fears;
And like a proud and haughty Conqueror,
Demand the Town, without the least Conditions.



By Heaven, she yields apace.




Pox on't, wou'd I'd ne'er seen her; now have I a Legend of small
Cupids at Hot-cockles in my heart.



Now am I pawsing on that word Conditions.
Thou sayst thou wou'dst not have me marry thee;
That is, as if I lov'd thee for thy Eyes,
And put 'em out to hate thee:
Or like our Stage-smitten Youth, who fall in love with a woman for-Acting finely,
and by taking her off the Stage, deprive her of the onely Charm she had,
Then leave her to Ill Luck.



Gad, he's i'th' right again too! A rare Fellow!



For, Widow, know, hadst thou more Beauty, yet not all of 'em were half
so great a Charm as thy not being mine.



Hum! How will he make that out now?



The stealths of Love, the Midnight kind admittance,
The gloomy Bed, the soft-breath'd murmuring Passion;
Ah, who can guess at Joys thus snatcht by parcels!
The difficulty makes us always wishing,
Whilst on thy part, Fear still makes some resistance;
And every Blessing seems a kind of Rape.



H'as don't! A Divine Fellow this; just of my Religion. I am stu∣dying
now whether I was never acquainted with his Mother.


L. Gall. walks away, Wild. follows.




Tempt me no more! What dull unwary Flame
Possest me all this while! Confusion on thee,

And all the Charms that dwell upon thy Tongue.
Diseases ruine that bewitching form,
That with thy soft feign'd Vows debaucht my Heart.



Heavens! can I yet endure!





By all that's good, I'll marry instantly;
Marry, and save my last stake, Honour, yet,
Or thou wilt rook me out of all at last.



Marry! thou canst not do a better thing:
There are a thousand Matrimonial Fops,
Fine Fools of Fortune,
Good-natur'd Blockheads too, and that's a wonder.




That will be manag'd by a man of Wit.








I have an eye upon a Friend of yours.



A Friend of mine! then he must be my Cuckold.



Very fine! can I endure yet more?





Perhaps it is your Uncle.








Hah, my Charles! why well said Charles, he bore up briskly to her.



Ah, Madam, may I presume to tell you 



Ah, Pox, that was stark naught! he begins like a Fore-man o• th' Shop▪
to his Masters Daughter.



How, Charles Meriwill acquainted with my Widow!



Why do you wear that scorn upon your face?
I've nought but honest meaning in my Passion;
Whilst him you favour, so prophanes your Beauties,
In scorn of Marriage and religious Rites,
Attempts the ruine of your sacred Honour.




Hah, Wilding, boast my love!




The Devil take him, my Nephew's quite spoil'd!
Why what a Pox has he to do with Honour now?




Pray leave me, Sir.



Damn it, since he knows all, I'll boldly own my flame 
You take a liberty I never gave you, Sir.



How, this from thee! nay, then I must take more,
And ask you where you borrow'd that Brutality,
T'approach that Lady with your sawcy Passion.



Gad, well done, Charles! here must be sport anon.



I will not answer every idle Question.



Death, you dare not.







No, dare not: for if you did 



What durst you, if I did?



Death, cut your Throat, Sir.




Hold, hold, let him have fair play, and then curse him that parts ye.

Taking 'em asunder, they draw.



Hold, I command ye, hold!



There rest my Sword to all Eternity.





Now I conjure ye both, by all your Honour,
If you were e'er acquainted with that Vertue,
To see my face no more,
Who durst dispute your interest in me thus,
As for a common Mistriss, in your Drink.

She goes out, and all but Wild. Sir Anth. and Sir Char.
who stands sadly looking after her.


A heavenly Girl! Well, now she's gone, by George, I am for dispu∣ting
your Title to her by dint of Sword.







Another time we will decide it, Sir.




After your whining Prologue, Sir, who the Devil would have expected
such a Farce? Come, Charles, take up thy Sword, Charles; and, d'ye hear,
forget me this Woman. 



Forget her, Sir! there never was a thing so excellent!



You lye, Sirrah, you lye, there are a thousand
As fair, as young, and kinder, by this day.
We'll into th' Country, Charles, where every Grove
Affords us Rustick Beauties,
That know no Pride nor Painting,
And that will take it and be thankful, Charles;

Fine wholsome Girls that fall like ruddy Fruit,
Fit for the gathering, Charles.




Oh, Sir, I cannot relish the coarse Fare.
But what's all this, Sir, to my present Passion?



Passion, Sir! you shall have no Passion, Sir.



No Passion, Sir! shall I have life and breath?



It may be not, Sirrah, if it be my will and pleasure.
 Why how now! sawcy Boys be their own Carvers?



Sir, I am all Obedience.




Obedience! Was ever such a Blockhead! Why then if I command it,
you will not love this Woman?







No, Sir! But I say, Yes, Sir, love her me; and love her me like a man
too, or I'll renounce ye, Sir.



I've try'd all ways to win upon her heart,
Presented, writ, watcht, fought, pray'd, kneel'd, and weept.



Why there's it now; I thought so: Kneel'd and weept! a Pox upon
thee I took thee for a prettier fellow. 
You shou'd a hufft and bluster'd at her door;
Been very impudent and sawcy, Sir;
Lewd, ruffling, mad; courted at all hours and seasons;
Let her not rest, nor eat, nor sleep, nor visit.
Believe me, Charles, women love importunity.
Watch her close, watch her like a Witch, Boy,
Till she confess the Devil in her, Love.




Her Eyes strike such an awe into my Soul, 



Strike such a Fiddlestick. Sirrah, I say, do't; what, you can towse a
Wench as handsomly You can be lewd enough upon occasion. I know not the
Lady, nor her Fortune; but I am resolv'd thou shalt have her, with practising a little
Courtship of my mode. Come 
Come my Boy Charles, since you must needs be doing,
I'll shew thee how to go a Widow-wooing.









ENough, I've heard enough of Wilding's Vices, to know I am undone. 
 Galliard his Mistriss too? I never saw her, but I have heard her
fam'd for Beauty, Wit, and Fortune.
That Rival may be dangerous.



Yes, Madam, the fair, the young, the witty Lady Galliard, even in the height
of all his love to you; nay, even whilst his Uncle courts her for a Wife, he designes
himself for a Gallant.



Wonderous Inconstancy and Impudence!




Nay, Madam, you may rely upon Mr. Fopington's Information: there∣fore
if you respect your Reputation, retreat in time.



Reputation! that I forfeited when I ran away with your Friend Mr. Wil∣ding.




Ah, that ever I should live to see  the sole Daughter and Heir
of Sir Nicholas Gettall, run away with one of the lewdest Heathens about town!



How! your Friend Mr. Wilding a Heathen; and with you too, Mrs. Clac∣ket!
That Friend Mr. Wilding, who thought none so worthy as Mrs. Clacket, to trust
with so great a secret as his flight with me; he a Heathen!




Aye, and a poor Heathen too, Madam. 'Slife, if you must marry a
man to buy him Breeches, marry an honest man, a religious man, a man that bears a
Conscience, and will do a woman some Reason. Why here's Mr. Fopington, Madam;
here's a Shape, here's a Face, a Back as straight as an Arrow, I'll warrant.



How! buy him Breeches! Has Wilding then no Fortune?



Yes, Faith, Madam, pretty well; so, so, as the Dice run: and now and
then he lights upon a Squire, or so, and between fair and foul Play, he makes a shift
to pick a pretty Livelihood up.



How! does his Uncle allow him no present Maintenance?



No, nor future Hopes neither: Therefore, Madam, I hope you will see the
difference between him and a man of Parts, that adores you.




If I find all this true you tell me, I shall know how to value my self and
those that love me.
 This may be yet a Rascal.




Mistriss, Mr. Wilding's below.




Below! Oh, Heavens, Madam, do not expose me to his lewd fury, for being
too zealous in your service.




I will not let him know you told any thing, Sir.



Death! to be seen here, would expose my Life.





Here, here, step out upon the Sair-case, and slip into my Chamber.

Going out, returns in fright.


'Owns, he's here! lock the door fast; let him not enter.




Oh, Heavens, I have not the Key! hold it, hold it fast, sweet, sweet
Mr. Foping Oh, should there be Murder done, what a scandal wou'd that be to the
house of a true Protestant!




Heavens! what will he say and think, to see me shut in with a man?




Oh, I'll say you're sick, asleep, or out of humour.







Charlot, Charlot! Am I deny'd an entrance? By Heaven, I'll
break the door.




Oh, I'm a dead man, dear Clacket!





Oh, hold, Sir, Mrs. Charlot is very sick.



How, sick, and I kept from her!




She begs you'll come again an hour hence.



Delay'd, by Heaven I will have enterance.



Ruin'd! undone! for if he do not kill me, he may starve me.




Oh, he will break in upon us! Hold, Sir, hold a little; Mrs. Charlot
is just-just-shifting her self, Sir: you will not be so uncivil as to press in, I hope,
at such a time.



I have a fine time on't between ye, to have him think I am stripping my
self before Mr. Fopington Let go, or I'll call out and tell him all.


Wild. breaks open the door and rushes in: Fop. stands close up at the enterance till
he is past him, then venturing to slip out, finds Wild. has made fast the door; so
he is forc'd to return again and stand close up behind Wild. with signs of fear.


How now, Charlot, what means this new unkindness? What, not a word?



There is so little Musick in my Voice, you do not care to hear it; you
have been better entertain'd, I find, mightily employ'd, no doubt.



Yes Faith, and so I have, Charlot: Damn'd Business, that Enemy to Love,
has made me rude.



Or that other Enemy to Love, damn'd Wenching.



Wenching! how ill hast thou tim'd thy Jealousie!
What Banker, that to morrow is to pay a mighty sum, wou'd venture out his stock
to day in little parcels, and lose his Credit by it?



You wou'd, perfidious as you are, though all your Fortune, all your future
Health, depended on that Credit.




So: Heark ye, Mrs. Clacket, you have been prating I find in my absence,
giving me a handsome character to Charlot. You hate any good thing should go
by your own Nose.






By my Nose, Mr. Wilding! I defie you: I'd have you to know, I scorn
any good thing shou'd go by my Nose in an uncivil way.








Have I been the Confident to all your secrets this three years, in sick∣ness
and in health, for richer, for poorer; concealed the nature of your wicked
Diseases, under the honest name of Surfeits; call'd your filthy Surgeons▪ Mr. Doctor,
  13
to keep up your Reputation; civily receiv'd your tother end of the• Town young
Relations at all hours; 








Been up with you and down with you early and late, by night and by
day;
let you in at all hours, drunk and sober, single and double, and civilly with∣drawn,
and modestly shut the door after me?



Whir! The storm's up, and the Devil cannot lay it.




And am I thus rewarded for my pain!




So Tempests are allay'd by showers of Rain.




That I shou'd be charg'd with speaking ill of you, so honest, so civil a
Gentleman 



No, I have better witness of your falshood.



Hah, 'sdeath, she'll name me!



What mean you, my Charlot?

Do you not think I love you?



Go ask my Lady Galliard, she keeps the best account of all your Sighs and Vows,
And robs me of my dearest softer hours.





You cannot hold from being kind to him.




Galliard! How came she by that secret of my life?  Why Aye, 'tis
true, I am there sometimes about an Arbitration, about a Suit in Law, about my
Uncle.



Aye, that Uncle too 
You swore to me you were your Uncles Heir;
But you perhaps may chance to get him one,
If the Lady prove not cruel.



Death and the Devil, what Rascal has been prating to her!




Whilst I am reserv'd for a dead lift, if Fortune prove unkind, or wicked
Uncles refractory,
Yet I cou'd love you, though you were a Slave,

And I were Queen of all the Universe.




Aye, there you spoil'd all again you forget your self.



And all the world, when he looks kindly on me.
But I'll take courage, and be very angry.

Nor does your Perjuries rest here; you're equally as false to Galliard, as to me; false
for a little Mistriss of the Town, whom you've set up in spight to Quality.





So, that was home and handsome.



What damn'd Informer does she keep in Pension?



And can you think my Fortune and my Youth
Merits no better Treatment?

How cou'd you have the heart to use me so?

I fall insensibly to Love and Fondness.




Ah, my dear Charlot! you who know my heart, can you believe me false?



In every Syllable, in every Look:
Your Vows, your Sighs, and Eyes, all counterfeit;
You said you lov'd me, where was then your truth?

  14You swore you were to be your Uncle's Heir:
Where was your confidence of me the while,
To think my Generosity so scanted,
To love you for your Fortune?
 How every look betrays my yielding heart!

No, since men are grown so cunning in their
Trade of Love, the necessary Vice I'll practice too▪
And chaffer with Love-Merchants for my Heart.
Make it appear you are your Uncles Heir,
I'll marry ye tomorrow.
Of all thy Cheats, that was the most unkind,
Because you thought to conquer by that Lye.
 To night I'll be resolv'd.







To night, or I will think you love me for my Fortune; which if you find
elsewhere to more advantage,
I may unpitied die and I should die,
If you should prove untrue.





There you've dasht all again.



I am resolv'd to keep my credit with her▪ Here's my hand:
This night, Charlot, I'll let you see the Writings.
 But how, a Pox of him that knows for Thomas.





Hah, that Hand without the Ring!
Nay, never study for a handsome Lye.



Ring! Oh, aye, I left it in my Dressing-room this morning.



See how thou hast inur'd thy Tongue to Falshood!
Did you not send it to a certain Creature
They call Diana,

From off that hand that plighted Faith to me?



By Heaven, 'tis Witchcraft all,
Unless this Villain Fopington betray me.
Those sort of Rascals will do any thing
For ready Meat and Wine. I'll kill the Fool Hah, here!





Where were thy Eyes, dear Wilding?




Where they have spy'd a Rascal.
Where was this Property conceal'd?



Conceal'd! What dost thou mean, dear Tom? Why I stood as plain as the
Nose on thy Face, mun.



But 'tis the ungrateful quality of all your sort, to make such base returns.
How got this Rogue admittance, and when in,
The Impudence to tell his treacherous Lyes?



Admittance! Why thou'rt stark mad: Did not I come in with you, that is,
followed you?







Why into the house, up stairs, stood behind you when you swore you wou'd
come in, and followed you in.



All this, and I not see!



Oh, Love's blind; but this Lady saw me, Mrs. Clack•• saw 〈◊〉 Admit∣tance
quotha!



Why did you not speak?



Speak! I was so amaz'd at what I heard, the villanous Scandals laid on you
by some pick-thank Rogue or other, I had no power.



Aye, thou knowst how I am wrong'd.



Oh, most damnably, Sir!



Abuse me to my Mistriss too!







Do you think they've wrong'd him, Sir? for I'll believe you.



Do I think, Madam? Aye, I think him a Son of a Whore that said it; and
I'll cut's Throat.




Well, this Impudence is a heavenly Vertue!



You see now, Madam, how Innocence may suffer.



In spight of all thy villanous dissembling,
I must believe, and love thee for my quiet.



That's kind; and if before to morrow I do not shew you I deserve your
Heart, kill me at once by quitting me. Farewel.   I know
both where my Uncle's Will and other Writings lie, by which he made me Heir to his
whole Estate.
My craft will be in catching; which if past,
Her Love secures me the kind Wench at last.





What if he shou'd not chance to keep his word now?



How if he shou'd not? by all that's good, if he shou'd not, I am resolv'd
•o marry him however. We two may make a pretty shift with three thousand
•ound a year: yet I would fain be resolv'd how affairs stand between the old Gen∣•leman
and him. I wou'd give the world to see that Widow too, that Lady Gal∣liard.




If you're bent upon't▪ I'll tell you what we'll do, Madam: There's e∣•ery
day mighty Feasting here at his Uncles hard by, and you shall disguise your
•elf as well as you can, and go for a Niece of mine I have coming out of Scotland:•here you will not fail of seeing my Lady Galliard, though I doubt, not Mr. Wilding,•ho is of late discarded.



Enough; I am resolv'd upon this designe: Let's in and and practise the
•orthern Dialect.









But then Diana took the Ring at last?



Greedl•y; but rail'd, and swore, • and ranted at your late unkindness, and
•ou'd not be appeas'd.





Dresswell, I was just going to see for thee.



I'm glad, dear Tom, I'm here to serve thee.



And now I've found thee, thou must along with me.



Whither? But I'll not ask, but obey.



To a kind sinner, Frank.



Pox on 'em all: prithee turn out those petty Tyrants of thy Heart, and fit
it for a Monarch, Love, dear Widling, of which thou never knewst the pleasure yet,
or not above a day.



Not knew the pleasure! Death, the very Essence, the first draughts of Love:
Ah, how pleas•••• is to drink when a man's adry!
The rest is all but dully •ipping on.



And yet this Diana, for thither thou art going, thou hast been constant to
this three or four years.



A constant Keeper thou meanst; which is indeed enough to get the scan∣dal
of a Coxcomb: But I know not, those sort of Baggages have a kind of Fascination
so inticing and Faith, after the Fatigues of Formal Visits to a mans dull Relations,
or what's as bad, to women of Quality; after the busie Afflictions of the Day, and
the Debauches of the tedious Night, I tell thee, Frank, a man's best Retirement is
with a soft kind Wench. But to say truth, I have a farther designe in my Visit▪
now. Thou knowst how I stand past hope of Grace, excommunicated the Kindness
of my Uncle.







My lewd Debauches, and being o'th wrong Party, as he calls it, is now be∣come
an reconcilable Quarrel; so that I having many and hopeful Intrigues now
depending, especially these of my charming Widow, and my City-Heiress, which can
by no means be carri'd on without that damn'd Necessary call'd Ready Money, I
have stretcht my Credit, as all young Heirs do, till 'tis quite broke. Now Liveries,
Coaches, and Cloaths must be had, they must, my Friend.



Why dost thou not in this Extremity clap up a Match with my Lady Gal∣liard?
or this young Heiress you speak of?



But Marriage, Frank, is such a Bug-bear! And this old Uncle of mine may
one day be gathered together, and sleep with his Fathers, and then I shall have six
thousand pound a year, and the wide World before me; and who the Devil cou'd
relish these Blessings with the clog of a Wife behind him? But till then, Money
must be had, I say.



Aye, but how, Sir?



Why, from the old Fountain, Iack, my Uncle; he has himself decreed it:
he tells me I must live upon my Wits, and will, Frank.



Gad, I'm impatient to know how.



I believe thee, for thou art out at Elboes: and when I thrive, you show
i'•h' Pit, behind the Scenes, and Coffee-houses. Thy Breeches give a better account
of my Fortune, than Lilly with all his Schemes and Stars.



I own I thrive by your Influence, Sir.



Well; but to your Project, Friend: to which I'll set a helping Hand, a
Heart, a Sword, and Fortune.



You make good what my Soul conceives of you. Let's to Diana then, and
there I'll tell thee all.

 Diana, I was just going to thy Lodgings!



Oh las, you are too much taken up with your rich City-Heiress.



That's no cause of quarrel between you and I, Diana; you were wont to
be as impatient for my marrying, as I for the death of my Uncle: for your rich Wife
ever obliges her Husbands Mistriss; and women of your sort, Diana, ever thrive better
by Adultery than Fornication.



Do, try to appease the easie Fool with these fine Expectations: No, I
have been too often flatter'd with the hopes of your marrying a rich Wife, and then
I was to have a Settlement; but instead of that, things go backward with me, my
Coach is vanisht, my Servants dwindled into one necessary Woman and a Boy,
which to save Charges, is too small for any service; my twenty Guinnies a week, into
forty Shillings: a hopeful Reformation!



Patience, Diana, things will m••d in time.



When, I wonder? Summer's come, yet I am still in my embroider'd Manto,
when I'm drest, lin'd with Velvet; 'twou'd give one a Feavor but to look at me:
yet still I am flamm'd off with hopes of a rich Wife, whose Fortune I am to lavish.
 But I see you have neither Conscience nor Religion in you; I wonder what a
Devil will become of your Soul for thus deluding me!




By Heaven, I love thee!



Love me! what if you do? how far will that go at the Exchange for Poynt?
Will the Mercer take it for currant Coin? But 'tis no matter, I must love a Wit,
with a Pox, when I might have had so many Fools of Fortune: But the Devil take
me, if you deceive me any longer.




You'll keep your word, no doubt, now you have sworn.



So I will. I never go abroad, but I gain new Conquest. Happy's the
man that can approach neerest the side-box where I sit at a Play, to look at me; but
if I daign to smile on him, Lord, how the o're-joy'd Creature returns it with a bow
low as the very Benches! Then rising, shakes his Ears, looks round, with pride, to
see who took notice how much he was in favour with charming Mrs. Dy.



No more: Come, let's be Friends, Diana; for you and I must manage an
Uncle of mine.



Damn your Projects, I'll have none of 'em.



Here, here's the best Softner of a womans heart; 'tis ••ld, two hundred
Pieces: Go, lay it on, till you shame Quality, into plain Silk and Fringe.



Lord, you have the strangest power of Perswasion! Nay, if you buy my
Peace, I can afford a penyworth.



So thou canst of any thing about thee.



Well, your Project, my dear Tommy?



Thus then Thou, dear Frank, shalt to my Uncle, •tell him that Sir Ni∣cholas
Gettall, as he knows, being dead, and having left, as he knows too, one onely
Daughter his whole Executrix, Mrs. Charlot, I have by my civil and modest beha∣viour,
so won upon her heart, that two nights since she left her Fathers Country∣house
at Lusum in Kent, in spight of all her strict Guards, and run away with me.



How, wilt thou tell him of it then?



Hear me That I have hitherto secured her at a Friends house here in the
City; but diligent search being now made, dare trust her there no longer. And
make it my humble Request by you, my Friend, (who are onely privy to this secret)
that he wou'd give me leave to bring her home to his house; whose very Authority
will defend her from being fought for there.



Aye, Sir, but what will come of this, I say?



Why a Settlement: You know he has already made me Heir to all he has,
after his decease; but for being a wicked Tory, as he calls me, he has, after the Wri∣tings
were made, sign'd, and seal'd, refus'd to give 'em in trust. Now when he secs
I have made my self Master of so vast a Fortune, he will immediately surrender, that
reconciles all again.



Very likely; but wo't thou trust him with the woman, Thomas?



No; here's Diana, who as I shall bedizen, shall pass for as substantial an
Aldermans Heiress, as ever fell into wicked hands. He never knew the right Char∣lot,
nor indeed has any body ever seen her but an old Aunt and Nurse, she was so
kept up: And there, Diana, thou shalt have a good opportunity to lye▪ dissem∣ble, and jilt in abundance, to keep thy hand in ure.
Prithee, dear Dresswell, haste with the News to him.



Faith, I like this well enough; this Project may take, and I'll about it.




Go, get ye home, and trick and betawder your self up like a right City-Lady,
rich, but ill-fashion'd; on with all your Jewels, but not a Patch, ye Gipsie,
nor no Spanish Paint, d'ye hear.



I'll warrant you for my part.



Then before the old Gentleman, you must behave your self very soberly,
simple, and demure, and look as prew as at a Conventicle; and take heed you drink
not off your Glass at Table, nor rant, nor swear; one Oath confounds our Plot, and
betrays thee to be an errant Drab.



Doubt not my Art of Dissimulation.



Go, haste and dress 



and reads a Paper.


Hah, who's yonder, the Widow! a Pox upon't, now have not I power to
stir: she has a damn'd •ank upon my Heart, and nothing but right down lying
with her, will dissolve the Charm. She has forbid me seeing her, and therefore I
am sure will the sooner take notice of me.




What will you put on to night, Madam? you know you are to sup at Sir
Timothy Treat-all's.




Time enough for that; prithee let's take a turn in this Balconey, this
City-garden, where we walk to take the fresh Air of the Sea-coal-smoak. Did the
Footman go back, as I order'd him, to see how Wilding and Sir Charles parted?



He did, Madam; and nothing cou'd provoke Sir Charles to fight after your
Ladyships strict Commands. Well, I'll swear he's the sweetest natur'd Gentleman 
•as all the advantages of Nature and Fortune: I wonder what Exception your La∣•yship
has to him▪




Some small Exception to his whining humour; but I think my chiefest
dislike is, because my Relations wish it a Match between us.
It is not hate to him, but natural contradiction. Hah, is not that Wilding yonder?
he's reading of a Letter sure.



So, she sees me. Now for an Art to make her lure me up: for though I
have a greater mind than she, it shall be all her own; the Match she told me of this
morning with my Uncle, sticks plaguily upon my stomach; I must break the neck
on't, or break the Widows heart, that's certain. If I advance towards the door
now, she frowningly retires; if I pass on, 'tis likely she may call me.





I think he's passing on,
Without so much as looking towards the window.



He's glad of the excuse of being forbidden.




But, Closet, knowest thou not he has abus'd my fame,
And does he think to pass thus unupbraided?
Is there no Art to make him look this way?
No trick? Prithee faign to laugh.




So, I shall not answer to that Call.





he takes it up, and looks up.] Cry mercy, Sir, I'm sorry I must trouble you to bring
it.



Faith, so am I; and you may spare my pains, and send your Woman for't,
I am in haste.




Then the quickest way will be to bring it.

Goes out of the Belconey with Closet.



I knew I should be drawn in one way or other.






Stay; I hear you're wonderous free of your Tongue, when 'tis let loose
on me.



Who I, Widow? I think of no such trifles.




Such Railers never think when they're abusive; but something you have
said, a Lye so infamous!



A Lye, and infamous of you! impossible!
What was it that I call'd you, Wise, or Honest?




How, can you accuse me for the want of either?



Yes, of both: Had you a grain of Honesty, or intended ever to be thought
so, wou'd you have the impudence to marry an old Coxcomb, a Fellow that will
not so much as serve you for a Cloak, he is so visibly and undeniably impotent?




Your Uncle you mean.



I do; who has not known the joy of Fornication this thirty year, and now
the Devil and you have put it into his head to marry, forsooth. Oh the Felicity of
the Wedding-night!




Which you, with all your railing Rhetorick, shall not have power to
hinder.



Not if you can help it: for I perceive you are resolv'd to be a lewd incor∣rigible
sinner, and marryest this seditious doting fool my Uncle, onely to hang him
out for the •igne of the Cuckold, to give notice where Beauty is to be purchas'd, for
fear otherwise we should mistake, and think thee honest.




So much for my want of Honesty; my Wit is the Part of the Text you
are to handle next.



Let the World judge of that, by this one action: This Marriage undispu∣tably
robs you both of your Reputation and Pleasure. Marry an old Fool, because
he's rich! when so many handsome proper younger Brothers wou'd be glad of
you!




Of which hopeful number your self are one.



Who, I! Bear witness, Closet; take notice I'm upon my Marriage, Widow,
and such a Scandal on my Reputation might ruine me: therefore have a care what
you say.




Ha, ha, ha, Marriage! Yes, I hear you give it out, you are to be married
to me: for which Defamation, if I be not reveng'd, hang me.



Yes, you are reveng'd: I had the fame of vanquishing where-e're I laid
my Siege, till I knew thee, hard-hearted thee; had the honest Reputation of lying
with the Magistrates Wives, when their Reverend Husbands were employ'd in the
necessary Affairs of the Nation, •editiously petitioning; and then I was esteemed;
but now they look on me as a monsterous thing, that makes honourable Love to
you; Oh hideous, a Husband-Lover! So that now I may protest, and swear, and
lye my heart out, I find neither Credit nor Kindness; but when I beg for either, my
Lady Galliard's thrown in my Dish: Then they laugh aloud, and cry, Who would
think it of gay, of fine Mr. Wilding! Thus the City She-wits are let loose upon
me, and all for you, sweet Widow; but I am resolved I will redeem my Reputation
again, if never seeing you nor writing to you more, will do it: And so farewel,
faithless and scandalous honest woman▪

















I am, and am resolv'd to lose no more time on a peevish woman, who va∣lues
her Honour above her Lover.





Go; this is the noblest way of losing thee.



Must not I call him back?




No: If any honest Lover come, admit him; I will forget this Devil.
Fetch me some Jewels; the company to night at Sir Timothy's may divert me.





Madam, one Sir Anthony Meriwill wou'd speak with your Ladyship.




Admit him; sure 'tis Sir Charles his Uncle: if he come to treat a Match
with me for his Nephew, he takes me in the critical minute. Wou'd he but leave
his whining, I might love him, if 'twere but in revenge.





So, I have tutor'd the young Rogue, I hope he'll learn in time. Good
day to your Ladyship; Charles my Nephew here, Madam 
  21
Sirrah notwithstanding your Ladyships Commands Look how he stands now,
being a mad young Raskal! Gad, he wou'd wait on your Ladyship A Devil on
him, see if he'll budge now For he's a brisk Lover, Madam, when he once begins.
A Pox on him, he'll spoil all yet.




Please you sit, Sir.



Madam, I beg your Pardon for my Rudeness.









D'ye hear that, Sirrah? Oh damn it, beg Pardon! The Rogue's quite
out of 's part.



Madam, I fear my Visit is unseasonable.



Unseasonable! Damn'd Rogue, unseasonable to a Widow! Quite
out.




There are indeed some Ladies that wou'd be angry at an untimely Visit,
before they've put on their best Faces; but I am none of those that wou'd be fair in
spight of Nature, Sir. Put on this Jewel here.




That Beauty needs no Ornament, Heaven has been too bountiful.



Heaven! Oh Lord, Heaven! a Puritanical Rogue, he courts her like
her Chaplain.





You are still so full of University-Complements 



D'ye hear that, Sirrah? Aye so he is, so he is indeed, Madam. To
her like a man, ye Knave.




Ah, Madam, I am come!



To shew your self a Coxcomb.




To tire me with discourses of your Passion. Fie, how this Curl sits!

Looking in the Glass.


No, you shall hear no more of that ungrateful subject.



Son of a Whore, hear no more of Love, damn'd Rogue! Madam, by
George he lyes; he does come to speak of Love, and make Love, and to do Love,
and all for Love. Not come to speak of Love, with a Pox! 'Owns, Sir, behave
your self like a man; be impudent, be sawcy, forward, bold, towzing, and lewd,
d'ye hear, or I'll beat thee before her. Why what a Pox!




Finding my hopes quite lost in your unequal Favours to young Wilding,
I'm quitting of the Town.




You will do well to do so. Lay by that Necklace; I'll wear Pearl to
day.




Confounded Blockhead! By George, he lyes again, Madam. A Dog,
I'll dis-inherit him.  He quit the Town, Madam! no, not whilst your Lady∣ship
is in it, to my knowledge. He'll live in the Town, nay, in the Street where
you live; nay, in the House; nay, in the very Bed, by George; I've heard him a
thousand times swear it. Swear it now, Sirrah: Look, look, how he stands now!
Why dear Charles, good Boy, swear a little, ruffle her, and swear Damn it, she shall
have none but thee.  Why you little think, Madam, that this Nephew
of mine is one of the maddest Fellows in all Devonshire.




Wou'd I cou'd see't, Sir.



See't! look ye there, ye Rogue. Why 'tis all his fault, Madam. He's
seldom sober; then he has a dozen Wenches in pay, that he may with the more Au∣thority
  22
break their w••dows. There's never a Maid within forty miles of Meriwill-hall
to work a Miracle on, but all are Mothers. He's a hopeful Youth, I'll say that
for him.



How I have lov'd you, my despairs shall witness: for I will die to pur∣chase
your content.




Die, a damn'd Rogue! Aye, aye, I'll dis-inherit him: A Dog, die, with
a Pox! No, he'll be hang'd first, Madam.



And sure you'll pity me when I am dead.



A Curse on him; pity, with a Pox! I'll give him ne'er a Souse.




Give me that Essence-bottle.




But for a recompence of all my sufferings 




Sprinkle my Handkercher with Tuberuse.




I beg a Favour you'd afford a stranger.




Sooner perhaps. What Jewel's that?




One Sir Charles Meriwill 




Sent, and you receiv'd without my order!
No wonder that he looks so scurvily.
Give him the Trifle back to mend his humour.



I thank you, Madam, for that repromand. Look in that Glass, Sir,
and admire that sneaking Coxcomb's Countenance of yours: A Pox on him, he's
past Grace, lost, gone, not a Souse, not a Groat; good buy to you, Sir. Madam, I
beg your Pardon; the next time I come a wooing, it shall be for my self, Madam,
and I have something that will justifie it too; but as for this fellow, if your Lady∣ship
have e'er a small  at leisure, I desire he may have order to kick him down
stairs. Adamn'd Rogue, to be civil now, when he shou'd have behav'd himself

and returns.] Hah, who have we here, hum, the fine mad Fellow? So, so, he'll
swindge him I hope; I'll stay to have the pleasure of seeing it done.





I was sure 'twas Meriwill's Coach at door.








Aye, now Sir, here's one will waken ye, Sir.





How now, Widow, you are always giving Audience to Lovers, I see.



You're very free, Sir.



I'm always so in the widows Lodgings, Sir.







You will not do't elsewhere?



Not with so much Authority.



An admirable Fellow! I must be acquainted with him.



Is this the Respect you pay women of her Quality?



The Widow knows I stand not much on Ceremonies.








Pardon him, Sir, this is his Cambridge-breeding.



Aye so 'tis, so 'tis; that two years there quite spoil'd him.




Sir, if you've any farther business with me, speak it; if not, I'm going
forth.



Madam, in short 



In short to a Widow, in short! quite lost.



I find you treat me ill for my Respect;
And when I court you next,
I will forget how very much I love you.



Sir, I shall be proud of your farther acquaintance; for I like, love, and
honour you.




I'll study to deserve it, Sir.



Madam, your Servant. A damn'd sneaking Dog to be civil and modest,
with a Pox!






See if my Coach be ready.




Whither are you janting now?




Where you dare not wait on me; to your Uncles to Supper.



That Uncle of mine pimps for all the Sparks of his Party;
There they all meet and bargain without scandal:
Fops of all sorts and sizes you may chuse.
Whig-land affords not such another Market.





Madam, here's Sir Timothy Treat-all come to wait on your Ladyship to Sup∣per.



My Uncle! Oh, damn him, he was born to be my Plague: Not dis-inhe∣riting
me had been so great a disappointment; and if he sees me here, I ruine all
the Plots I've laid fo• him. Ha• he's here!





How, my Nephew Thomas here!



Madam, I find you can be cruel too,
Knowing my Uncle has abandon'd me.



How now, Sir, what's your business here?



I came to beg a Favour of my Lady Galliard, Sir, knowing her Power and
Quality here in the City.



How, a Favour of my Lady Galliard! The Rogue said indeed he wou'd
Cuckold me.  Why, Sir, I thought you had been taken up with your rich
Heiress?



That was my business now, Sir: Having in my possession the Daughter and
Heir of Sir Nicholas Gettall, I would have made use of the Authority of my Lady
Galliard's house to have secur'd her, till I got things in order for our Marriage; but
my Lady, to put me off, cryes, I have an Uncle.









Well, I have heard of your good Fortune; and however a Reprobate
thou hast been, I'll not shew my self so undutiful an Uncle, as not to give the Gentle∣woman
a little house-room: I heard indeed she was gone a week ago,
And, Sir, my house is at your service.



I humbly thank you, Sir. Madam, your Servant. A Pox upon him, and
all his Association.




Come, Madam, my Coath waits below.
Exit.









HEre, take my Sword, Iervice. What have you inquir'd as I directed
you concerning the rich Heiress, Sir Nicholas Gettall's Daugher?



Alas, Sir, inquir'd! why 'tis all the City-News, that she's run away with one
of the maddest Tories about Town.



Good Lord! Aye, aye, 'tis so; the plaguie Rogue my Nephew has got
her. That Heaven shou'd drop such Blessings in the mouths of the Wicked! Well'
Iervice, what Company have we in the house, Iervice?



Why truely, Sir, a fine deal, con•idering there's no Parliament.



What Lords have we, Iervice?



Lords, Sir! truly none.



None! what ne'er a Lord! Some mishap will befal me, some dire mis∣chance:
Ne'er a Lord! ominous, ominous! our Party dwindles dayly. What, nor
Earl, nor Marquiss, nor Duke, nor ne'er a Lord? Hum, my Wine will lie most vil∣lanously
upon my hands to night, Iervice. What, have we store of Knights and Gen∣tlemen?



I know not what Gentlemen there be, Sir; but there are Knights, Citizens,
their Wives and Daughters.



Make us thankful for that; our Meat will not lie upon our hands then,
Iervice: I'll say that for our little Londoners, they are as tall fellows at a well-charg'd
Board as any in Christendom.



Then, Sir, there's Nonconformist-Parsons.



Nay, then we shall have a cleer Board: for your true Protestant Appetite
in a Lay-Elder, does a mans Table credit.



Then, Sir, there's Country-Justices and Grand-Jury-men.



Well enough, well enough, Iervice.





An't like your Worship, Mr. Wilding is come in with a Lady richly drest in
Jewels, mask'd, in his hand, and will not be deny'd speaking with your Worship.



Hah, rich in Jewels! this must be she. My Sword again, Iervice. 
Bring 'em up, Sensure, Prithee how do I look to night, Iervice?




Oh, most methodically, Sir.





Sir, I have brought into your kind protection the richest Jewel all London
can afford, fair Mrs. Charlot Gettall.



Bless us, she's ravishing fair! Lady, I had the honour of being intimate
with your worthy Father. I think he has been dead 



If he chastize me much on that point, I shall spoil all. Alas, Sir, name him
not; for if you do,  I'm sure I cannot answer you one Question.




For Heaven sake, Sir, name not her Father to her; the bare remembrance
of him kills her.




Alas, poor Soul! Lady, I beg your Pardon. How soft-hearted she's! I
am in love; I find already a tickling kind of I know not what, run frisking through my
Veins.




Aye, Sir, the good Alderman has been dead this twelvemonth just, and has
lest his Daughter here, my Mistriss, three thousand pound a year.




Three thousand pound a year! Yes, yes, I am in love.




Besides Money, Plate, and Jewels.



I'll marry her out of hand:  Alas, I cou'd even weep too; but
'tis in vain. Well, Nephew, you may be gone now: for 'tis not necessary you shou'd
be seen here, d'ye see.




You see, Sir, now, what Heaven has done for me; and you have often told
me, Sir, when that was kind, you wou'd be so. Those Writings, Sir, by which you
were so good to make me Heir to all your Estate, you said you wou'd put into my
possession, whene'er I made it appear to you I cou'd live without 'em, or bring you
a Wife of Fortune home.



And I will keep my word; 'tis time enough.




I have, 'tis true, been wicked; but I shall now turn from my evil ways, e∣stablish
my self in the religious City, and enter into the Association. There wants
but these same Writings, Sir, and your good Character of me.



Thou sha't have both; all in good time, man: Go, go thy ways, and
I'll warrant thee for a good Character; go.



Ay, Sir; but the Writings, because I told her, Sir, I was your Heir; nay,
forc'd to swear it too, before she wou'd believe me.



Alas, alas, how shrewdly thou wer't put to't!



I told her too, you'd buy a Patent for me: for nothing wooes a City-For∣tune
like the hopes of a Ladyship.



I'm glad of that; that I can settle on her presently.




You may please to hint something to her of my Godly Life and Conver∣sation;
that I frequent Conventicles, and am drunk nowhere but at your true Pro∣testant
Consults and Clubs, and the like.



Nay, if these will please her, I have her for certain.  Go, go,
fear not my good word.



But the Writings, Sir. 



Am I a Jew, a Turk? Thou sha't have any thing, now I find thee a
Lad of Parts, and one that can provide so well for thy Uncle.


Puts him out, and addresses himself to the Lady.


Wou'd they were hang'd that •••u•t you, that have but the Art of Lejerde∣main,
and can open the Japan-Cabinet in your Bed-chamber, where I know those
Writings are kept. Death, what a disappointment's here! I wou'd a'sworn, this
Sham had past upon him. But, Sir, shall I not have the Writings now?



What not gone yet! for shame, away: Canst thou distrust thy own na∣tural
Uncle? Fie, away, Tom, away.



A Plague upon your damn'd Dissimulation, that never-failing 〈◊〉 of all
your Party, there's always mischief at the bottom on't; I know ye all; and Fortune
be the Word. When next I see you, Uncle, it shall cost you dearer.
Exit.





An't please your Worship, Supper's almost over, and you are askt for.



They know I never sup: I shall come time enough to bid 'em welcome.





I keep you, Sir, from Supper and better Company.



Lady, were I a Glutton, I cou'd be satisfi'd
With feeding on those two bright starry Eyes.



You are a Courtier, Sir; we City-maids do seldom hear such Language:
in which you shew your kindness to your Nephew, more than your-thoughts of
what my Beauty merits.



Lord, Lord, how innocent she is!  My Nephew, Madam? yes,
yes, I cannot chuse but be wonderous kind upon his score.



Nay, he has often told me, you were the best of Uncles, and he deserves
your goodness; so hopeful a young Gentleman.



Wou'd I cou'd see't.









Yes, ask my Maids.







Yes, to my Neighbours Wives.  But so, Madam, I find by this
high Commendations of my Nephew, your Ladyship has a very slender opinion of
your devoted Servant the while; or else, Madam, with this not disagreeable face
and shape of mine, six thousand pound a year, and other Vertues and Commodities
that shall be nameless, I see no reason why I should not beget an Heir of my own
Body, had I the helping hand of a certain victorious person in the world, that shall
be nameless.




Meaning me, I am sure: If I shou'd marry him now, and disappoint my
dear Inconstant with an Heir of his own begetting, 'twou'd be a most wicked Re∣venge
for past Kindnesses.




I know your Ladyship is studying now who this victorious person shou'd
be, whom I dare not name; but let it suffice she is, Madam, within a mile of an
Oak.



No, Sir, I was considering, if what you say be true,
How unadvisedly I have lov'd your Nephew,
Who swore to me he was to be your Heir.



My Heir, Madam! am I so visibly old to be so desperate?
No, I'm in my years of desires and discretion,
And I have thoughts, durst I but utter 'em;
But modestly say, Mum 



I took him for the hopefullest Gentleman 



Let him hope on, so will I; and yet, Madam, in consideration of your
love to him, and because he is my Nephew, young, handsome, witty, and soforth, I
am content to be so much a Parent to him, as, if Heaven please, to see him fairly
hang'd.








He has deserv'd it, Madam; First, for lampooning the Reverend City,
with its noble Government, with the Right Honourable Gown-men; libelling some
for Feasting, and some for Fasting, some for Cuckolds, and some for Cuckold-ma∣kers;
charging us with all the seven deadly sins, the sins, of our Forefathers,
adding seven score more to the number; the sins of Forty One reviv'd again in Eighty
One, with Additions and Amendments: for which, though the Writings were
drawn by which I made him my whole Executor, I will dis-inherit him. Secondly,
Madam, he deserves hanging for seducing and most feloniously bearing away a young
City-Heiress.



Undone, undone! Oh with what face can I return again!
What man of Wealth or Reputation, now
Will think me worth the owning!




Yes, yes, Madam, there are honest, discreet, religious and true Protestant
Knights in the City, that would be proud to dignifie and distinguish so worthy a
Gentlewoman.




Look to your hits, and take fortune by the forelock, Madam.

 Alas, Madam, no Knight, and poor too!







Well▪ Madam, take comfort; if the worst come to the worst, you have Estate
enough for both.



Aye, Betty, were he but honest, Betty.




Honest! I think he will not steal; but for his Body, the Lord have mercy
upon't, for he has none.



'Tis evident I am betray'd, abus'd;
H'as lookt, and sigh'd, and talkt away my Heart;
H'as sworn and vow'd, and flatter'd me to ruine.




A small fault with him; he has flatter'd and sworn me out of many a
fair thousand: Why he has no more Conscience than a Polititian, nor no more
Truth than a Narrative (under the Rose.)



Is there no Truth nor Honesty i'th' World?



Troth, very little, and that lies all i'th' City, amongst us sober Magi∣strates.



Were I a man, how wou'd I be reveng'd!



Your Ladyship might do it better as you are, were I worthy to advise
you.







Why by marrying your Ladyships most assur'd Friend, and most humble
Servant, Timothy Treat-all of London, Alderman.




Aye, this is something, Mistriss; here's Reason!



But I have given my Faith and Troth to Wilding, Betty.



Faith and Troth! We stand upon neither Faith nor Troth in the City,
Lady. I have known an Heiress married and bedded, and yet with the advice of the
wiser Magistrates, has been unmarried and consummated anew with another, so it
stands with our Interest; 'tis Law by Magna Charta. Nay, had you married my un∣gracious
Nephew, we might by this our Magna Charta have hang'd him for a Rape.



What, though he had my consent?



That's nothing, he had not ours.



Then shou'd I marry you by stealth, the danger wou'd be the same.



No, no, Madam, we never accuse one another; 'tis the poor Rogues,
the Tory Rascals, we always hang. Let 'em accuse me if they please, alas, I come
off hand-smooth with Ignoramus.





Sir, there's such calling for your Worship! They are all very merry, the
Glasses go briskly about.



Go, go, I'll come when all the Healths are past; I love no Healths.



They are all over, Sir, and the Ladies are for dancing; so they are all adjour∣ning
from the Dining-room hither, as more commodious for that Exercise. I think
they're coming, Sir.



Hah, coming! Call Sensure to wait on the Lady to her Apartment. 
And, Madam, I do most heartily recommend my most humble Address to your most
judicious consideration, hoping you will most vigorously, and with all your might,
maintain the Rights and Privil dges of the honourable City; and not suffer the
force or perswasion of any Arbitrary Lover whatsoever, to subvert their Ancient and
Fundamental Laws, by seducing and forcibly bearing away so rich and so illustrious a
Lady: and, Madam, we will unanimously stand by you with our Lives and Fortunes.
 This I learnt from a Speech at the Election of a Burgess.

Leads her to the door: she goes out with Betty and Sensure.


Charles with Lady Galliard, several other women and men.




 Philander was a jolly Swain,
And lov'd by ev'ry Lass;
Whom when he met upon the Plain,
He laid upon the Grass.


And here he kist, and there he play'd
With this, and then the tother,
Till every wanton smiling Maid.
At last became a Mother.


And to her Swain, and to her Swain,
The Nymph begins to yield;
Ruffle, and breathe, then to't again,
Thou'rt Master of the Field.


Clapping Sir Char. on the back.


And if I keep it not, say I'm a Coward, Uncle.



More Wine there, Boys, I'll keep the Humour up.




How! young Meriwill so close •o the Widow! 






Sir Timothy, why what a Pox dost thou bring that damn'd Puritanical,
Schismatical, Phanatical, Small beer-face of thine into good Company? Give Him
a full Glass to the Widow's Health.



O lack, Sir Charles, no Healths for me, I pray.



Heark ye, leave that couzening, canting, sanctin'd Sneer of yours and drink
ye me like a sober loyal Magistrate, all those Healths you are behind, from his sacred
Majesty, whom God long preserve, with the rest of the Royal Family, even down to
this wicked Widow, whom Heaven soon convert from her lewd designes upon my
Body.




A rare Boy! he shall have all my Estate.



How, the Widow a lewd designe upon his Body! Nay, then I am jea∣lous.





I a lewd designe upon your Body! for what, I wonder?



Why, for villanous Matrimony.








Who, you? yes, you.
Why are those Eyes drest in inviting Love?
Those soft bewitching Smiles, those rising Breasts,
And all those Charms that make you so adorable,
Is't not to draw Fools into Matrimony?



How's that, how's that! Charles at his Adorables and Charms! He
must have t'other Health, he'll fall to his old Dog-trot again else. Come, come,
every man his Glass. Sir Timothy, you are six behind. Come, Charles, name 'em
all.




 Not •ate ye an Ace, Sir: Come, his Majesties Health, and Confusion
to his Enemies,




Hold, Sir, hold, if I must drink, I must; but this is very Arbitrary, me∣thinks.




And now, Sir, to the Royal Duke of Albany. Musick, play a Scotch
Jig.




This is meer Tyranny.





Sir, there is just alighted at the Gate a Person of Quality, as appears by his
Train, who give him the Title of a Lord.



How, a strange Lord! Conduct him up with Ceremony, Iervice. 
'Ods so, he's here!




Sir, by your Reverend Aspect, you shou'd be the Renown'd Mester de Hotell?



Meter de Otell! I have not the honour to know any of that name; I
am call'd Sir Timothy Treat-all.




The same, Sir: I have been bred abroad, and thought all Persons of Qua∣lity
had spoke French.



Not City Persons of Quality, my Lord.



I'm glad on'•, Sir: for 'tis a Nation I hate, as indeed I do all Monarchies.



Hum! hate Monarchy! Your Lordship is most welcome.




Unless Elective Monarchies, which so resemble a Commonwealth.



Right, my Lord; where every man may hope to take his turn. Your
Lordship is most singularly welcome.




And though I am a stranger to your Person, I am not to your Fame, amongst
the sober Party of the Amsterdamians, all the French Hugonots throughout Geneva;
even to Hungary and Poland, fames trumpet sounds your praise, making the Pope to
fear, the rest admire you.



I'm much oblig'd to the Renowned Mobily.



So you will say, when you shall hear my Embassie. The •o•anders by me
salute you, Sir, and have in this next new Election, prickt ye down for their succee∣ding
King.



How, my Lord, prickt me down for a King! Why this is wonderful!
Prickt me, unworthy me, down for a King! How cou'd I merit this amazing Glory!



They know, he that can be so great a Patriot to his Native Country, where
but a private person, what must he be when Power is on his side?



Aye, my Lord, my Country, my bleeding Country! there's the stop to
all my rising Greatness. Shall I be so ungrateful to disappoint this big expecting
Nation? defeat the sober Party, and my Neighbours, for any Polish Crown? But
yet, my Lord, I will consider on't: Mean time my House is yours.



I've brought you, Sir, the measure of the Crown: Hah, it •its you to a

You were by Heaven and Nature fram'd that Monarch.



Hah, at it again!  Come, we grow
dull, Charles: where stands the Glass? what, balk my Lady Galliard's Health!

They go to drink.


Hah, Galliard and so sweet on Meriwill!





If it be your business, Sir, to drink, I'll withdraw.



Gad, and I'll withdraw with you, Widow. Heark ye, Lady Galliard, I
am damnably afraid you cannot bear your Liquor well, you are so forward to leave
good Company and a Bottle.



Well, Gentlemen, since I have done what I never do, to oblige you, I
hope you'll not refuse a Health of my Denomination.



We scorn to be so uncivil.




Why then here's a conceal'd Health that shall be nameless, to his Grace
the King of Poland.



King of Poland! Lord, Lord, how your thoughts ramble!



Not so far as you imagine; I know what I say, Sir.








I see, Sir, you still keep up that English Hospitality that so renowned our
Ancestors in History.





Aye, my Lord, my noble Guests are my Wife and Children.




Are you not married then? Death, she smiles on him!



I had a Wife, but, rest her Soul, she's dead; and I have no Plague left
now, but an ungracious Nephew, perverted with Ill Customs, Tantivie-Opinions,
and Court-Notions.



Cannot your pious Examples convert him?

  31By Heaven, she's fond of him!




Alas, I hav•••y'd all ways, fair and foul; •ay, had settled t'other day my
whole Estate upon him, and just as I had sign'd the Writings, out comes me a damn'd
Libel call'd, A Warning to all good Christians against the City-Magistrates; and I doubt
he had a hand in Absolon and Achitophel; a Rogue: But some of our sober Party
have claw'd him home, i'faith, and given him Rhyme for his Reason.



Most visibly in love! Oh, Sir, Nature, Laws, and Religion, plead for so
neer a Kinsman.



Laws and Religion! Alas, my Lord, he deserves not the name of a Pa∣triot,
who does not for the Publick Good de•ie all Laws and Religion.



Death, I must interrupt 'em! Sir, pray what Lady's that?




I beseech your Lordship, know her, 'tis my Lady Galliard: 'the rest are
all my Friends and Neighbours, true Protestants all Well, my Lord, how do you
like my method of doing the Business of the Nation, and carrying on the Cause with
Wine, Women, and soforth.



High feeding and smart Drinking, gains more to the Party, than your
smart Preaching.



Your Lordship has hit it right: A rare man this!



But come, Sir, leave we serious affairs, and oblige these fair ones.

Addresses himself to Galliard, Sir Charles puts him by.




Heavens, Clacket, yonders my false one, and that my lovely Rival.

Pointing to Wild. and L. Gall.





Dear Mrs. Sensure, this Favour has oblig'd me.



I hope you'll not discover it to his Worship, Madam.



By her meen, this shou'd be handsome.   Madam, I hope
you have not made a Resolution to deny me the honour of your hand.



Hah, Wilding! Love can discover thee through all disguise.



Hah, Diana! Wou'd 'twere Felony to wear a Vizard. Gad, I'd rather
meet it on the Kings Highway with Stand and Deliver, than thus encounter it on
the Face of an old Mistriss; and the Cheat were more excusable. But how 

Talks aside with her.


Nay, never frown nor chide: for thus do I intend to shew my Autho∣rity,
till I have made thee onely fit for me.



Is't so, my precious Uncle! are you so great a Devil in Hypocrisie! Thus
had I been serv'd, had I brought him the right woman.




But do not think, dear Tommy, I wou'd have serv'd thee so; married thy
Uncle, and have cozen'd thee of thy Birthright. But see, we're observ'd!


Charlot listening behind him all this whil•.


By all that's good, 'tis he! that Voice is his!

He going from Dian. turns upon Charlot and looks.


Hah, what pretty Creature's this, that has so much of Charlot in her face?
But sure she durst not venture: 'tis not her dress nor meen. Dear pretty stranger,
I must dance with you.



Gued deed, and see ye shall, Sir, •en you please. Tho l's not dance, Sir,
I's tell ya that noo.



Nor I: so we're well matcht. By Heaven, she's wonderous like her.



By th' Mass, not so kind, Sir: 'Twere gued that ene of us shou'd dance
to guid the other weel.



How young, how innocent, and free she is?
And wou'd you, fair one, be guided by me?



In any thing that gued is.



I love you extreamly, and wou'd teach you to love.








A thing I know you do not understand.



Gued faith, and ya're i'th' right, Sir; yet 'tis a thing I's often hear ya gay
men talk of.



Yes, and no doubt have been told those pretty Eyes inspired it.



Gued deed, and so I have: Ya men make sa mickle ado aboot ens Eyes,
ways me, I's ene tir'd with sick-like Compliments.



Ah, if you give us Wounds, we must complain.



Ya may ene keep out a harms way then.



Oh, we cannot; or if we cou'd, we wou'd not.



Marry and I's have ene a Song tol that tune, Sir.



Dear Creature, let me beg it.



Gued faith, ya shall not, Sir, I's sing without entreaty.



Ah, Jenny, gen your Eyes do kill,
You'll let me tell my pain;
Gued faith, I lov'd against my will,
But wad not break my Chain.
I ence was call'd a bonny Lad,
Till that fair face if yours
Betray'd the freedom ence I had,
And ad my bleether howers.


But noo ways me, like Winter look•,
My gloomy showering Eyne,
And on the banks of shaded Brooks,
I pass my wearied time.
I call the Streem that gleedeth on,
To witness if it see,
On all the flowry Brink along,
A Swain so true as Iee.




This very Swain am I, so true and so forlorn, unless you pity me.
This is an excellently Charlot wants, at least I never heard her sing.




Why Charles, where stands the woman, Charles?
Fop. comes up to Charlot.




I must speak to Galliard, though all my Fortunes depend on the discovery
of my self.




Come, come, a cooling Glass about.



Dear Dresswell, entertain Charles Meriwill a little, whilst I speak to Galliard.

The men go all to the Drinking-table.
By Heaven, I die, I languish for a word!
 Madam, I hope you have not made a Vow
To speak with none but that young Cavalier?
They say, the freedom English Ladies use,
Is as their Beauty, great.




Sir, we are none of those of so nice and delicate a Vertue as Conversa∣tion
can corrupt; we live in a cold Climate.



And think you're not so apt to be in love,
As where the Sun shines oftner.
But you too much partake of the Inconstancy of this your fickle Chmat•


One day all Sun-shine, and th' encourag'd Lover
Decks himself up in glittering Robes of Hope;
And in the midst of all their boasted Finery
Comes a dark Cloud across his Mistriss Brow,
Dashes the Fool, and spoils the gawdy show.





Hah, do no• I know that railing Tongue of yours?



'Tis from your Guilt, not Judgment then.
I was resolv'd to be to night a Witness
Of that sworn Love you flatter'd me so often with.
By Heaven, I saw you playing with my Rival,
Sigh'd, and lookt Babies in his gloating Eyes.
When is the Assignation? when the Hours?
For he's impatient as the raging Sea,
Loose as the Winds, and amorous as the Sun
That kisses all the Beauties of the Spring.




I take him for a soberer person, Sir.



Have I been the Companion of his Riots
In all the lewd course of our early Youth,
Where like unwearied Bees we gather'd Flowers?
But no kind Blossome cou'd oblige our stay,
We rifled and were gone.




Your Vertues I perceive are pretty equal;
Onely his Love's the honester o'th' two.



Honester! that is, he wou'd owe his good fortune to the Parson of the
Parish;
And I wou'd be oblig'd to you alone.
He wou'd have a License to boast he lies with you,
And I wou'd do't with modesty and silence:
For Vertue's but a name kept free from Scandal,
Which the most base of women best preserve,
Since Gilting and Hypocrisie cheat the world best.
 But we both love, and who shall blab the secret?





Oh, why were all the Charms of Speaking given to that false Tongue
that makes no better use of 'em?
 I'll hear no more of your inchanting Reasons.

















By all the Powers above 



By all the powers of Love, you'll break your Oath, unless you swear this
night to let me see you.













I'd die first At what hour?




O•, name it; and if I fail 





I wou'd not for the World 



That I shou'd fail!




Not name the guilty hour.



Then I through eager haste shall come too soon,
And do your Honour wrong.




My Honour! Oh that word!



Which the Devil was in me for naming.






My Women and my Servants then are up.



At One, or Two.




So late! 'twill be so quickly day!



Aye, so it will:
That half our business will be left unfinisht.




Hah, what do you mean? what business?



A thousand tender things I have to say,
A thousand Vows of my eternal love.;
And now and then we'll kiss and 








As you can wish.




Rather as I command: for shou'd he know my wish, I were undone.
Aside.








Oh, press me not; yet you may come at midnight under my Chamber-window.




Hold, Sir, hold! Whi•st I am listening to the relation of your French
Fortifications, Outworks, and Counterscarps, I perceive the Enemy in my Quarters.
 My Lord, by your leave.




Perswade me not; I burst with Jealousie.




Death and the Devil Clacket! then 'tis Charlot, and I'm discover'd to her.



Say, are not you a false dissembling thing?




What, my little Northern Lass translated into English!
This 'tis to practise Art in spight of Nature.

•as, thy Vertue, Youth, and Innocence,

  35Were never made for Cunning.
I found ye out through all your forc'd Disguise.




•ah, did you know me then?



At the first glance, and found you knew me too,
And talkt to yonder Lady in revenge,
Whom my Uncle wou'd have me marry. But to avoid all discourses of that nature,
I came to night in this disguise you see, to be conceal'd from her; that's all.



And is that all, on honour? is it, Dear?



What, no Belief, no Faith in villanous women?



Yes, when I see the Writings.



Go home; I die if you shou'd be discover'd;
And credit me, I'll bring you all you ask.

Clacket, you and I must have an odde Reckoning about this nights jant of yours.





Well, my Lord, how do you like our English Beauties?



Extreamly, Sir; and was pressing •is young Lady to give us a Song.

Here is an Italian Song in two parts.


I never saw this Lady before: pray who may she be, Neighbour?






A Niece of mine, newly come out of Scotland, Sir.



Nay, then she dances by nature. Gentlemen and Ladies, please you to
sit, here's a young Neighbour of mine will honour us with a Dance.
They all sit; Charl. and Fop. dance.
So, so; very well, very well. Gentlemen and ladies, I am for Liberty of Consci∣ence,
and Moderation. There's a Banquet waits the Ladies, and my Cellars are open
to the men; but for my self, I must retire: first waiting on your Lordship to shew
you your Apartment, then leave you to cher entire; and tomorrow, my Lord, you
and I will settle the Nation, and resolve on what return we will make to the noble
Polanders.





Well said, Charles, thou leavest her not, till she's thy own, Boy. And
Philander was a jolly Swain, &c.




All things succeed above my wish, dear Frank;

Fortune is kind; and more, Galliard is so:
This night crowns all my Wishes.

Laboir, are all things ready for our purpose?




Dark Lanthorns, Pistols, Habits and Vizards, Sir.



I have provided Portmantles to carry off the Treasure.



I perceive you are resolv'd to make a through-stitcht Robbery on't.



Faith, if it lie in our way, Sir, we had as good venture a Caper under the
Triple Tree for one as well as t'other.



We will consider on't. 'tis now just struck Eleven: within this hour is
the dear Assignation with Galliard.



What, whether our affairs be finisht or not?



'Tis but at next door; I shall return time enough for that trivial busi∣ness.



A trivial business of some six thousand pound a year?



Trivial to a woman, Frank! no more do you make as if you w•nt to bed.
 Labo•• do you feign to be drunk, and lie on the Hall-table; and when I give the
signe, let me softly in.



Death, Sir, will you venture at such a time!



My life and future hope I am resolv'd,
Let Polititians plot, let Rogues go on
In the old beaten Path of Forty One,
Let City-Knaves delight in Mutiny,
The Rabble bow to old Presbytery;
Let petty States be to confusion hurl'd,
Give me but Woman, I'll despise the World.





Lady Galliard is discover'd in an undress at her Table, Glass, and Toilette, Closet atten∣ding:
As soon as the Scene draws off, she rises from the Table as disturb'd and out
of humour.



COme, leave your everlasting Chamber-Maids Chat, your dull Road of
Slandering by rote, and lay that Paint aside. Thou art fuller of false
News, than an unlicens'd Mercury.



I have good proof, Madam, of what I say.




Proof of a thing impossible! Away.



Is it a thing so impossible, Madam, that a man of Mr. Wilding's parts and
person should get a City-Heiress?
Such a bonne Mine, and such a pleasant Wit!




Hold thy fluent Tattle, thou hast Tongue
Enough to talk an Oyster-woman deaf; I say it cannot be. 
What means the panting of my troubled Heart!
Oh my presaging fears! shou'd what she says prove true,
How wretched and how lost a thing am I!




Your Honour may say your pleasure; but I hope I have not liv'd to these
years to be impertinent: No, Madam, I am none of those that run up and down
the Town a Story-hunting, and a Lye-catching, and 




Eternal rattle, peace! 
Mrs. Charlot Gettall go away with Wilding!

A man of Wilding's extravagant life
Get a Fortune in the City!
Thou might'st as well have told me, a Holder forth were married to a Nun.
There are not two such Contraries in Nature;
'Tis flamm, 'tis foolery, 'tis most impossible.



I beg your Ladyships pardon, if my discourse offend you; but all the world
knows Mrs. Clacket to be a person 




Who is a most devout Bawd, a precise Procurer;
Saint in the Spirit, and Whore in the Flesh;
A Doer of the Devils work in Gods Name.
Is she your Informer? nay, then the Lye's undoubted. 
I say once more, adone with your idle Tittle-tattle, 
And to divert me, bid Betty sing the Song which Wilding

Made to his last Mistriss: we may judge by that
What little Haunts and what low Game he follows.
This is not like the description of a rich Citizens Daughter and Heir, but some com∣mon
Hackney of the Suburbs.



I have heard him often swear she was a Gentlewoman, and liv'd with her
Friends.




Like enough; there are many of these Gentlewomen who live with their
Friends, as rank Prostitutes, as errant Jilts, as those who make open profession of the
Trade almost as mercenary But come, the Song.





In Phillis all vile Iilts are met,
Foolish, uncertain, false, Coquette.
Love is her constant welcome Guest,
And still the newest pleases best.
Quickly she likes, then leaves as soon;
Her life on Woman's a Lampoon.


Yet for the Plague of Humane Race,
This Devil has an Angels Face;
Such Youth, such Sweetness in her look,
Who can be man, and not be took?
What former Love, what Wit, what Art,
Can save a poor inclining heart?


In vain, a thousand times an hour,
Reason rebels against her power.
In vain I rail, I curse her Charms;
One look my feeble Rage disarms.
There is Inchantment in her Eyes;
Who sees 'em, can no more be wise.






Twelve was the luckie minute when we met:
Most charming of your Sex, and wisest of all Widows,
My Life, my Soul, my Heaven to come, and here!
Now I have liv'd to purpose, since at last Oh, killing Joy! 
Come, let me sold you, press you in my arms,
And kiss you thanks for this dear happy night.




You may spare your thanks, Sir, for those that will deserve 'em; I shall
give ye no occasion for 'em.



Nay, no Scruples now, dearest of Dears, no more▪
'Tis most unseasonable 
I bring a heart full fraight with eager hopes,
Opprest with a vast load of longing Love;
Let me unlade me in that soft white Bosome,
That Store-house of rich Joys and lasting Pleasures,
And lay me down as on a Bed of Lillies.





You're wonderous full of Love and Rapture, Sir; but certainly you mi∣stake
the person you address 'em to.



Why, are you not my Lady Galliard, that very Lady Galliard, who if one
may take her word for't, loves Wilding? Am I not come hither by your own ap∣pointment;
and can I have any other business here at this time of night, but Love,
and Rapture, and 




Scandalous and vain! by my appointment, and for so lewd a purpose!
guard me, ye good Angels.
If after an Affront so gross as this,
I ever suffer you to see me more,
Then think me what your Carriage calls me▪
An Impudent, an open Prostitute,
Lost to all sense of Vertue, or of Honour.



What can this mean?

Oh, now I understand the Mystery;


Her Woman's here, that troublesome piece of Train.
 I must remove her. Heark ve, Mrs. Closet, I had forgot to tell you; As I came up I
heard a Kinsman of yours very earnest with the Servants below, and in great haste to
speak with you.



A Kinsman! that's very likely indeed, and at this time of night.



Yes, a very neer Kinsman he said he was, your Fathers own Mothers Un∣cles
Sisters Son; what d'ye call him?



Aye, what d'ye call him indeed; I shou'd be glad to hear his name. Alas,
Sir, I have no neer Relation living that I know of, the more's my misfortune, poor
helpless Orphan that I am.




Nay, but Mrs. Closet, pray take me right,
This Country-man of yours, as I was saying 




Chang'd already from a Kinsman to a Country-man! A plain contri∣vance
to get my Woman out of the Room. Closet, as you value, my service, stir
not from hence.



This Country-man of yours, I say, being left Executor by your Fathers
last will and Testament, is come Dull Waiting-woman, I wou'd be alone with your
Lady; know your Que, and retire.







Learn, I say, to understand Reason when you hear it. Leave us a while;
Love is not a Game for three to play at.




I must own to all the world, you have convinc'd me; I ask a thousand Par∣dons
for my dulness. Well, I'll be gone, I'll run; you're a most powerful person,
the very Spirit of Perswasion. I'll steal out. You have such a taking way with you 
  39
But I forget my self. Well, your most obedient Servant: Whenever you've occa∣sion,
Sir, be pleas'd to use me fr•ely.



Nay, dear Impertinent, no more Complements, you see I'm busie now;
prithee be gone, you see I'm busie.



I'm all Obedience to you, Sir 
Your most obedient 




Whither are you •isking and gigiting now?



Madam, I am going down, and will return immediately, immediately.
Exit Clos.




So, she's gone; Heaven and broad Gold be prais'd for the deliverance:
And now, dear Widow, let's lose no more pretious time; we've fool'd away too
much already.








To you, yes, to whom else shou'd it be? unless being sensible you have not
discretion enough to manage your own affairs your self, you resolve, like other Wi∣dows,
with all you're worth to buy a Governour, commonly called a Husband. I
•ook ye to be wiser; but if that be your designe, I shall do my best to serve you 
though to deal freely with you 




Trouble not your self, Sir, to make Excu••s; I'm not so fond of the offer
to take you at your word. Marry you! a Rakes•••e, who have not esteem enough
for the Sex to believe your own Mother honest without Money or Credit, without
Land either in present or prospect; and half a dozen hungry Vices, like so many
bawling Brats at your back, perpetually craving, and more chargeable to keep than
twice the number of Children. Besides, I think you are provided for; are you not
married to Mrs. Charlot Gettall?



Married to her? do I know her, you shou'd rather ask. What Fool has
forg'd this unlikely Lye? But suppose 'twere true, cou'd you be jealous of a wo∣man
I marry? do you take me for such an Ass, to suspect I shall love my own Wise?
On the other side, I have a great charge of Vices, as you well observe, and I must not
be so barbarous to let them starve. Every body in this Age takes care to provide for
their Vices, though they send their Children a begging; I should be worse than an
In•idel to neglect them. No, I must marry some stiff a•kward thing or other with
an ugly face and a handsome Estate, that's certain: but whoever is ordain'd to make
my Fortune, 'tis you onely that can make me happy. Come, do it then.








Unkindly said, you must.




Unreasonable man! because you see
I have unusual regards for you,
Pleasure to hear, and trouble to deny you;
A •atal yielding in my nature toward you,
Love bends my Soul that way. 
A weakness I ne'er felt for any other;
And wou'd you be so base? and cou'd you have the heart
To take th' advantage on'• to ruine me,
To make me infamous, despis'd, loath'd, pointed at?



You reason false. 
According to the strictest rules of Honour,

  40Beauty shou'd still be the Reward of Love,
Not the vile Merchandize of Fortune,
Or the cheap Drug of a Church-Ceremony.
She's onely infamous, who to her Bed,
For interest, takes some nauseous Olown she hates:
And though a Joynture or a Vow in publick

•e her price, that makes her but the dearer whore.




I understand not these new Morals.



Have patience, I say 'tis clear.
All the desires of mutual Love are vertuous.
Can Heaven or Man be angry that you please
Your self and me, when it does wrong to none?
Why rave you then on things that ne'r can be?
Besides, are we not alone, and private? who can know it?




Heaven will know't; and I that that's enough:
But when you're weary of me, first your Friend, then his, then all the world.



Think not that t••e will ever come.




Oh, it must, it will!



Or if it shou'd, cou'd I be such a Villain 
Ah Cruel! if you lov'd me as yo• say,
You wou'd not thus distrust me.




You do me wrong; I love you more than ere my Tongue,
Or all the Actions of my Life can tell you so well 
Your very faults, how gross soere, to me
Have something pleasing in 'em. To me you're all
That Man can praise, or Woman can desire;
All Charm without, and all Desert within:
But yet my Vertue is more lovely still;
That is a price too high to pay for you:
The love of Angels may be bought too dear,
If we bestow on them what's kept for Heaven.



Hell and the Devil! I'll hear no more
Of this Religious stuff, this Godly nonsence.
Death, Madam, do you bring me into your Chamber to preach Vertue to me?




I bring you hither! how can you say it?
I suffer'd you indeed to come, but not
For the base end you fancy'd, but to take
A last leave of you. Let my heart break with Love,
I cannot be that wretched thing you'd have me:
Believe I still shall have a kindness for you,
Always your Friend, your Mistriss now no more.



Cozen'd, abus'd, she loves some other man!
Dull Blockhead not to find it out before!

 Well, Madam, may I at last believe
This is your fixt and final Resolution?
And does your Tongue now truly speak your Heart,
That has so long bely'd it?








I'm glad on't. Good night: And when I visit you again,
May you again thus fool me.





Stay but a moment.



For what? to praise your Night-dress, or make court to your little Dog?
No, no, Madam, send for Mr. Flamfull and Mr. Flutterbuz, Mr. Lapp-fool and Mr. Love-all;
they'll do it better, and are more at leisure.




Hear me a little: You know I both despise, and hate those civil Cox∣combs,
as much as Lesteem and love you. But why will you be gone so soon? and
why are you so cruel to urge me thus to part either with your good Opinion or your
Kindness? I wou'd fain keep 'em both.




Then keep your word, Madam.




My word! And have I promis'd then to be
A Whore? A Whore! Oh let me think of that!
A man's Convenience, his leisure hours, his Bed of Ease,
To loll and tumble on at idle times;
The Slave, the Hackney of his lawless Lust!
A loath'd Extinguisher of filthy flames,
Made use of, and thrown by. Oh infamous!



Come, come, you love me not, I see it plain;
That makes your scruples: that, that's the reason
You start at words, and run away from shadows.
Already some pert Fop, some Ribon-fool,
Some dancing Coxcomb, has supplanted me
In that unsteady treacherous woman's heart of yours.




Believe it if you will. Yes, let me be false, unjust, ungrateful, any thing but
a Whore 



Oh, Sex on purpose form'd to plague Mankind!
All that you are, and that you do, 's a lye.
False are your Faces, false your floating Hearts;
False are your Quarrels, false your Reconcilements:
Enemies without Reason, and Dear without Kindness.
Your Friendship's false, but much more false your Love;
Your damn'd deceitful Love is all o'er false.




False rather are the Joys you are so fond of.
Be wise, and cease, Sir, to pursue 'em farther.



No, them I can never quit; but you most easily.
A woman changeable, and false as you.




Said you most easily? Oh, inhumane!
Your cruel words have wak'd a dismal thought;
I feel 'em cold and heavy at my heart,
And weakness steals upon my Soul apace;
I find I must be miserable. 
I would not be thought false.




Nor wou'd I think you so; give me not cause.




What heart can bear distrust from what it loves?
Or who can always her own Wish deny?

My Reason's weary of the unequal strise;

  42And Love and Nature will at last o'ercome.
 Do you not then believe I love you?




How can I, while you still remain unkind?




How shall I speak my guilty thoughts? 
I have not power to part with you: conceal my shame I doubt I cannot, I fear I
wou'd not any more deny you.



Oh, heavenly sound! Oh, charming Creature! speak that word again, a∣gen,
agen! for ever let me hear it.




But did you not indeed? and will you never, never love Mrs. Charlot,
never?








Turn your face away, and give me leave
To hide my rising Blushes: I cannot look on you,
As this last Speech is speaking
she sinks into his Arms by
degrees.
But you must undo me if you will. 
Since I no other way my truth can prove,
 You shall see I love.
Pity my Weakness, and admire my Love.



All Heaven is mine, I have it in my arms:
Nor can ill Fortune reach me any more.
Fate, I de•ie thee, and dull World, adieu.
In Loves kind Fever let me ever ly,
Drunk with Desire, and raving mad with Joy.






A Dog, a Rogue, to leave her!



Why look ye, Uncle, what wou'd you have a man do?
I brought her to her Coach. 



To her Coach! to her Coach! Did not I put her into your hand, fol∣low'd
you out, winkt, smil'd, and nodded, cry'd, 'buy Charles, 'buy Rogue; which
was as much as to say, Go home with her, Charles, home to her Chamber, Charles;
nay, as much as to say, Home to her Bed, Charles▪ nay, as much as to say Hum,
hum, a Rogue, a Dog, and yet to be modest too! That I shou'd bring thee up with
no more fear of God before my Eyes!



Nay, dear Uncle, don't break my heart now. Why I did proffer, and
press, and swear, and ly'd, and but a Pox on her, she has the damndest wheedling
way with her, as, Dear Charles, nay pri•hee, he, 'tis late, to morrow, my Honour,
which if you lov'd, you wou'd preserve; and such obliging Reasons.



Reasons! Reason! a Lover, and talk of Reason! You lye, Sirrah, you
lye. Leave a woman for Reason, when you were so finely drunk too, a Rascal!



Why look ye, d'ye see, Uncle, I du••t not trust my self alone with her in
this pickle, lest I shou'd a fallen soul on her.



Why there's it; 'tis that you shou'd adone: I am mistaken if she be not
one of those Ladies that love to be ravisht of a Kindness. Why, your willing Rape
is all the fashion, Charles.



But heark ye, Uncle.



Why how now, Jack-sawce, what, capitulate?



Why do but hear me, Uncle: Lord you're so hasty! Why look ye, I
am a• ready, d'ye see, as any man 〈◊〉 these occasions.



Are you so, Sir? and I'll make you willing, or try Toledo with you,
Sir. Whe, what, I shall have ye whining when you are sober again, traversing your
Chamber with Arms across, railing on Love and Women, and at last defeated, turn
whipping Tom, to revenge your self on the whole Sex.



My dear Uncle, come kiss me and be friends, I will be rul'd




 A most admirable good-natur'd Boy this!  Well then, dear
Charles, know, I have brought thee now hither to the Widows house with a resolu∣tion
to have thee order matters so, as before thou quits her, she shall be thy own,
Boy.



Gad, Uncle, thou'rt a Che••bin! Introduce me, d'ye see, and if I do not
so woo the Widow, and so do the Widow, that •re morning she shall be content to
take me for better for worse. Renounce me! Egad, I'll make her know the Lord
God from Tom Bell, before I have done with her. Nay, ba•kt by my noble Uncle,
I'll venture on her, had she all Cupid's Arrows, Venus's Beauty, and Ma•alina's Fire,
d'ye see.



A sweet Boy, a very sweet Boy! Hum, thou art damnable handsome
to night, Charles. Aye, thou wilt do't; I see a kind of a resistless Lewdness about
thee, a most triumphant Impudence, loose and wanton.






Heavens, Gentlemen, what makes you here at this time of night?











Why is she asleep? Come, come, I'll wake her.

Offers to force in as to the Bed-chamber.


Hold, hold, Sir: No, no, she's a little busie, Sir.



I'll have no business done to night, Sweetheart.



Hold, hold, I beseech you, Sir, her Mother's with her: For Heavens sake,
Sir, be gone.







No not a foot.



The City you know, Sir, is so 〈◊〉 







All the W•igs, Charles, all the Whigs.



In short, I am resolv'd, d'ye see, to go to the Wido•s Chamber.



Heark ye, Mrs. Closet, I thought I had intirely engag'd you this even∣ing.



I am perfectly yours, Sir; but now it happens so, her Mother being there 
Yet if you wou'd withdraw for half an hour, into my Chamber, till she were
gone 



This is Reason, Charles. Here, here's two Pieces to buy thee a Gorget.




And here's my two, because 〈…〉 i•••strious.

Giv•• her Money• and goes out with her.






What have I done? Ah, whither shall I flie?




Why all these Tears? Ah, why this cruel Passion?




Undone, undone! Unhand me, false, sorsworn;
Be gone, and let me rage till I am dead.
What shou'd I do with guilty Life about me?



Why, where's the harm of what we two have done?




Ah, leave me 
Leave me alone to sigh to flying Winds,
That the infection may be born aloft,
And reach no humane Ear.



Cease, lovely Charmer, cease to wound me more.




Shall I survive this shame! No, if I do,
Eternal Blushes dwell upon my Cheeks,
To tell the World my Crime.
 Mischief and Hell, what Devil did possess me?



It was no Devil, but a Deity;
A little gay-wing'd God, harmless and innocent,
Young as Desire, wanton as Summer-breezes,
Soft as thy Smiles, resistless as thy Eyes.




Ah, what malicious God,
Sworn Enemy to feeble Womankind,
Taught thee the Art of Conquest with thy Tongue?
Thy false deluding Eyes were surely made
Of Stars that rule our Sexes Destiny:
And all thy Charms were by Inchantment wrought,
That first undo the heedless Gazers on,
Then shew their natural deformity.



Ah, my Galliard, am I grown ugly then?
Has my increase of Passion lessen'd yours?





Peace tempter, Peace, who artfully betrayest me,
And then upbraidest the wretchedness thou'st made.
 Ah, Fool, eternal Fool! to know my danger,
Yet venture on so evident a ruine.



Say, what one Grace is faded!
Is not thy Face as fair, thy Eyes as Killing?
By Heaven, much more: This charming change of Looks,
Raises my flame, and makes me wish t'invoke
The harmless God again.





By Heaven, not all thy Art
Shall draw me to the tempting sin again.



Oh, I must, or dye.




By all the Powers, by 



Oh, do not swear, lest Love shou'd take it ill
That Honour shou'd pretend to give him Laws,
And make an Oath more powerful than his Godhead.

  45 Say that you will half a long hour hence 








Or say a tedious hour.








Or if you must promise me then to morrow.




No, hear my Vows.



Hold, see me die; if you resolve 'em fatal to my love, by Heaven I'll do't.

Lays his hand on his Sword.







Revoke that fatal Never then.








Oh, say you will.




Alas, I dare not utter it.



Let's in, and thou shalt whisper it into my Bosom;
Or sighing, look it to me with thy Eyes.









It toucht my Soul! Repeat that sigh again.




Ah, I confess I am but feeble woman.




Good Mistriss keep-door, stand by: for I must enter.





Hah, young Meriwill's voice!



Pray, Sir Charles, let me go and give my Lady notice.
She enters and goes to Wild.

 For Heavens sake, Sir, withdraw, or my Lady's Honour's lost.



What will you have me do?





Be gone, or you will ruine me for ever.




Nay, then I will obey.




Here, down the back-stairs. 
As you have Honour, go and cherish mine.

 He's gone; and now methinks the shivering fit of Honour is return'd.





Deni'd an entrance! nay, then there is a Rival in the case, or so; and
I'm resolv'd to discover the Hellish Plot, d'ye see.

Iust as he enters drunk at one door, Wild. returns at the other.



Ha, Wilding return'd! shield me, ye Shades of Night.

Puts out the Candles, and goes to Wild.



The back-stairs-door is lockt.




Oh, I am lost! curse on this fatal night!
Art thou resolv'd on my undoing every way?



Nay, now we're by dark, let me alone to guide you, sir.




What, what, all in darkness? Do you make Love like Cats, by Star∣light?





Ah, he knows he's here! Oh, what a pain is Guilt!




I wou'd not be surpriz'd.

As Closet takes him to lead him out, he takes out his Sword, and by dark, pushes
by Sir Charles, and almost overthrows Sir Anthony; at which they both
draw, whilst he goes out with Closet.



Hah, Gad 'twas a Spark! What, vanisht! hah 



Nay, nay, Sir, I am for ye.



Are you so, Sir? and I am for the Widow, Sir, and 
Iust as they are passing at each other, Closet enters with a Candle.
 Hah, why what have we here, my none flesh and blood?




Cry mercy, Sir! Pray how fell we out?



Ou•, Sir! Pri•••e where's my Rival? where's the Spark, the Gad, I
took thee for an errant Rival: Where, where is he?





Whom seek ye, Sir, a man, and in my Lodgings?




A man! merciful, what will this scandalous lying World come to? Here's
no man.



Away, I say, thou damn'd Domestick Intelligence, that comest out every
half hour with some fresh Sham. No man! What, 'twas an appointment onely,
hum, which I shall now make bold to unappoint, render null, void, and of none
effect. And if I find him here  I shall very civilly and accidentally,
as it were, being in perfect friendship with him pray mark that run him through
the Lungs.




Oh, what a Coward's guilt! what mean you, Sir?



Mean! why I am obstinately bent to ravish thee, thou hypocritical Wi∣dow,
make thee mine by force, that so I may have no obligation to thee, and conse∣quently
use thee scurvily with a good Conscience.



A most delicate Boy! I'll warrant him as lewd as the best of 'em, God
grant him life and Health.





'Tis late, and I entreat your absence, Sir: These are my hours of prayer,
which this unseasonable Visit has disturb'd.



Prayer! no more of that, Sweetheart: for let me tell you, your Prayers
are heard. A Widow of your Youth and Complexion can be praying for nothing
so late, but a good Husband; and see, Heaven has sent him just in the crit critical
minute, to supply your occasions.



A Wag, an arch Wag; he'll learn to make Lampoons presently. I'll
not give sixpence from him, though to the Poor of the Parish.



Come, Widow, let's to bed.





Hold, Sir, you drive the Jest too far;
And I am in no humour now for mirth.



Jest! Gad ye lye, I was never in more earnest in all my life.



He's in a heavenly humour, thanks to good Wine, good Counsel, and
good Company.





What mean you, Sir? what can my Woman think to see me treated
thus?



Well thought on! Nay, we'll do things decently, d'ye see 
Therefore, thou sometimes necessary Utensil, withdraw.





Aye, aye, let me alone to reach her her duty.





Stay, Closet, I command ye.
 What have you seen in me shou'd move you to this rudeness?





No •row•ing; for by this dear night, 'tis charity, care of your Repu∣tation,
Widow: and therefore I am resolv'd nobody shall lie with you but my self.
  47
You have dangerous 〈◊〉 buzzing •bout your Hive, Widow mark that   Nay, no parting but upon terms, which in short, d'ye see, are these:
Down on your knees, and swear me heartily as G•d shall judge your Soul, d•ye see,
to marry me to morrow.




To morrow! Oh, I have urgent bu•iness then.



So have I. Nay Gad, an you be for the neerest way to wood, the sober
discreet way of loving, I am for you, look ye.





Hold, Sir, what mean you?



Onely to go to bed, that's all.





Hold, hold, or I'll call out.



Aye do, call up a Jury of your Female Neighbours; they'll be for me,
d'ye see, bring in the Bill Ignoramus, though I am no very true blue Protestant nei∣ther:
Therefore dispatch, or 




Hold, are you mad? I cannot promise you to night.



Well, well, I'll be content with performance then to night, and trust
you for your promise till to morrow.



 Ah, Rogue! By George, he out-does my expectations of
him.




What Imposition's this! I'll call for help.



You need not, you'll do my business better alone.





What shall I do! how shall I send him hence!




He shall ne'er drink small Beer more, that's po•itive: I'll burn all's
Books too, they have helpt to spoil him; and sick or well, found or unsound, Drink∣ing
shall be his Diet, and Whoring his Study.




Come, come, no pausing; your promise, or I'll to bed.

Offers to pull off his Breeches, having pull'd off almost all the rest of his Clothes.



What shall I do, here is no Witness neer! And to be rid of him, I'll
promise him: he'll have forgot it in his sober Passion.

Hold, I do swear I will 

















Nay, that's too much. Hold, hold, I will to morrow.
 Now you are satisfi'd, you will withdraw?





Charles, Joy Charles, give ye Joy: here's two substantial Witnesses.



I deny it, Sir; I heard no such thing.



What, what, Mrs. Closet, a Waiting-woman of Honour, and ••inch from
her Evidence! Gad, I'll damn thy Soul, if thou darest swear what thou sayest.




How, upon the catch, Sir! am I betray'd?
Base and unkind, is this your humble Love!
Is all your whining come to this, false man! By Heaven, I'll be reveng'd.

She goes out in rage, with Closet.



Nay, Gad you're caught, struggle and •lounder as you please, Sweetheart,
you'll but intangle more; let me alone to tickle your Gills, ••aith.

  48 Uncle, get ye home about your business: I hope you'll give me the Goo• mor∣row,
as becomes me. I say no more A word to the Wise 



By George, thou'rt a brave fellow; why I did not think it had been in
thee, man. Well, adieu: I'll give thee such a Good morrow, Charles the Devil's
in him! 'Buy, Charles a plaguie Rogue! 'Night, Boy a Divine Youth!




Gad, I'll not leave her now, till she is mine▪
Then keep her so by constant consummation.
Let Man a God do his, I'll do my part,
In spight of all her •ickleness and art;
There's one sure way to fix a Widows heart.









NOt yet! a Plague of this damn'd Widow: the Devil ow'd him an un∣lucky
Cast, and has thrown it him to night.
Enter Wild. in Rapture and Ioy.
 Hah, dear Tom, art thou come?



I saw how at her length she lay!
I saw her rising Bosome bare!



A Pox of her rising Bosome: My Dear, let's dress and about our business.



Her loose thin Robes, through which appear
A Shape design'd for Love and Play!



'Sheart, Sir, is this a time for Rapture? 'tis almost day.



Ah, Frank, such a dear night!



A Pox of nights, Sir, think of this and the day to come▪ which I perceive
you were too well employ'd to remember.



The day to come!
Death, who cou'd be so dull in such dear Joys,
To think of time to come, or ought beyond 'em!
And had I not been interrupted by Charles Meriwill, who getting drunk, had cou∣rage
enough to venture on an untimely Visit▪ I'd had no more power of returning, than
committing Treason: But that conjugal Lover, who will needs be my Cuckold,
made me then give him way, that he might give it me another time, and so unseen
I got off. But come my disguise.




All's still and hush, as if Nature meant to favour our designe.



'Tis well: And heark ye, my Friends, I'll proscribe you no bounds, or
〈◊〉 for I have considered if we modestly take nothing but the Writings,
'twill be easie to suspect the Thief.



Right; and since 'tis for the securing our Necks, 'tis lawful prise. Sirrah,
leave the Por•mantua here.


After a small time,





Murder, Murder! Thieves, Murder!






A Plague upon his Throat; set a Gag in's mouth and bind him, though
he be my Uncle's chief Pimp. So 






Well, we have bound all within hearing in their Beds, ere they cou'd alarm
their Fellows by crying out.



'Tis well: come, follow me, like a kind Midnight-Ghost, I will conduct ye
to the rich buried heaps this door leads to my Uncles Apartment; I know each
secred nook contious of Treasure.








Help, help! Murder! Murder!




What have we here, a Female bolted from Mr. Aldermans Bed?

Holding his Lanthorn to her face.


Ah mercy, Sir, alas, I am a Virgin.



A Virgin! Gad and that may be, for any great miracles the old Gentle∣man
can do.



Do! alas, Sir, I am none of the wicked.



That's well. The sanctifi'd Jilt professes Innocence, yet has the Badge of
her Occupation about her neck.




Ah misfortune, I have mistook his Worships Coat for my Gown.

A little Book drops out of her Bosome.


What have we here? A Sermon preacht by Richard Baxter, Divine. Gad a
mercy, Sweetheart, thou art a hopeful Member of the true Protestant Cause.



Alack, how the Saints may be scandaliz'd! I went but to tuck his Worship
in.



And comment upon the Text a little, which I suppose may be increase and
multiply. Here, gag and bind her.





Hold, hold, I am with Child!



Then you'll go neer to miscarry of a Babe of Grace.







Gentlemen, why Gentlemen, I beseech you use a Conscience in what you
do, and have a feeling of what you go about. Pity my Age.



Damn'd beggarly Conscience, and needless Pity 



Oh fearful! But, Gentlemen, what is't you designe? is it a genera•
Massacar, pray, or am I the onely person aim'd at as a Sacrifice for the Nation?
know, and all the World knows, how many Plots have been laid against my sel•  50
both by men, women, and children, the Diabolical Emissaries of the Pope.








Nay, Gentlemen, not but I love and honour his Holiness with all my
Soul; and if his Grace did but know what I have done for him, d'ye see 



You done for the Pope, Sirrah! why what have you done for the Pope?



Why, Sir, an't like ye, I have done you great service, very great service,
for I have been, d'ye see, in a small Tryal I had, the cause and occasion of invali∣dating
the Evidence to that degree, that I suppose no Jury in Christendom will ever
have the impudence to believe 'em hereafter, shou'd they swear against his Holiness
himself, and all the Conclave of Cardinals.



And yet you plot on still, cabal, treat, and keep open debauch, for all the
Renegado-Tories and old Commonwealths-men to carry on the good Cause.



Alas, what signifies that? You know, Gentlemen, that I have such a
strange and natural agility in turning, I shall whip about yet, and leave 'em all in
the lurch.



'Tis very likely; but at this time we shall not take your word for that.



Bloody minded men, are you resolv'd to assassinate me then?



You trifle, Sir, and know our business better, than to think we come to take
your Life, which wou'd not advantage a Dog, much less any Party or Person, Come,
come, your Keys, your Keys.



Aye, aye, discover, discover your Money, Sir, your ready 



Money, Sir! good lack, is that all?

Why what a Beast was I, not knowing of your coming, to put out all my Money last
week to Alderman Draw-tooth! Alack, alack, what shift shall I make now to accom∣modate
you? But if you please to come again to morrow 



A shamming Rogue; the right Sneer and Grin of a dissembling Whig.
Come, come, deliver, Sir; we are for no Rhetorick, but ready Money.




Hold, I beseech you, Gentlemen, not so loud: for there is a Lord, a most
considerable person and a stranger, honours my house to night; I wou'd not for the
world his Lordship shou'd be disturb'd.



Take no care for him, he's fast bound, and all his Retinue.



How, bound! my Lord bound, and all his People! Undone, undone,
disgrac'd! What will the Polanders say, that I shou'd expose their Embassadour to
this disrespect and affront?



Bind him, and take away his Keys.




Aye, aye, what you please, Gentlemen, since my Lord's bound. Oh
what Recompence can I make for so unhospitable usage? I am a most unfortunate
Magistrate! Hah, who's there, Iervice? Alas, art thou here too? What, canst not
speak? But 'tis no matter and I were dumb too: for what Speech or Harangue will
serve to beg my pardon of my Lord? And then my Heiress, Iervice, aye, my rich
Heiress, why she'll be ravisht, oh Heavens, ravisht! The young Rogues will have no
mercy, Iervice; nay, perhaps as thou sayest, they'll carry her away. Oh that

 Why Gentlemen, rob like Christians, Gentlemen.



〈◊〉, do you mutter, Dog?




Not in the least, Sir, not in the least; onely a Conscience, Sir, in all
things does well. Barbarous Rogues!  Here's you Arbi∣trary
Power, Iervice; here's the rule of the Sword now for you: These are your
Tory Rogues, your Tantivie Roysters; but we shall cry quits with you, Rascals,
erelong: and if we do come to our old Trade of Plunder and Sequestration, we will
so handle ye 〈…〉 neither Prince, Peer, nor Prelate. Oh, I long to have a
••ice at your fat Church-men, your Crape-Gown-orums.




A Prize, a Prize, my Lads, in ready Guinies! Contribution, my Beloved.



Nay then 'tis lawful Prize, in spight of Ignoramus and all his Tribe. 
What hast thou there?




A whole Bag of Knavery, damn'd Sedition, Libels, Treason, Successions,
Rights and Priviledges, with a new-fashion'd Oath of Abjuration, call'd the Associa∣tion.
 Ah Rogue, what will you say when these shall be made publick?



Say, Sir? why I'll deny it, Sir: for what Jury will believe so wise a
Magistrate as I, cou'd communicate such Secrets to such as you? I'll say you forg'd
'em, and put 'em in, or print ev•ry one of 'em, and own 'em, as long as they were
writ and publisht in London, Sir.) Come, come, the World is not so bad yet, but a
man may speak Treason within the Walls of London, thanks be to God, and honest
conscientious Jury-men. And as for the Money, Gentlemen, take notice you rob the
Party.



Come, come, carry off the Booty, and prithee remove that Rubbish of the
Nation out of the way. Your Servant, Sir. So, away with it to Dresswell's Lod∣gings,
his Coach is at the door ready to receive it.

They carry off Sir Timothy, and others take up the Bags, and go out with 'em.


Well, you are sure you have all you came for?



All's safe, my Lads, the Writings all. 



Come, let's away then.



Away? what meanst thou? is there not a Lord to be found bound in his
bed, and all his People? Come, come, dispatch, and each man bind his fellow.



We had better follow the Baggage, Captain.



No, we have not done so ill, but we dare shew our faces. Come, come,
to binding.



And who shall bind the last man?



Honest Laboir, d'ye hear, Sirrah? you got drunk and lay in your Clothes
under the Hall-table; d'ye conceive me? Look to't, ye Rascal, and carry things
discreetly, or you'll all be hang'd, that's certain.





So; now will I i'th morning to Charlot, and give her such a character of
her Lover, as if she have resentment, makes her mine.




 Ho, Ienkin, Roger, Simon! where are these Rogues?
None left alive to come to my assistance? So ho, ho, ho! Rascals, Sluggards, Drones!
So ho, ho, ho!



So, now's my Que and stay, I am not yet sober.

Puts himself into a drunken posture.


Dogs, Rogues, none hear me? Fire, fire, fire!



Water, water, I say: for I am damnable dry.







What doleful voice is that?



What art thou, friend or foe?




Very direful why what the Devil art thou?



If thou'rt a friend, approach, approach the wretched.



Wretched! What art thou, Ghost, Hobgobling, or walking Spirit?

Reeling in with a Lanthorn in's hand.


Oh, neither, neither, but meer mortal Sir Timothy Treat-all, robb'd and
bound.





How, our generous Host?



How, one of my Lords Servants! Alas, alas, how cam'st thou to escape?



Ene by Miracle, Sir, by being drunk and falling asleep under the Hall-table
with your Worships Dog Tory, till just now a Dream of Small-beer wakt me; and
crawling from my Kennel to secure the black Jack, I stumb'ed upon this Lanthorn,
which I took for one, till I found a Candle in't, which helps me to serve your Wor∣ship.




Hold, hold, I say; for I scorn to be so uncivil to be unbound before his
Lordship: therefore run, Friend, to his Honours Chamber, for he, alas, is confin'd
too.



What, and leave his worthy Friend in distress? by no means, Sir.



Well then, come, let's to my Lord, whom if I be not asham'd to look in
the face, I am an errant Sarazan.




He discover'd sitting in a Chair bound his Vallet bound by him; to them Sir Timothy
and Laboir.



Peace, Sirrah, for sure I hear some coming. Villains, Rogues! I care not
for my self, but the good pious Alderman.




Wonderful goodness, for me! alas, my Lord, this sight will break my
heart.




Sir Timothy safe! nay then I do forgive 'em.



Alas, my Lord, I've heard of your rigid fate.



It is my custom, Sir, to pray an hour or two in my Chamber, before I go
to bed; and having pray'd that drowsie Slave asleep, the Thieves broke in upon us
unawares, I having laid my Sword aside.



Oh, Heavens, at his Prayers! damn'd Ruffians, and wou'd they not stay
till you had said your Prayers?



By no perswasion. Can you not guess who they shou'd be, Sir?



Oh, some damn'd Tory-rory Rogues, you may be sure, to rob a▪ man at
his Prayers! why what will this world come to?



Let us not talk, Sir, but pursue 'em.




Pursue 'em? alas, they're past our reach by this time.



Oh, Sir, they are neerer than you imagine:
  53〈…〉 each corner of your house, I'll warrant.




Think ye so, my Lord? Aye, this comes of keeping Open House; which
makes so many shut up their doors at Dinner-time.





Good morrow, Gentlemen! what was the Devil broke loose to night?



Onely some of his Imps, Sir, sawcy Varlets, insupportable Rascals. But
well, my Lord, now I have seen your Lordship at liberty, I'll leave you to your rest,
and go see what harm this nights work has done.



I have a little business, Sir, and will take this time to dispatch it in; my
Servants shall to bed, though 'tis already day. I'll wait on you at Dinner.



Your time: my House and all I have is yours; and so I take my leave
of your Lordship.





Now for my angry Maid, the young Charlot;

'Twill be a task to soften her to peace:
She is all new and gay, young as the Morn,
Blushing as tender Rose-buds on their stalks,
Pregnant with sweets, for the next Sun to ravish.
 Come, thou shalt along with me, I'll trust thy friendship.



She is discover'd dressing, with Betty.



Methinks I'm up as early as if I had a mind to what I'm going to do, marry
this old rich Coxcomb.



And you do well to lose no time.



Ah, Betty, and cou'd thy prudence prefer an old Husband, because rich, be∣fore
so young, so handsome, and so soft a Lover as Wilding?



I know not that, Madam; but I verily believe the way to keep your young
Lover, is to marry this old one: for what Youth and Beauty cannot purchase,
Money and Quality may.



Aye, but to be oblig'd to lie with such a Beast; aye, there's the Devil



Ah, when I find the difference of their Embraces,
The soft dear Arms of Wilding round my neck,
From those cold feeble ones of this old Dotard;
When I shall meet, instead of Tom's warm Kisses,
A hollow pair of thin blue wither'd Lips,
Trembling with Palsie, stinking with Disease,
By Age and Nature baracado'd up
With a kind Nose and Chin;
What fancy or what thought can make my hours supportable?



What? why six thousand pound a year, Mistri•s.
He'll quickly die and leave you rich, and then do what you please.



Die! no, he's too temperate. Sure these Whigs, Betty, believe there's no
Heaven, they take such care to live so long in this world. No, he'll out-live me.




In grace a God he may be hang'd first, Mistriss. Ha, one knoc 〈◊〉
lieve 'tis he.





I cannot bring my heart to like this business;
One sight of my dear Tom wou'd turn the scale.










'Tis I, impatient I, who with the Sun have welcom'd in the day;
This happy day to be inroll'd
In Rubrick-letters, and in Gold.
 Hum, I am profoundly eloquent this morning.

 Fair Excellence, I approach 




Like Physick in a morning next one's heart;

Which though 'tis necessary, is most filthy loathsome.




What, do you turn away, bright Sun of Beauty?
 Hum, I'm much upon the Suns and Days this morning.




It will not down.




Alas, ye Gods, am I dispis'd and scorn'd?
Did I for this, ponder upon the Question,
Whether I shou'd be King or Alderman?




If I must marry him, give him patience to endure the Cuckolding, good
Heaven.




Heaven! did she name Heaven, Betty?



I think she did, Sir.



I do not like that: What need has she to think of Heaven upon her
Wedding-day?



Marriage is a sort of hanging, Sir; and I was onely making a short Prayer
before Execution.



Oh, is that all? Come, come, we'll let that alone till we are abed, that
we have nothing else to do.




Not much, I dare swear.



And let us, Fair one, haste; the Parson stays: besides, that heap of Scan∣dal
may prevent us, I mean my Nephew.



A Pox upon him now for naming Wilding.




How, weep at naming my ungracious Nephew? Nay, then I am pro∣vokt 
Look on this Head, this wise and reverend Head; I'd have ye know, it has
been taken measure on to fit it to a Crown, d'ye see.








Aye, and it fits it too: and am I slighted, I that shall receive Billet Deux
from Infantas? 'tis most uncivil and •mpolitick.



I hope he's mad, and then I reign alone.

Pardon me, Sir, that parting Tear I shed indeed at naming Wilding,

Of whom my foolish heart has now tane leave,
And from this moment is intirely yours.

Gives him her hand, they go out.






Stay, my heart misgives me I shall be undone.
 Ah, whither was I going?





Do, stay till the news arrives that he is married to her that had his company
to night, my Lady Galliard.



Oh take heed, lest you sin doubly, Sir.



By Heaven, 'tis true, he past the night with her.



All night? what cou'd they find to do?




A very proper Question: I'll warrant you they were not idle, Ma∣dam.



Oh no; they lookt and lov'd, and vow'd and lov'd, and swore eternal
Friendship. Haste, haste, and lead me to the Church, the Altar; I'll put it past my
power to love him more.



Oh, how you charm me!




Yet what art thou? a stranger to my heart.
Wherefore, ah why, on what occasion shou'd I?



Acquaintance, 'tis enough, I know him, Madam, and I hope my word
will be taken for a greater matter i'th' City: In troth you're beholding to the Gen∣tleman
for marrying you; your Reputation's gone.



How, am I not honest then?




Marry Heaven forbid! But who that knows you have been a single
hour in Wilding's hands, that wou'd not swear you'd lost your Maidenhead? And
back again I'm sure you dare not go unmarried; that wou'd be a fine History to be
sung to your eternal fame in a Ballad.



Right; and you see Wilding has left you for the Widow, to whom perhaps
you'll shortly hear he's married.



Oh, you trifle, Sir; lead on.

They going out, meet Sir Anthony with Musick: they return.


Come, come, Gentlemen, this is the House, and this the window belong∣ing
to my Ladies Bed-chamber: Come, come, let's have some neat, soft, brisk, lan∣guishing,
sprightly Air now.



Old Meriwill how shall I pass by him?




So, here's Company too; 'tis very well Not have the Boy? I'll warrant
this does the business. Come, come, screw up your Chitterling.

 Hold, hold a little, Good morrow, my Lady Galliard,

 Give your Ladyship joy.



What do I hear, my Lady Galliard joy'd?



How, married her already?



Oh, yes he has. Lovely and false, hast thou deceiv'd my Faith?




Oh Heavens, Mr. •opington, she faints ah me!

They hold her, Musick plays.





Ah, Musick at Galliard's door!



Good morrow, Sir Charles Meriwill; give your Worship and your fair
Lady joy.



Hah, Meriwill married the Widow?



No matter; prithee advance and mind thy own affairs.



Advance, and not inquire the meaning on't!
Bid me not eat, when Appetite invites me;
Not draw, when branded with the name of Coward;
Nor love, when Youth and Beauty meets my eyes. Hah! 

Sees Sir Charles come into the Belconey undrest.


Good morrow, Uncle. Gentlemen I thank ye: Here, drink the Kings
Health, with my Royal Master's the Duke.




Heaven bless your Honour, and your vertuous Bride.









Death and the Devil, Meriwill above?



Hah, the Boys Rival here! By George, here may be breathing this
morning. No matter, here's two to two; come, Gentlemen, you must in.

Thrusts the Musick in, and goes in.


Is't not what you expected? nay, what you wisht?



What then? it comes too suddenly upon me 
Ere my last kiss was cold upon her lips,
Before the pantings of her Breast were laid,

•ais'd by her Joys with me; Oh damn'd deluding Woman!



Be wise, and do not ruine where you love.



Nay, if thou com'st to reasoning, thou hast lost me.

Breaks from him and runs in.


I say 'twas Wilding's voice, and I will follow it.



How, Madam, wou'd you after him?



Nay, force me not: By Heaven I'll cry a Rape,
Unless you let me go. Not after him!
Yes to th'infernal S•ades. Unhand me, Sir.



How, Madam, have you then design'd my ruine?



Oh, trust me, Sir, I am a Maid of Honour.






So; a Murrain of your Projects, we're all undone now: For my part
I'll en'• after her, and deny to have any hand in the business.




Damn all ill ••ck, was ever man thus Fortune-bit, that he shou'd cross my
hopes just in the nick? But shall I lose her thus? No Gad, I'll after her; and
come the worst, I have an Impudence shall out-face a Middlesex- Jury, and out-swear
a Discoverer.










Sirrah, run to my Lord Mayors and require some of his Officers to assist
me instantly; and d'ye hear, Rascal, bar up my doors, and let none of his mad Crew
enter.




William, you may stay, William.




I say, obey me, Sirrah.



Sirrah, I say know your Lord and Master.









Was ever woman teaz'd thus? pursue me not.



You are mistaken, I'm disobedient grown,
Since we became one Family; and when I've us'd you thus a week or two, you will
grow weary of this peevish fooling.




Malicious thing, I wo'not, I am resolv'd I'll tire thee out meerly in spight
to have the better of thee.



Gad I'm as resolv'd as you, and do your worst:
For I'm resolv'd never to quit thy house.




But Malice, there are Officers, Magistrates i'th' City, that will not see me
us'd thus, and will be here anon.



Magistrates! why they shall be welcome, if they be honest and loyal; if
not, they may be hang'd in Heavens good time.




Are you resolv'd to be thus obstinate?
Fully resolv'd to make this way your Conquest?



Most certainly, I'll keep you honest to your word, my Dear, I've Wit∣ness 








You'll find it so.




Then know, if thou darest marry me, I will so plague thee, be so reveng'd
for all those tricks thou'st playd me 
 Dost thou not dread the Vengeance Wives can take?



Not at all: I'll trust thy stock of Beauty with thy Wit.




Death, I will cuckold thee.



Why then I shall be free o'th' Reverend City.




Then I will game without cessation, till I've undone thee.



Do, that all the Fops of empty heads and pockets, may know where to
be sure of a Cully; and may they rook ye till ye lose, and fret, and chafe, and rail
those youthful Eyes to sinking; watch your fair Face to pale and withered lean∣ness.




Then I will never let thee bed with me, but when I please.



For that, see who'll petition first, and then I'll change for new ones every
night.





Madam, here's Mr. Wilding at the door, and will not be deni'd 〈…〉





Hah, Wilding! Oh my eternal shame! now thou hast done thy 〈◊〉




Now for a struggle 'twixt your Love and Honour.
 Yes, here's the Bar to all my Happiness,
You wou'd be left to the wide World and Love,
To Infamy, to Scandal, and to Wilding;

But I have too much Honour in my Passion,
To let you loose to Ruine: Consider and be wise.




Oh, he has toucht my heart too sensibly.





 As far as good Manners goes I'm yours;
But when you press indecently to Ladies Chambers, civil
Questions ought to be askt, I take it, Sir.




To find him here, will make him mad with Jealousie, and in the fit he'll
utter all he knows; Oh, Guilt, what art thou?






Prithee, dear Wilding, moderate thy Passion.



By Heaven, I will; she shall not have the pleasure to see I am concern'd.
 Morrow, Widow; you are early up, you mean to thrive I see, you're like a Mill
that grinds with every Wind.



Hah, Wilding this, that past last night at Sir Timothy's for a man of Qua∣lity?
Oh, give him way, Wilding's my Friend, my Dear, and now I'm sure I have
the advantage of him in thy love. I can forgive a hasty word or two.



I thank thee, Charles What, you are married then?




I hope you've no exception to my choice.




False woman, dost thou glory in thy perfidy?

 Yes, Faith, I've many exceptions to him 

Had you lov'd me, you'd pitcht upon a Blockhead,
Some spruce gay fool of Fortune, and no more,
Who would have taken so much care of his own ill-favour'd
Person, he shou'd have had no time to have minded yours,
But left it to the care of some fond longing Lover.




Death, he will tell him all!  Oh, you are merry, Sir.



No, but thou art wonderous false,
False as the Love and Joys you feign'd last night.





Oh, Sir, be tender of those treacherous minutes.

 If this be all you have to say to me 




Faith, Madam, you have us'd me scurvily,
To marry and not give me notice.

 Curse on thee, did I onely blow the Fire▪
To warm another Lover?





Perjur'd was't not by your advice I marry'd?
 Oh where was then your Love?




So soon did I advise,
Didst thou invite me to the Feast of Love,
To snatch away my Joys as soon as tasted;

  59〈…〉 was then your Modesty and sense of Honour?




Aye, where indeed, when you so quickly vanquisht?


〈◊〉 I find are come prepar'd to rail.




No, 'twas with thee to make my last effort against your scorn.
Shews her the Writings.
And this I hop'd, when all my Vows and Love,
When all my Languishments cou'd nought prevail,
Had made ye mine for ever.






'Morrow, Charles, 'Morrow to your Ladyship: Charles, bid Sir Timothy
welcome; I met him luckily at the door, and am resolv'd none of my Friends shall
pass this joyful day without giving thee Joy, Charles, and drinking my Ladies
Health.



Hah, my Uncle here so early?




What has your Ladyship serv'd me so? How finely I had been mumpt now,
if I had not took heart a grace and shew'd your Ladyship trick for trick: for I have
been this morning about some such business of Life too, Gentlemen; I am married
to this fair Lady, the Daughter and Heiress of Sir Nicholas Gettall, Knight and Alder∣man.



Hah, married to Diana!

How fickle is the Faith of common women?




Hum, Who's here, my Lord? What, I see you Lordship has found the
way already to the fair Ladies; but I hope your Lordship will do my Wedding-din∣ner
the honour to grace it with your presence.



I shall not fail, Sir.
A Pox upon him, he'll discover all.





I must own, Sir Timothy, you have made the better choice.



I cou'd not hel• my destiny; Marriages are made in Heaven, you know.


Ent•r Charlot weeping, and Clacket.


Stand off, and let me loose as are my Griefs, which can no more be boun∣ded:
Oh let me face the perjur'd, false, forsworn!




Fair Creature, who is't that you seek with so much sorrow?



Thou, thou fatally fair Inchantress.




Charlot! Nay then I am discover'd.




Alas, what wou'dst thou?



That which I cannot have, thy faithless Husband.
Be judge, ye everlasting Powers of Love,
Whether he more belongs to her or me.



How, my Nephew claim'd? Why how now, Sirrah, have you been dab∣ling
here?



By Heaven, I know her not. Heark ye, Widow, this is some trick of
yours, and 'twas well laid: and Gad, she's so pretty, I cou'd find in my heart to take
her at her word.




Vile man, this will not pass your falshood off.
Sure 'tis some Art to make me jealous of him,
To find how much I value him.



Death, I'll have the forgery out;
 Tell me, thou pretty weeping Hypocrite, who was it set thee on to lay 〈…〉
me?



To you! Alas, who are you? for till this moment I never saw your 〈◊〉▪




Mad as the Seas when all the Winds are raging.



Aye, aye, Madam, stark mad! Poor Soul Neighbour, pray let her lie i'th'
dark, d'ye hear.



How came you, pretty one, to lose your Wits thus?



With loving, Sir, strongly, with too much loving.
 Will you not let me see the lovely false one?


For I am told you have his heart in keeping.




Who is he? pray describe him.



A thing just like a Man, or rather Angel!
He speaks, and looks, and loves, like any God!
All fine and gay, all manly, and all sweet:
And when he swears he loves, you wou'd swear too
That all his Oaths were true.



Who is she? some one who knows her and is wiser, speak you, Mi∣striss.





Since I must speak, there comes the man of Mischief:
 'Tis you I mean, for all your learing, Sir.













I never knew your Nephew was a Lord: Has his Honour made him
forget his Honesty?




I have thee, and I'll die thus grasping thee:
Thou art my own, no Power shall take thee from me.



Never, thou truest of thy Sex, and dearest,
Thou soft, thou kind, thou constant Sufferer,
This moment end thy fears; for I am thine.



May I believe thou art not married then?



How can I, when I'm yours?
How cou'd I, when I love thee more than Life?
 Now, Madam, I'm reveng'd on all your scorn.


 And, Uncle, all your cruelty.



Why, what are you indeed my Nephew, Thomas?



I am Tom Wilding, Sir, that once bore some such Title, till you discarded
me, and left me to live upon my Wits.



What, and are you no Polish Embassadour then incognito?



No, Sir, nor you no King Elect, but must e'en remain as you were ever,
Sir, a most seditious pestilent old Knave; one that deludes the Rabble with your Po∣liticks,
then leave 'em to be hang'd, as they deserve, for silly mutinous Rebels.



I'll peach the Rogue, and then he'll be hang'd in course, because he's a
Tory. One comfort is, I have couzen'd him of his rich Heiress; for I am married,
Sir, to Mrs. Charlot.



Rather Diana, Sir; I wish you Joy: See here's Charlot! I was not such a
Fool to trust such Blessings with the Wicked.



How Mrs. Dy Ladyfi'd! This is an excellent way of disposing an old
〈◊〉▪



How, have I married a Strumpet then?



You give your Nephews Mistriss, Sir, too coarse a name: 'Tis true, I lov'd
him, onely him, and was true to him.



Undone, undone! I shall ne'r make Guildhall-speech more; but he shall
hang for't, if there be ere a Witness to be had between this and Salamancha for
Money.



Do your worst, Sir; Witnesses are out of fashion now, Sir, thanks to your
Ignoramus Juries.



Then I'm resolv'd to dis-inherit him.



See, Sir, that's past your skill too, thanks to my last nights Ingenuity:
they're  sign'd, seal'd, and deliver'd in the presence of, &c.



Bear Witness, 'twas he that robb'd me last night.



We bear Witness, Sir, we know of no such matter we. I thank you for
that, Sir, wou'd you make Witnesses of Gentlemen?



No matter for that, I'll have him hang'd, nay drawn and quarter'd.



What, for obeying your Commands, and living on my Wits?



Nay, then 'tis a cleer case you can neither hang him nor blame him.



I'll propose fairly now, if you'll be generous and pardon all: I'll render your
Estate back during Life, and put the Writings in Sir Anthony Meriwill's and Sir Charles•
his hands. 
I have a Fortune here that will maintain me,
Without so much as wishing for your death.



This is but Reason.



With this Proviso, that he makes not use on't to promote any mischief
to the King and Government.








Hum, I'd as good quietly agree to't, as lose my Credit by making a noise.
 Well, Tom, I pardon all, and will be Friends.




See, my dear Creature, even this hard old man is mollifi'd at last into
good nature; yet you'll still be cruel.




No, your unwearied Love at last has vanquisht me. Here, be as happy as
a Wife can make ye One last look more, and then be gone fond Love.

Sighing and looking on Wilding, giving Sir Charles her hand.


Come, Sir, you must receive Diana too; she is a cheerful witty Girl, and
handsome, one that will be a Comfort to your Age, and bring no scandal home.
Live peaceably, and do not trouble your decrepid Age with business of State.
Let all things in their own due order move,
Let Caesar be the Kingdoms care and love:
Let the Hot-headed Mutineers petition,
And meddle in the Rights of Just Succession;
But may all honest hearts as one agree
To bless the King, and Royal Albanie.


