

A Table with Lights, Abdelazer sullenly leaning his head on his hands; after a little while, still Musick plays.



LOve in Phantastique Triumph sat,
Whilst Bleeding hearts about him flow'd,
For whom fresh pays he did create,
And strange Tyrannick pow'r he shew'd;
From thy bright Eyes he took his fires,
Which round about in sport he hurl'd;
But 'twas from mine he took desires,
Enough t' undoe the Amorous world.


From me he took his sighs and tears,
From thee his pride and cruelty;
From me his languishments and fears,
And ev'ry killing Dart from thee:
Thus thou, and I, the God have arm'd,
And set him up a Deity,
But my poor heart alone is harm'd,
Whilst thine the Victor is, and free.



  2After which he rouzes, and gazes.


ON me this Musick lost? this sound on me
That hates all softness? What ho, my Slaves!





My gracious Lord 





My dearest Abdelazer 



Oh, are you there? Ye Dogs, how came she in?
Did I not charge you on your lives to watch,
That none disturb my privacy?



My gentle Abdelazer, 'tis thy Queen,
Who 'as laid aside the bus'ness of her State,
To wanton in the hinder joys of Love. 
Play all your sweetest Notes, such as inspire
To the Musick; they play softly▪
The active Soul with new and soft desire,
Whilst we from Eyes thus dying, fan the fire.




Cease that ungrateful noise 




Can ought that I command displease my Moor?



Away, fond woman 



Nay, prithee be more kind. 



Nay, prithee good Queen, leave me, I am dull,
Unfit for dalliance now. 



Why dost thou frown? to whom was that Curse sent?







To me! it cannot be; to me, sweet Moor! 
No, no, it cannot; prithee smile upon me; 
Smile whilst a thousand Cupids shall descend
And call thee Iove, and wait upon thy smiles,
Deck thy smooth brow with flowers;
Whilst in my Eyes, needing no other Glass,
Thou shalt behold and wonder at thy beauty.



Away, away, be gone. 



Where hast thou learnt this language, that can say
But those rude words, Away, away, be gone?
Am I grown ugly now?



Ugly as Hell. 



Didst thou not love me once, and swore that Heav'n
Dwelt in my face and eyes?



Thy face and eye! Bawd, fetch me here a Glass,

And thou shalt see the balls of both those eyes
Burning with fire of Lust. 
That bloud that dances in thy Cheeks so hot,
That have not I to cool it

  3Made an extraction ev'n of my Soul,
Decay'd my Youth, only to feed thy Lust!
And wou'dst thou still pursue me to my Grave?



All this to me, my Abdelazer!




I cannot ride through the Castilian Streets,
But thousand eyes
Throw killing looks at me; 
And cry, That's he that does abuse our King; 
There goes the Minion of the Spanish Queen,
Who, on the lazie pleasures of his Love,
Spends the Revenues of the King of Spain: 
This many-headed-beast your Lust has arm'd,. 



How dare you, Sir, upbraid me with my Love?



I will not answer thee, nor hear thee speak.



Not hear me speak! Yes, and in thunder too;
Since all my passion, all my soft intreaties
Can do no good upon thee,
I'le see (since thou hast banisht all thy Love,
That Love, to which I've sacrific'd my Honour)
If thou hast any sence of Gratitude,
For all the mighty graces I have done thee.



Doe; and in thy story too, do not leave out
How dear those mighty graces I have purchas'd!
My blooming Youth, my healthful vigorous Youth,
Which Nature gave me for more Noble Actions
Then to lie fawning at a womans feet,
And pass my hours in idleness and Love. 
If I cou'd blush, I shou'd through all this Cloud
Send forth my sence of shame into my Cheeks.




Have I for this abus'd the best of men?
My noble Husband!
Depriving him of all the joys of Love,
To bring them all intirely to thy bed;
Neglected all my vows, and sworn 'em here a-new,
Here, on thy lips; 
Exhausted Treasures that wou'd purchase Crowns,
To buy thy smiles, to buy a gentle look; 
And when thou didst repay me, blest the Giver! 
Oh Abdelazer, more then this I've done. 
This very hour, the last the King can live,
Urg'd by thy witchcraft I his life betray'd:
And is it thus my bounties are repaid?
What e're a crime so great deserves from Heav'n,
By Abdelazer might have been forgiv'n. 
(weeps.


But I will be reveng'd by penitence,
And e're the King dies, own my black offence. 
And yet that's not enough Elvira 
(pawses.
Cry murder, murder, help, help. 

She and her woman cry aloud, he is sur∣priz'd, the Queen falls, he draws a Dagger at Elvira.



Help, murder, murder. 



Hell, what's this! peace Bawd, 'sdeath,
They'le raise the Court upon me, and then I'me lost. 
My Queen, my Goddess, Oh raise your lovely eyes,
I have dissembled coldness all this while;
And that deceit was but to try thy Faith. 
takes her up, sets her in a Chair, then kneels.
Look up, by Heav'n 'twas Jealousie, 
Pardon your Slave, pardon your poor Adorer.



Thou didst upbraid me with my shamefull passion.



I'le tear my tongue out for its profanation.



And when I woo'd thee, but to smile upon me,
Thou crydst, Away, I'me dull, unfit for dalliance.



Call back the frighted bloud into thy Cheeks,
And I'le obey the dictates of my Love,
And smile, and kiss, and dwell for ever here. 


How now! why star'st thou so? 


My Lord, the King is dead.



The King dead! 'twas time then to dissemble.
(aside.
What means this rudeness? 






My Lord, the Cardinal enquiring for the Queen,
The Court is in an uproar, none can find her.



Not find the Queen! and wou'd they search her here!



What shall I do? I must not here be found.



Oh, do not fear, no Cardinal enters here;
No King, no God, that means to be secure. 
Slaves, guard the doors, and suffer none to enter,
Whilst I, my charming Queen, provide for your security: 
You know there is a Vault deep under ground,
Into the which the busie Sun ne're entred,
Bue all is dark, as are the shades of Hell;
Through which in dead of night I oft have pass'd,
Guided by Love, to your Apartment, Madam. 
They knock agen; thither, my lovely Mistress,
(knock.
Suffer your self to be conducted. 

Osmin, attend the Queen, descend in haste,
Qu. Osm. and Elv. descend the Vault.
My Lodgings are beset.



I cannot guard the Lodgings longer,
Don Ordonio, Sir, to seek the Queen.



How dare they seek her here?



My Lord, the King has swounded twice,
And being recover'd, calls for her Majesty.



The King not dead! go Zarrack, and aloud
Tell Don Ordonio and the Cardinal,
He that dares enter here to seek the Queen,
Puts his hand to his sword.
Had better snatch the She from the fierce side
Of a young Amorous Lion, and 'twere safer. 
Again, more knocking! 




My gracious Lord, it is your Brother, Don Alonzo.




I will not have him enteer, I am disorder'd. 



My Lord, 'tis now too late.





Saw you not the Queen, my Lord?







Was not the Queen here with you?



The Queen with me!
Because, Sir, I am married to your Sister,
You, like your Sister, must be jealous too:
The Queen with me! with me! a Moor! a Devil!
A Slave of Barbary! for so
Your gay young Courtiers christen me: but Don,
Although my skin be black, within my veins
Runs bloud as red, and Royal as the best. 
Mr Father, Great Abdela, with his Life
Lost too his Crown: both most unjustly ravisht
By Tyrant Philip; your old King I mean.
How many wounds his valiant breast receiv'd,
Ere he wou'd yield to part with Life and Empire:
Methinks I see him cover'd o're with bloud,
Fainting amidst those numbers he had conquer'd;
I was but young, yet old enough to grieve,
Though not revenge, or to defie my Fetters;
For then began my Slavery: and e're since
Have seen that Diadem by this Tyrant worn,
Which Crown'd the Sacred Temples of my Father.
And shou'd adorn mine now; shou'd! nay and must; 
Go tell him what I say, 'twill be but death: 
Go Sir, the Queen's not here. 



Do not mistake me, Sir; or if I wou'd,
I've no old King to tell, the King is dead; 

  6And I am answer'd, Sir, to what I came for,
And so good night. 




Now all that's brave and Villain seize my soul,
Reform each faculty that is not Ill,
And make it fit for Vengeance; noble Vengeance!
Oh glorious word! fit only for the Gods,
For which they form'd their Thunder,
Till man usurpt their Power, and by Revenge
Swayed Destiny as well as they,
And took their trade of killing. 
And thou, almighty Love!
Dance in a thousand forms about my Person,
That this same Queen, this easie Spanish Dame
May be bewitcht and dote upon me still:
Whilst I make use of the Insatiate flame
To set all Spain on fire. 
Mischief, erect thy Throne,
And sit on high; here, here upon my head;
Let Fools fear Fate, thus I my Stars defie,
points to his Sword.
The influence of this must raise my glory high.










What dolefull cry was that, which like the voice
Of angry Heav'n struck through my trembling soul!
Nothing but horrid shrieks, nothing but death;
Whilst I, bowing my knees to the cold Earth,
Drowning my Cheeks in Rivulets of tears,
Sending up prayers in sighs t' implore from Heav'n
Health for the Royal Majesty of Spain, 
All, cry'd the Majesty of Spain, is dead.
Whilst the sad sound flew through the ecchoing Air,
And reacht my frighted soul Inform my fears,
Oh my Fernando, oh my gentle Son. 




Madam, read here the truth, if looks can shew
That which I cannot speak, and you wou'd know:
The common Fate, in ev'ry face appears;
A Kings great loss, the publique grief declares,
But 'tis a Fathers death that claims my tears.

Card. leads in the Qu. attended.





If you thus grieve, who ascend by what y'ave lost
To all the greatness that a King can boast;
What tributes from my eyes and heart are due,
Who've lost at once a King and Father too?



My Leonora, cannot think my grief
Can from those empty Glories find relief;
Nature within my soul has equal share,
And that and Love surmount my glory there.
Had Heav'n continu'd Royal Philips life,
And giv'n me bright Florella for a wife,
(bows to Flor.

To Crowns and Scepters I had made no claim,
But ow'd my blessings only to my flame.
But Heav'n well knew in giving thee away,
(to Flor.
I had no bus'ness for another joy. 
(weeps.
The King, Alonzo, with his dying breath,
turns to Alon. and Leon.

To you my beauteous Sister did bequeath;
And I his generotsiy approve,
And think you worthy Leonora's love.




Too gloriously my services are paid,
In the possession of this Royal Maid,
To whom my guilty heart durst ne're aspire,
But rather chose to languish in its fire.





I know he is not dead; what envious powers
Durst snatch him hence? he was all great and good,
As fit to be ador'd as they above.
Where is the body of my Royal Father?
That body which inspir'd by's sacred soul,
Aw'd all the Universe with ev'ry frown,
And taugh 'em all obedience with his smiles.
Why stand you thus distracted? Mother Brother 
My Lords Prince Cardinal 
Has sorrow struck you dumb?
Is this my welcome from the toyls of War?
When in his bosome I shou'd find repose,
To meet it cold and pale! Oh guide me to him,
And with my sighs I'le breath new life into't.




There's all that's left of Royal Philip now,
Pay all thy sorrow there; whilst mine alone
Are swoln too high t' admit of lookers on.








His soul is flew to all Eternity:
And yet methought it did inform his body
That I, his darling Philip was arriv'd
With Conquest on my Sword; and even in death
Sent me his Joy in smiles.



If souls can after death have any sense
Of humane things, his will be proud to know
That Philip is a Conquerour. 
(Enter Abdelazer.
But do not drown thy Lawrels thus in tears,
Such tributes leave to us, thou art a Souldier.



Gods! this shou'd be my Mother. 



It is, Great Sir, the Queen.



Oh she's too foul for one or t'other title.



How Sir, do you not know me?



When you were just, I did, 
And with a reverence such as we pay Heav'n,
I paid my awfull duty; 
But as you have abus'd my Royal Father,
For such a sin the basest of your Slaves
Wou'd blush to call you Mother.



What means my Son?



Son! by Heav'n I scorn the title.



Oh insolence! out of my sight, rude Boy.



We must not part so, Madam;
I first must let you know your sin and shame: 
Nay, hear me calmly, for by Heav'n you shall. 
My Father whilst he liv'd, tir'd his strong Arm
With numerous Battels 'gainst the Enemy,
Wasting his brains in Warlike stratagems,
To bring confusion on the faithless Moors,
Whilst you, lull'd in soft peace at home, betray'd
His name to everlasting Infamy;
Suffer'd his Bed to be defil'd with Lust,
Gave up your self, your honour, and your vows,
To wanton in yon Sooty Leacher's arms.




Me dost thou mean!



Yes, Villain, thee, thou Hell-begotten Fiend,
'Tis thee I mean.



Oh most unnatural to dishonour me!



That Dog you mean, that has dishonour'd you,
Dishonour'd me, these Lords, nay and all Spain;

This Devil's he, that 



That what? Oh pardon me if I throw off
All tyes of Duty: wert thou ten Kings Sons,
And I as many souls as I have sins,
Thus I wou'd hazard all 

draws, they all run between.


Stand off, or I'le make way upon thy
Bosome. 



How got you, Sir, this daring? 



From injur'd Philips death,
Who, whilst he liv'd, unjustly cherisht thee,
And set thee up beyond the reach of Fate;
Blind with thy brutal valour, deaf with thy flatteries,
Discover'd not the Treasons thou didst act,
Nor none durst let him know 'em: but did he live,
I wou'd aloud proclaim them in his ears.



You durst as well been damn'd. 



Hell seize me if I want revenge for this, 
Not dare!
Arise thou injur'd Ghost of my dead King,
And through thy dreadfull paleness dart a horrour,
May fright this pair of Vipers from their sins.



Oh insupportable! dost hear me Boy!



Are ye all mute, and hear me thus upbraided?




Dare ye detain me, whilst the Traytor braves me?



Forbear, my Prince, keep in that noble heat,
That shou'd be better us'd then on a Slave.



You politick Cheat 





By the Authority of my Government,
Which yet I hold over the King of Spain,

By warrant from a Councel of the Peers,
And (as an Unbeliever) from the Church,
I utterly deprive thee of that Greatness,
Those Offices and Trusts you hold in Spain.




Cardinal, who lent thee this Commission?
Grandees of Spain, do you consent to this?







What reason for it? let his Faith be try'd.



It needs no tryal, the proofs are evident,
And his Religion was his veil for Treason.



Why should you question his Religion, Sir?
He does profess Christianity.



Yes, witness his habit, which he still retains
In scorn to ours. 
His Principles too are as unalterable.



Is that the only Argument you bring? 

  10I tell thee, Cardinal, not thy Holy Gown
Covers a soul more sanctify'd
Than this Moorish Robe.



Damn his Religion, he has a thousand crimes
That will yet better justifie your sentence.



Come not within the Court, for if you do,
Worse mischief shall ensue: you have your sentence.

(Ex. Phil. & Men.


My Brother banisht! 'tis very sudden;
For thy sake, Sister, this must be recall'd.





Alonzo, joyn with me, I'le to the King,
And check the pride of this insulting Cardinal.






Banisht! if I digest this gall,
May Cowards pluck the wreath from off my brow,
Which I have purchas'd with so many wounds,
And all for Spain; for Spain! ingrateful Spain! 
Oh my Florella, all my Glory's vanisht,
The Cardinal (Oh damn him!) wou'd have me banisht.



But Sir, I hope you will not tamely go.



Tamely! ha, ha, ha, yes by all means;
A very honest and Religious Cardinal!



I wou'd not for the world you shou'd be banisht.



Not Spain you mean; for then she leaves the King.
(aside.
What if I be? Fools! not to know All parts oth' world
Allow enough for Villanie, for I'le be brave no more.
It is a crime, and then I can live any where. 
But say I go from hence; I leave behind me
A Cardinal that will laugh; I leave behind me
A Philip that will clap his hands in sport: 
But the worst wound is this, I leave my wrongs,
Dishonours, and my Discontents, all unreveng'd. 
Leave me, Florella, prithee do not weep;
I love thee, love thee wondrously; go, leave me, 
I am not now at leisure to be fond; 
Go to your Chamber, go. 



No, to the King I'le fly,
And beg him to revenge thy Infamy.






The Cardinal's made to have thee banisht Spain;

I've left the Queen in angry contradiction,
But yet I fear the Cardinal's reasoning.



This Prince's hate proceeds from Love,
He's jealous of the Queen, and fears my power.




Come, rouze thy wonted spirits, awake thy soul,
And arm thy Justice with a brave Revenge.




I'le arm no Justice with a brave Revenge.



Shall they then triumph o're thee, who were once
Proud to attend thy Conqu'ring Chariot wheels?



I care not; I am a Dog, and can bear wrongs.



But Sir, my Honour is concern'd with yours,
Since my lov'd Sister did become your Wife;
And if yours suffer, mine too is unsafe.



I cannot help it. 



What Ice has chil'd thy bloud?
This patience was not wont to dwell with thee.



'Tis true, but now the world is chang'd you see;
Thou art too brave to know what I resolve: 
(aside.
No more, here comes the King with my Florella.

He loves her, and she swears to me she's chast;
'Tis well, if true; well too, if it be false:
I care not, 'tis Revenge 
That I must sacrifice my love and pleasure to.


Alon. and Abd. stand aside.




Thou woo'st me to reverse thy Husbands doom,
And I wooe thee, for mercy on my self;
Why shou'dst thou sue to him for life and liberty
For any other, who himself lies dying,
Imploring from thy eyes a little pity.



Oh mighty King! in whose sole power, like Heav'n,
The lives and safeties of your Slaves remain,
Hear and redress my Abdelazer's wrongs.



All lives and safeties in my power remain!
Mistaken charming creature, if my power
Be such, who kneel and bow to thee,
What must thine be,
Who hast the Soveraign command o're me and it.
Wou'dst thou give life? turn but thy lovely eyes
Upon the wretched thing that wants it,
And he will surely live, and live for ever.
Canst thou do this, and com'st to beg of me?



Alas Sir, what I beg's what you alone can give,
My Abdelazer's pardon



Pardon! can any thing ally'd to thee offend?
Thou art so sacred and so innocent,
That but to know thee, and to look on thee,
Must change even vice to virtue.
Oh my Florella!

So perfectly thou dost possess my soul,
That ev'ry wish of thine shall be obey'd:
Say, wou'dst thou have thy Husband share my Crown?
Do but submit to love me, and I yield it.



Such love as humble Subjects owe their King,
kneels, he takes her up.
And such as I dare pay, I offer here.



I must confess it is a price too glorious:
But my Florella 



I'le interrupt your amorous discourse.



Abd. comes up to them.


Sir, Abdelazer's here 



His presence never was less welcome to me; 
(aside.
But Madam, durst the Cardinal use this insolence?
Where is your Noble Husband?



He sees me, yet enquires for me.




Sir, my Lord is here 




Abdelazer, I have heard with much surprize
Oth' injuries y'ave receiv'd, and mean to right you:
My Father lov'd you well, made you his General,
I think you worthy of that Honour still.



True, for my Wifes sake 




When my Coronation is solemnized,
Be present there, and reassume your wonted State and place;
And see how I will check the Insolent Cardinal.



I humbly thank my Soveraign 
kneels and kisses the Kings hand
That he loves my Wife so well. 







Wilt thou not pay my service with one smile?
Have I not acted well the Suppliants part?



Oh wonderfully! y'ave learnt the art to move;
Go, leave me. 



Still out of humour, thoughtful, and displeas'd!
And why at me, my Abdelazer, what have I done?



Rarely! you cannot do amiss you are so beautiful,
So very fair! Go, get you in, I say. 
(turns her in ruffly.
She has the art of dallying with my soul,
Teaching it lazie softness from her looks. 
But now a nobler passion's enter'd there,
And blows it thus, to Air. Idol Ambition,

  13Florella must to thee a Victim fall:
Revenge, to thee a Cardinal and Prince:
And to my Love and Jealousie, a King. 
More yet, my mighty Deities, I'le do,
None that you e're inspir'd like me shall act;
That fawning servile crew shall follow next,
Who with the Cardinal cry'd banish Abdelazer:

Like Eastern Monarchs I'le adorn thy Fate,
And to the shades thou shalt descend in state.









Alonzo, Roderigo, Ordonio, Sebastian, Antonio, Officers and
Guards; met by Abdelazer, follow'd by Osmin, Zarrack, and Moors
attending. He comes in with Pride, staring on Philip and Mendozo, and takes his stand next the King.


WHy stares the Devil thus, as if he meant
From his infectious eyes to scatter Plagues,
And poison all the world; was he not banisht? 
How dares the Traytor venture into th' Presence? 
Guards, spurn the Villain forth.



Who spurns the Moor
Were better set his foot upon the Devil! 
Do, spurn me; and this hand thus justly arm'd,
Shall like a Thunder-bolt, breaking the Clouds,
Divide his body from his soul; stand back! 
(to the Guards.
Spurn Abdelazer! 



Death, shall we bear this Insolence!



Great Sir, I think his Sentence was unjust.




Sir, you're too partial to be Judge in this,
And shall not give your Voice.



Proud Cardinal, but he shall, and give it loud,
And who shall hinder him? 



This, and cut his Wind-pipe too,
(offers to draw.
To spoil his whisp'ring.


Abd. offers to draw, his Attend, do the same.


What means this violence?
Forbear to draw your Swords, 'tis we command.



Sir, do me Justice, I demand no more,
kneels, and offers his Sword.
And at your feet we lay our weapons down.



Sir, Abdelazer has had Justice done,
And stands by me banisht the Court of Spain.





From whence do you derive Authority
To banish him the Court without our leave?



Sir, from my care unto your Royal Person,
As I'me your Governour; then, for the Kingdoms safety.



Because I was a Boy, must I be still so?
Time, Sir, has given me in that formal Ceremony,
And I am of an age to Rule alone;
And from henceforth, discharge you of your care.
We know your near relation to this Crown,
And wanting Heirs, that you must fill the Throne,
Till when, Sir, I am absolute Monarch here, 
And you must learn obedience.



Pardon my zealous duty, which I hope
You will approve, and not recall his Banishment.



Sir, but I will; and who dares contradict it, is a Traytor.



I dare the first, yet do defie the last.



My hot-brain'd Sir, I'le talk to you anon.



Sir, I am wrong'd, and will Appeal to Rome.




By Heav'n I'le to the Camp; Brother, farewell,
When next I meet thee, it shall be in Arms;
If thou canst get loose from thy Mistress Chains,
Where thou ly'st drown'd in idle wanton Love.



Hah! his Mistress! who is't Prince Philip means?



Thy wife! thy wife! proud Moor, whom thou'rt content
To sell (for Honour) to eternal Infamy. 
Does't make thee snarle! bite on, whilst thou shalt see,
I go for Vengeance, and 'twill come with me.

(going out, turns and draws.


Stay! for 'tis here already; turn, proud Boy.




What mean you, Philip? 

(talks to him aside.


Cease! cease your most impolitick Rage! 
(to Abd.
Is this a time to shew't? Dear Son, you are a King,
And may allay this Tempest.



How dare you disobey my will and pleasure?




Shall I be calm, and hear my wife call'd Whore?
Were he great Iove, and arm'd with all his Lightning,
By Heav'n I could not hold my just Resentment.

King talking to Phil. aside.


'Twas in his passion, noble Abdelazer: 
Imprudently thou dost disarm thy Rage,
And giv'st the Foe a warning, e're thou strik'st;
When with thy smiles thou might'st securely kill, 

  15You know the Passion that the Cardinal bears me,
His power too o're Philip, which well manag'd
Will serve to ruine both; put up your Sword, 
When next you draw it, teach it how to act.



You shame me, and command me.



Why all this Rage? does it become you, Sir?
to Men. aside.
What is't you mean to do?



You need not care, whilst Abdelazer's safe.



Jealousie upon my life; how gay it looks.



Madam, you want that pitying regard
To value what I do, or what I am;
I'le therefore lay my Cardinals Hat aside,
And in bright Arms, demand my Honour back.



Is't thus, my Lord, you give me proofs of Love?
Have then my eyes lost all their wonted power?
And can you quit the hope of gaining me,
To follow your Revenge? go, go to fight,
Bear Arms against your Country, and your King,
All for a little worthless Honour lost.



What is it, Madam, you would have me do?



Not side with Philip, as you hope my Grace. 
Now Sir, you know my pleasure, think on't well.



Madam, you know your Power o're your Slave,
And use it too tyrannically; but dispose
The Fate of him, whose Honour, and whose Life,
Lies at your mercy; 
I'le stay and dye, since 'tis your gracious pleasure.




Philip, upon your life,
Upon your strict Allegiance, I conjure you
To remain at Court, till I have reconcil'd you.




Nor can you bend my temper to that tameness.



'Tis in my power to charge you as a Prisoner;
But you're my Brother: yet remember too
I am your King. No more. 








I beg you will forget your cause of hate
Against my Brother Philip, and the Cardinal;
He's young, and rash, but will be better temper'd.



Sir, I have done, and beg your Royal pardon,



Come Philip, give him your hand.



I can forgive without a Ceremony.



And to confirm ye Friends,
I invite you all to Night to Banquet with me,


Pray see you give Attendance: Come Brother,
You must along with us.





(To the Women, who Ex.
Now my dear Moor 







Why dost thou answer with that cold Reserve? 
Is that a look, an action for a Lover?







Have I not taken off thy Banishment?
Restor'd thee to thy former state and honours?
Nay, and heapt new ones too, too mighty for thy hopes;
And still to raise thee equal to this heart,
Where thou must ever Reign.



'Tis true, my bounteous Mistress, all this you've done, 
But 



But what, my Abdelazer.




I will not call it to your memory.



What canst thou mean?



Why was the King remov'd?



To make thy way more easie to my arms.











Not but it is a blessing, Gods would languish for; 
But as you've made it free, so make it just.



Thou meanst, and marry thee.



No, by the Gods! 
(aside.
Not marry me, unless I were a King.



What signifies the Name, to him that Rules one?



What use has he of life, that cannot live
Wihout a Ruler?



Thou wouldst not have me kill him.



Oh by no means, not for my wretched life!
What, kill a King! forbid it Heav'n!
Angels stand like his Guards, about his Person.
The King!
Not for so many Worlds as there be Stars
Twinkling upon the embroider'd Firmament!
The King!
He loves my wife Florella, shou'd he dye 
I know none else durst love her.



And that's the reason you wou'd send him hence.



I must confess, I wou'd not bear a wrong,
But do not take me for a Villain, Madam;
He is my King, and may do what he pleases.







Again that frown, it renders thee more charming,
Than any other Dress thou cou'dst put on.



Away, you do not love me.



Now mayst thou hate me, if this be not pretty.



Oh you can flatter finely 



Not I, by Heav'n!
Oh that this head were circled in a Crown,
And I were King, by Fortune, as by Birth!
And that I was, till by thy Husband's power
I was divested in my Infancy. 
Then you shou'd see, I do not flatter ye.
But I, instead of that, must see my Crown
Bandy'd from head to head, and tamely see it;
And in this wretched state I live, 'tis true,
But with what joy, you, if you lov'd, might guess.



We need no Crowns; Love best contented is
In shadie Groves, and humble Cottages,
Where when 'twou'd sport, it safely may Retreat,
Free from the noise, and danger of the Great;
Where Victors are ambitious of no Bays,
But what their Nymphs bestow on Holy-days;
Nor Envy, can the amorous Shepherd move,
Unless against a Rival in his love.



Love and Ambition, are the same to me,
In either, I'le no Rivals brook.




And when the King you urge me to remove,
It may be from Ambition, not from Love.



Those scruples did not in your bosom dwell,
When you a King, did in a Husband kill.



How Sir! dare you upbraid me with that sin,
To which your Perjuries first drew me in?



You interrupt my sense, I only meant
A sacrifice, to Love, so well begun,
Shou'd not Devotion want to finish it;
And if that stop to all our joys were gon,
The envying world wou'd to our Power submit:
But Kings are Sacred, and the Gods alone
Their Crimes must judge, and punish too, or none. 
Yet he alone destroys our happiness.



There's yet one more 



One more! give me his name,
And I will turn it to a Magick Spell,
To bind him ever fast.








Florella! Oh I cou'd gnaw my Chains,
That humble me so low as to adore her:
But the fond blaze must out, whilst I erect
aside.
A nobler fire more fit for my Ambition.
 Florella, dies, a Victim to your will.
I will not let you lose one single wish,
For a poor life, or two;
Though I must see my Glories made a prey,
And not demand 'em from the Ravisher,
Nor yet complain, because he is my King!
But Philip's brow, no Sacred Oyntment Deifies,
If he do wrong, stands fair for the Revenger.




Philip! instruct me how t' undoe that Boy I hate;
The publick Infamy I have receiv'd,
I will Revenge, with nothing less than death.



'Tis well we can agree in our Resentments,
For I have vow'd he shall not live a day,
He has an art to pry into our secrets:
To all besides, our love is either hid,
Or else they dare not see; but this Prince
Has a most dangerous spirit must be calm'd.



I have resolv'd his death,
And now have waiting in my Cabinet
Engines to carry on this mighty work of my Revenge.



Leave that to me, who equally am injur'd;
You, like the Gods! need only but command,
And I will execute your sacred will. 
That done, there's none dare whisper what we do.



Nature be gone, I chase thee from my soul,
Who Love's Almighty Empire does controul;
And she that will to thy dull Laws submit,
In spight of thee, betrays the Hypocrite.
No rigid Virtue shall my soul possess,
Let Gown-men preach against the wickedness;
Pleasures were made by Gods! and meant for us,
And not t' enjoy 'em, were ridiculous.



Oh perfect, great and glorious of thy Sex!
Like thy great self 'twas spoke, resolv'd and brave! 
I must attend the King; where I will watch
All Philip's motions 



And after that if you will beg admittance,
I'le give you leave to visit me to night.



Madam, that blessing now must be deferr'd;
My wrongs and I will be retir'd to Night,
And bring forth Vengeance, with the Mornings light.

leads her to the door.




My gracious Lord 



Come near and take a secret from my lips;
And he who keeps not silence, hears his death. 
This night the Prince, and Cardinal do you mark me 
Are murder'd!







Here in the Court.



By whom, Great Sir!



By thee! I know thou dar'st. 







Good! then see it be perform'd.
 Osmin, how goes the Night?



About the hour of Eight,
And you're expected at the Banquet, Sir:
Prince Philip storms, and swears you're with the Queen.



Let him storm on! the Tempest will be laid; 
Where's my Wife? 



In the Presence, Sir, with the Princess and other Ladies.



She's wondrous forward! what the King 
(I am not jealous tho') but he makes Court to her;
 hah, Osmin!

He throws out love from Eyes all languishing; 
Come tell me, he does sigh to her; no matter if he do: 
And fawns upon her hand, and kneels; tell me, Slave!



Sir, I saw nothing like to Love; he only treats her
Equal to her Quality.



Oh damn her Quality!



I came just now,
From waiting on his Person to the Banquet,
And heard him ask, if he might visit her to night,
Having something to impart to her, that concern'd his life.



And so it shall, by Heav'n!




But she deny'd, and he the more intreated, 
But all in vain, Sir.



Go Osmin, (you the Captain of my Guard of Moors)
Chuse out the best affected Officers,
To keep the Watch to night: 
Let every Guard be doubled; you may be liberal too, 
And when I give the word, be ready all. 



What shall the word be?





Why Treason: mean time make it your bus'ness,
To watch the Prince's coming from the Banquet;

  20Heated with Wine, and fearless of his Person,
You'l find him easily to be attaqu'd.



Sir, do not doubt my management nor success.





So, I thank thee Nature, that in making me
Thou didst design me Villain!
Fitting each faculty for Active mischief: 
Thou skilful Artist, thank thee for my face,
It will discover nought that's hid within. 
Thus arm'd for ills,
Darkness! and Horrour! I invoke your aid;
And thou, dread Night! shade all your busie Stars
In blackest Clouds,
And let my Daggers brightness only serve
To guide me to the mark, and guide it so,
It may undoe a Kingdom at one blow.








My Lords you're sad to night; give us loud Musick, 
I have a double cause to mourn;
And grief has taken up its dwelling here, 
Beyond the art of Love, or Wine to conquer. 
'Tis true, my Father's dead, and possibly
'Tis not so decent to appear thus gay;
But life, and death, are equal to the wretched, 
And whilst Florella frowns, 'tis in that number
(to Flor.
I must account her Slave. Alonzo,

How came thy Father so bewitch'd to Valour,
(For Abdelazer has no other Virtue)
To recompence it with so fair a Creature?
Was this a Treasure t' inrich the Devil with?



Sir, he has many Virtues, more than Courage,
Royally born, serv'd well this King, and Country;
My Father brought him up to Martial toyls,
And taught him to be Brave; I hope, and Good; 
Beside, he was your Royal Father's Favourite.



No, Alonzo, 'twas not his love to Virtue,
But nice obedience to his King, and Master,
Who seeing my increase of Passion for her,
To kill my hopes, he gave her to this Moor.



She's now a virtuous woman, Sir.



Politique Sir, who would have made her other? 
Against her will, he forc'd her to his arms,
Whilst all the world was wondring at his madness.



He did it with her Approbation, Sir.



With thine, Florella! cou'dst thou be so criminal!



Sir, I was ever taught Obedience;
My humble thoughts durst ne're aspire to you,
And next to that death, or the Moor, or any thing.



Oh God! had I then told my tale
So feebly, it could not gain belief!
Oh my Florella! this little faith of thine
Has quite undone thy King! Alonzo,

Why didst not thou forbid this fatal Marriage,
She being thy only Sister?



Great Sir, I did oppose it, with what violence
My duty would permit; and wou'd have dy'd
In a just quarrel, of her dear defence:
And Sir, though I submitted to my Father,
The Moor, and I, stand on unequal terms.



Come, who dares drink Confusion to this Moor?



That, Sir, will I.







Page, fill my Glass, I will begin the Round;
Ye all shall pledge it; Alonzo, first to thee.








Why yes; thou lovest him, therefore 
Nay you shall drink it, though 'twere oth' Stygian Lake: 
Take it, by Heav'n thou'dst Pimp for him to my Mother, 
Nay and after that, give him another Sister.



'Tis well you are my Prince.



I'de rather be a Prince of Curs; come, pledge me 



Well Sir, I'le give you way 




So wou'dst thou any, though they trod on thee.
So nay Prince Cardinal, though it be not decent
For one so sanctify'd to drink a Health;
Yet 'tis your Office, both to damn and bless: 
Come, drink and damn the Moor.



Sir, I'm for no carousing.



I'm in an humour now to be obey'd,
And must not be deny'd: but see, the Moor
(Enter Abdelazer, gazes on them.
Just come to pledge at last, Page, fill again 



I'le do you reason, Prince, whate're it be.

(gives him the Glass.


'Twas kindly said; Confusion to the Moor.



Confusion to the Moor if this vain Boy,
See the next rising Sun.



Well done my Lad. 




Abdelazer, you have been missing long,
The Publique good takes up your whole concern,
But we shall shortly ease you of that load. 
Come, let's have some Musick; 
Ordonio, did I not call for Musick?












My gracious Lord. 

(Roderigo whispers to Abd.


No more, the Prince observes us.



There's no good towards when you are whisp'ring.



The Musick you commanded, Sir, is ready.





MAke haste Amintas, come away,
The Sun is up and will not stay,
And oh how very short's a Lovers day.
Make haste Amintas, to this Grove,
Beneath whose shade so oft I've sat,
And heard my dear lov'd Swain repeat,
How much he Galatea lov'd;
Whilst all the listening Birds around,
Sung to the Musick of the blessed sound.
Make haste Amintas, come away,
The Sun is up and will not stay,
And oh how very short's a Lovers day.

Swain enters, with Shepherds and Shepherdesses, and Pipes.
I hear thy charming voice, my Fair,
And see bright Nymph, thy Swain is here;
Who his devotions had much earlier paid,
But that a Lamb of thine was stray'd:
And I the little wanderer have brought,
That with one angry look from thy fair eyes,
Thou mayst the little Fugitive chastise;
Too great a punishment for any fault.
Come Galatea, haste away,
The Sun is up and will not stay,
And oh how very short's a Lovers day.
Dance.



How likes Florella this?



Sir, all delight's so banisht from my soul,
I've lost the taste of every single joy.



Gods! this is fine! give me your Art of flattery,
Or something more of this, will ruine me. 
Though I've resolv'd her death, yet whilst she's mine,
I would not have her blown by Summer Flyes.



Mark how he snarles upon the King!
The Cur will bite anon.



Come my Florella, is't not Bed-time, Love?



I'le wait upon you, Sir.




The Moor has ta'en away, we may depart.



What has he ta'en away?




The fine gay play-thing, that made us all so merry.



Was this your sport?





Abdelazer, keep your way: Good night, fair Oreature!



I will obey, for once.




Why this Resentment, Brother, and in publick?



Because he gives me cause, and that in publick.
And Sir, I was not born to bear with Insolence;
I saw him dart Revenge, from both his Eyes,
And bite his angry Lip between his teeth,
To keep his Jealousie from breaking forth;
Which when it does, stand fast my King.



But Philip, we will find a way to check him;
Till when we must dissemble; take my counsel, Good night.



I cannot, nor I will not; yet Good night.
Exit King, and all but Phil. Party
Well Friends, I see the King will sleep away his anger,
And tamely see us murder'd by this Moor;
But I'le be Active, Boys. 
Therefore Antonio, you Command the Horse;
Get what more numbers to our Cause you can:
'Tis a good Cause, and will advance our credit.
We will awake this King, out of his Lethargy of Love,
And make him absolute: Go to your Charge,
And early in the morning I'le be with you. 
(Ex. all but Phil.

If all fail, Portugal shall be my Refuge,
Those whom so late I Conquer'd, shall Protect me. 
But this Alonzo, I shou'd make an Interest in;
Cou'd I but flatter, 'tis a Youth that's Brave.




Fly, fly, my Prince, we are betray'd and lost else.



Betray'd and lost! Dreams, idle Coward dreams.



Sir, by my Holy Order, I'm in earnest,
And you must either quickly fly, or dye;
'Tis so ordain'd: nor have I time to tell
By what strange miracle I learnt our Fate.



Nor care I, I will stay, and Brave it.



That Sir you shall not, there's no safety here,
And 'tis the Army only can secure us.



Where had you this Intelligence?



I'le tell you as we go to my Apartment;
Where we must put our selves in Holy dress,
For so the Guards are set in every place,
(And those all Moors, the Slaves of Abdelazer)
That 'tis impossible in any other Habit to escape.
Come, haste with me, and let us put 'em on.



I'de rather stay and kill, till I am weary; 
Let's to the Queens Apartment, and seize this Moor;
I am sure there the Mongrel's Kennell'd.



Sir, we lose time in talking, come with me.



Where be these Lowsie Gaberdines?



I will conduct you to 'em.



Mother, and Moor Farewell, 
I'le visit you again, and if I do,
My black Infernal, I will Conjure you.













OSmin (my Lord) by this has done his task,
And Philip is no more among the living. 
Will you not rest to Night?



Is this a time for sleep and idleness? dull Slaves 



The bus'ness we have order, Sir, to doe,
We can without your aid.






Thy ominous looks presage an ill success;
Thy Eyes no joyful news of Murders tell:

  25I thought I should have seen thee drest in bloud; 
Speak! Speak thy News! 
Say that he lives, and let it be thy last. 



Yes Sir, he lives 



Lives! thou ly'st, base Coward, lives! renounce thy Gods!
It were a sin less dangerous! speak again.











Not by my fault, by Heav'n!



By what curst chance,
If not from thee, could he evade his Fate?



By some intelligence from his good Angel.



From his good Devil!
Gods! must the Earth another day at once
Bear him and me alive!



Another day! an Age for ought I know;
For Sir, the Prince is fled, the Cardinal too.



Fled! Fled! sayst thou?
Oh I cou'd curse the Stars, that rule this Night:
'Tis to the Camp they're fled; the only refuge
That Gods, or men cou'd give 'em. 
Where got you this intelligence?



My Lord, enquiring for the Prince
At the Apartment of the Cardinal, (whither he went)
His Pages answer'd me, he was at his Devotions:
A lucky time (I thought) to do the deed;
And breaking in, found only their empty Habits,
And a poor sleeping Groom, who with much threatning,
Confess'd that they were fled, in Holy Robes.



That case of Sanctity was first ordain'd,
To cheat the honest world:
'Twas an unlucky chance; but we are idle. 
Let's see, how from this ill, we may advance a good: 
(pawses:
'Tis now dead time of Night, when Rapes, and Murders,
Are hid beneath the horrid Veil of darkness; 
I'le ring through all the Court, with doleful sound,
The sad alarms of Murder, Murder. Zarrack,

Take up thy standing yonder; Osmin, thou
At the Queens Apartment; cry out, Murder!
Whilst I, like his ill Genius, do awake the King.
Perhaps in this disorder I may kill him.
(aside.
 Treason Murder Murder Treason.




What dismal crys are these? 



Where is the King? Treason! Murder! 
Where is the sleeping Queen? arise! arise!



The Devil taught him all his arts of falshood.


Enter King in a Night-Gown, with Lights.


Who frights our quiet slumbers with this noise?




Was it a dream, or did I hear the sound
Of Treason, call me from my silent griefs?



Who rais'd this rumour, Abdelazer, you?



I did, Great Sir.







Oh Sir, your Brother Philip, and the Cardinal,
Both animated by a sense of wrongs,
(And envying, Sir, the fortune of your Slave)
Had laid a Plot, this Night, to murder you;
And 'cause they knew it was my waiting Night,
They would have laid the Treason, Sir, on me.



The Cardinal, and my Brother! bring them forth,
Their lives shall answer it.




For when they found their Villany discover'd,
They in two Friers Habits made escape.



That Cardinal is subtle, as Ambitious,
And from him Philip learnt his dangerous Principles.



The Ambition of the one, infects the other,
And they are both too dangerous to live. 
But might a Mothers counsel be obey'd,
I wou'd advise you, send the valiant Moor
To fetch 'em back, e're they can reach the Camp:
For thither they are fled, where they will find
A welcome fatal to us all.



Madam, you counsel well; and Abdelazer,

Make it your care to fetch these Traytors back,
Not only for my safety, and the Kingdoms,
But for they are your Enemies; and th' envious world
Will say, you made this story to undoe 'em.



Sir, I'le obey; nor will I know repose,
Till I have justify'd this fatal truth.

(Abd. goes to the Queen, and talks to her.


Mean time I will to my Florella's Lodging,
aside.
Silence, and Night, are the best Advocates
To plead a Lover's cause. Abdelazer, haste.
Madam, I'le wait on you to your Chamber.



Sir, that's my duty.



Madam, good night; Alonzo, to your rest.

(Ex. all but Qu. and Abd.





Oh that I were upon some Desart shore,
Where I might only to the waves and winds
Breath out my sense of Rage for this defeat.



Oh 'tis no time for Rage, but Action, Madam.



Give me but any hopes of blest Revenge,
And I will be as calm, as happy Lovers.



There is a way! and is but that alone;
But such a way, as never must be nam'd.



How! not be nam'd! Oh swear thou hat'st me rather,
It were a torment equal to thy silence.



I'le shew my passion rather in that silence.



Kind Torturer, what mean'st thou?



To shew you, Madam, I had rather live
Wrong'd and contemn'd by Philip,

Than have your dearer Name made Infamous.



Heav'ns! dost thou mock my Rage! can any sin
I cou'd commit, undoe my Honour more
Than his late Insolence!
Oh name me something may revenge that shame!
I wou'd encounter killing Plagues, or fire
To meet it. Come, oh quickly give me ease.



I dare no more reveal the guilty secret,
Then you dare execute it when 'tis told.



How little I am understood by thee: 
Come, tell me instantly, for I grow impatient;
You shall obey me, nay I do command you.



Durst you proclaim Philip a Bastard, Madam.



Hah! proclaim my self what he wou'd have me thought!
What mean'st thou? 



Instruct you in the way to your Revenge.



Upon my self, thou mean'st. 




He's now fled to th' Camp, where he'l be fortify'd
Beyond our power to hurt, but by this means;
Which takes away his hopes of being a King,
(For he'd no other aim in taking Arms)
And leaves him open to the Peoples scorn;
Whom own'd as King, numbers would assist him,
And then our lives he may dispose,
As he has done our Honours.



There's reason in thy words but oh my Fame



Which I, by Heav'n, am much more tender on,
Then my own life or Honour; and I've a way
To save that too, which I'le at leisure tell you.
In the mean time, send for your Confessor,
And with a borrow'd penitence confess,
Their Idol Philip is a Bastard;
And zealously pretend you're urg'd by Conscience:
A cheap pretence to cozen fools withall.



Revenge, although I court thee with my fatal ruine,
I must enjoy thee! there's no other way,
And I'm resolv'd upon the mighty pleasure;
He has prophan'd my purer flame for thee,
And merits to partake the Infamy. 

(he leads her out.


Now have at my young King: 
I know he means to Cuckold me to night,
Whilst he believes, I'le tamely step aside, 
No, let Philip and the Cardinal gain the Camp,
I will not hinder 'em: 
I have a nobler Sacrifice to make
To my declining Honour; shall redeem it,
And pay it back with Interest: well, then in order to't,
I'le watch about the Lodgings of Florella,

And if I see this hot young Lover enter,
I'le save my Wife the trouble of allaying
The Amorous heat: this will more nimbly do't,
Snatches out his Dagger.
And do it once for all. 




My Abdelazer, why in that fierce posture,
As if thy thoughts were always bent on Death: 
Why is that Dagger out? against whom drawn?



Or stay, suppose I let him see Florella,

And when he's high with the expected bliss,
Then take him thus, Oh 'twere a fine surprize!



My Lord, dear Abdelazer 



Or say I made her kill him, that were yet
An action much more worthy of my vengeance.



Will you not speak to me? what have I done?



By Heaven it shall be so. 



What shall be so? 







Why dost thou dress thy Eyes in such unusual wonder?
There's nothing here that is a stranger to thee;
Or what is not intirely thine own.







Thou canst not doubt it.



No, and for a proof thou art so, take this Dagger.



Alas, Sir! what to do?



To stab a heart, Florella, a heart that loves thee. 







No matter what Heaven will, I say it must 







That Dagger must enter the heart of him
That loves thee best, Florella; guess the man.



What means my Moor? 
Wouldst thou have me kill thy self?



Yes, when I love thee better then the King.



Ah Sir! what mean you?



To have you kill this King,
When next he does pursue thee with his love; 
What do you weep? 
By Heav'n they shall be bloudy tears then. 



I shall deserve them, when I suffer love
That is not fit to hear; but for the King,
That which he pays me, is so innocent 



So innocent! damn thy dissembling tongue;
Did I not see, with what fierce wishing Eyes
He gaz'd upon thy face, whilst yours as wantonly
Return'd, and understood the Amorous language.



Admit it true, that such his Passions were,
As (Haven's my witness) I've no cause to fear;
Have not I Virtue to resist his flame,
Without a pointed Steel?



Your Virtue! Curse on the weak defence;
Your Virtue's equal to his Innocence. 
Here, take this Dagger, and if this Night he visit thee,
When he least thinks on't, send it to his heart.



If you suspect me, do not leave me, Sir.



Oh I'm dispatch'd away, to leave you free, 
About a wonderful affair: mean time,
I know you will be visited; but as you wish to live,
At my Return, let me behold him dead. 
Be sure you do't. 'tis for thy Honours safety. 
I love thee so, that I can take no rest,
Till thou hast kill'd thy Image in his breast.
 Adieu, my dear Florella 




Murder my King! the man that loves me too! 
What Fiend, what Fury such an act wou'd do?
My trembling hand, wou'd not the weapon bear,


And I shou'd sooner strike it here, than there. 
(pointing to her breast.
No! though of all I am, this hand alone
Is what thou canst command, as being thy own;
Yet this has plighted no such cruel vow:
No Duty binds me to obey thee now.
To save my King's, my life I will expose,
No Martyr dies in a more Glorious Cause.








Thou grateful Night, to whom all happy Lovers
Make their devout and humble Invocations;
Thou Court of Silence, where the God of Love,
Lays by the awfull terrour of a Deity,
And every harmfull Dart, and deals around
His kind desires; whilst thou, blest Friend to joys,
Draw'st all thy Curtains made of gloomy shades,
To veil the blushes of soft yielding Maids;
Beneath the covert grant the Love-sick King,
May find admittance to Florella's arms;
And being there, keep back the busie day;
Maintain thy Empire till my Moor returns
Where in her Lodgings he shall find his Wife,
Amidst her Amorous dalliance with my Son. 
My watchful Spyes are waiting for the knowledge;
Which when to me imparted, I'le improve,
Till my Revenge be equal to my Love.


 Elvira, in thy looks I read success; 
What hast thou learnt?



Madam, the King is gone as you imagin'd,
To fair Florella's Lodgings.



But art thou sure he gain'd Admittance?




But what welcome he has found, to me's unknown,
But I believe it must be great, and kind.



I am of thy opinion. 
But now, Elvira, for a well-laid Plot,
To ruine this Florella; though she be innocent,
Yet she must dye; so hard a Destiny


My passion for her Husband does decree:
But 'tis the way, I stop at. 
His Jealousie already I have rais'd;
That's not enough, his Honour must be toucht:
This meeting 'twixt the King, and fair Florella,

Must then be render'd Publick;
'Tis the disgrace, not Action, must incense him: 
Go you to Don Alonzo's Lodging strait,
Exit Elvira.
Whilst I prepare my story for his Ear. 
Assist me all that's ill in Woman-kind,
And furnish me with sighs, and feigned tears,
That may express a grief, for this discovery. 
My Son, be like thy Mother, hot and bold;
And like the Noble Ravisher of Rome,

Court her with Daggers, when thy Tongue grows faint,
Till thou hast made a Conquest o're her Virtue.




 Oh Alonzo, I have strange News to tell thee!



It must be strange indeed, that makes my Queen
Dress her fair eyes in sorrow.



It is a Dress that thou wilt be in love with,
When thou shalt hear my story. 
You had a Sister once.







Yes, had whilst she was like thy self, all Virtue;
Till her bewitching Eyes kindled such flames,
As will undoe us all.



My Sister, Madam! sure it cannot be: 
What eyes? what flames? inform me strait.




Alonzo, thou art honest, just, and brave,
And should I tell thee more 
(Knowing thy Loyalty's above all Nature)
It would oblige thee to commit an outrage,
Which baser Spirits will call cruelty.



Gods, Madam! do not praise my Virtue thus,
Which is so poor, it scarce affords me patience
To attend the end of what you wou'd deliver. 
Come Madam, say my Sister is a Whore;
I know 'tis so you mean: and being so,
Where shall I kneel for Justice?
Since he that shou'd afford it me,
Has made her Criminal. 
Pardon me, Madam, 'tis the King I mean.



I grieve to own, all thy Prophetick fears
Are true, Alonzo, 'tis indeed the King.




For Heaven can only punish him.





Whilst that Religious patience dwels about thee,
All Spain must suffer; nay Ages that shall ensue,
Shall curse thy Name, and Family;
From whom a Race of Bastards shall proceed,
To wear that Crown.



No, Madam, not from mine,
My Sister's in my power, her Honour's mine;
I can command her life, though not my Kings.
Her Mother is a Saint, and shou'd she now
Look down from Heaven upon a deed so foul,
I think even there, she wou'd invent a Curse,
To thunder on her head. 
But Madam, whence was this intelligence?




Elvira saw the King enter her Lodgings,
With Lovers haste, and joy.







Now, not an hour ago, 
Now, since the Moor departed.



Damnation on her! can she be thus false? 
Come, lead me to the Lodgings of this Strumpet,
And make me see this truth,
Or I will leave thee dead, for thus abusing me.





Nay dear Alonzo, do not go inrag'd,
Stay till your temper wears a calmer look;
That if, by chance, you shou'd behold the Wantons,
In little harmless Dalliance, such as Lover▪
(Aided with silence, and the shades of Night)
May possibly commit,
You may not do, that which you may repent of.



Gods! should I play the Pander!
And with my patience, aid the Am'rous sin? 
No, I shall scarce have so much tameness left,
To mind me of my Duty to my King.
Ye Gods! behold the Sacrifice I make
To my lost Honour: behold, and aid my justice.





It will concern me too, to see this wonder,
For yet I scarce can credit it.








Ah Sir, the Gods and you would be more merciful,
If by a death less cruel than my fears,
You would preserve my Honour; begin it quickly,
And after that I will retain my Duty,
And at your feet breath thanks in dying sighs.



Where learnt you, Fairest, so much cruelty,
To charge me with the Pow'r of injuring thee?
Not from my Eyes, where Love and languishment
Too sensibly inform thee of my heart.



Call it not injury, Sir, to free my soul
From fears which such a Visit must create,
In dead of Night, when nought but frightful Ghosts.
Of restless souls departed walk the Round.



That fleeting thing am I; whom all repose,
All joys, and every good of life abandon'd,
That fatal hour thou gavest thy self away;
And I was doom'd to endless desperation:
Yet whilst I liv'd, all glorious with my hopes,
Some sacred Treasures in thy breast I hid,
And near thee still my greedy soul will hover.



Ah rather like a Ravisher you come,
With love and fierceness in your dangerous Eyes;
And both will equally be fatal to me.



Ah do not fear me, as the fair Lucretia

Did the fierce Roman Youth; I mean no Rapes,
Thou canst not think that I wou'd force those joys,
Which cease to be so, when compell'd, Florella: 
No, I wou'd sooner pierce this faithful heart,
Whose flame appears too Criminal for your mercy.



Why do you fright me▪ Sir? methinks your looks
All pale; your eyes thus fixt, and trembling hands,
The awfull horrour of the dark and silent night,
Strikes a cold terrour round my fainting heart,
That does presage some fatal Accident.



'Tis in your cruel Eyes the danger lies: 
Wou'd you receive me with that usual tenderness
Which did express it self in everysmile,
I should dismiss this horrour from my face,
And place again its Native calmness there;


And all my Veins shall re-assume their heat,
And with a new, and grateful Ardour beat.



Sir, all my soul is taken up with fear,
And you advance your Fate, by staying here: 
Fly, fly, this place of death; if Abdelazer

Shou'd find you here, all the Divinity
About your Sacred Person, could not Guard you.



Ah my Florella, cease thy needless fear,
And in thy soul let nothing reign but Love!
Love! that with soft desires may fill thy Eyes,
And save thy Tongue the pain t'instruct my heart,
In the most grateful knowledge Heav'n can give me.



That knowledge, Sir, wou'd make us both more wretched,
Since you, I know, wou'd still be wishing on,
And I shou'd grant, till we were both undone.
And Sir, how little she were worth your care,
Cou'd part with all her honourable fame,
For an inglorious life, short and despis'd. 



Canst thou believe a flame thy Eyes have kindled,
Can urge me to an infamous pursuit? 
No, my Florella, I adore thy Virtue,
And none prophane those Shrines, to whom they offer;
 Say but thou lov'st, and I thus low will bow, 
(kneels.
And sue to thee, to be my Soveraign Queen;
I'le circle thy bright Forehead with the Crowns
Of Castile, Portugal, and Aragon;

And all those petty Kingdoms, which do bow
Their Tributary knees to thy Adorer.



Ah Sir! have you forgot by Sacred vow
All that I am, is Abdelazers now.



By Heav'n it was a Sacrilegious theft!
But I the Treasure from his breast will tear,
And reach his heart, though thou art seated there.



A deed like that, my Virtue wou'd undoe,
And leave a stain upon your Glories too;
A sin, that wou'd my hate, not passion move;
I owe a Duty, where I cannot love.



Thou think'st it then no sin to kill thy King;
For I must dye, without thy love, Florella.




How tamely, Sir, you with the Serpent play,
Whose fatal Poison must your life betray;
And though a King, cannot Divine your Fate;
Kings only differ from the Gods in that. 
See, Sir, with this I am your Murderer made;
(holds up a Dagger.
By those we love, we soonest are betray'd.



How! can that fair hand acquaint it self with death?
 What wilt thou do, Florella?





And give my heart those wounds design'd for yours.
 If you advance, I'le give the deadly blow.



Hold! I command thee hold thy impious hand,
My heart dwels there, and if your strike I dye.






Florella! arm'd against the King! 
Snatches the Dagger and stabs her; the King rises.
Of Traitress! 



Hold! hold, inhuman Murdress;
What hast thou done, most barbarous of thy Sex!

(takes Flor. in his arms.


Destroy'd thy Murdress, and my too fair Rival.




My Murdress! what Devil did inspire thee
With thoughts so black and sinfull? cou'd this fair Saint
Be guilty of a Murder! No, no, too cruel Mother,
With her Eyes, her charming lovely Eyes,
She might have kill'd; and her too virtuous cruelty.
 Oh my Florella! Sacred lovely Creature!



My death was kind, since it prevented yours!
And by that hand, which sav'd mine from a guilt:
(points to the Queen.
 That Dagger, I receiv'd of Abdelazer,

To stab that heart he said, that lov'd me best;
But I design'd to overcome your Passion,
And then to have vanquisht Abdelazer's Jealousie:
But finding you too faithfull to be happy,
I did resolve to dye, and have my wish.
 Farewell my King, my soul begins its flight,
 And now is hovering in eternal Night.




She's gon, she's gone, her sacred soul is fled
To that Divinity, of which it is a part;
Too excellent to inhabit Earthly bodies.



Oh Sir, you grieve too much, for one so foul



What prophane breath was that pronounc'd her foul!
Thy Mothers soul, though turn'd into a Cherubin,
Was black to hers: Oh she was all Divine.
 Alonzo, was it thou? her Brother!



When she was good, I own'd that title, Sir.



Good! by all the Gods she was as chaste as Vestals!
As Saints translated to Divine abodes.
 I offer'd her to be my Queen, Alonzo!

To share the growing Glories of my Youth;
But uncorrupted she my Crown contemn'd,


And on her Vertues Guard stood thus defended.
(Alon. weeps.

 Oh my Florella! let me here lie fix'd,
(kneels.
And never rise, till I am cold and pale,
As thou fair Saint art now: but sure
She cou'd not dye; that noble generous heart,
That arm'd with love and honour, did rebate
All the fierce sieges of my Amorous flame,
Might sure defend it self against those wounds
Given by a Womans hand, or rather 'twas a Devils.
(rises.
 What dost thou merit for this Treachery?
Thou vilest of thy Sex 
But thou'rt a thing I have miscall'd a Mother,
And therefore will not touch thee, live to suffer
By a more shamefull way; but here the lyes,
Whom I, though dead, must still adore as living.



Sir, pray retire, there's danger in your stay;
When I reflect upon this Nights disorder,
And the Queens Art to raise my Jealousie;
And after that my Sisters being murder'd,
I must believe there is some deeper Plot,
Something design'd against your Sacred Person.




Alonzo! raise the Court, I'le find it
(Exit Alonzo.
Though 'twere hid within my Mothers soul.



My gentle Son, pardon my kind mistake,
I did believe her arm'd against thy life.



Peace Fury! Not ill-boding Raven shrieks,
Nor Midnight cries of murder'd Ghosts, are more
Ungratefull, than thy faint and dull excuses.
 Be gone! and trouble not the silent griefs,
Which will insensibly decay my life,
Till like a Marble Statue I am fixt,
kneels, and weeps at Flor.'s feet.
Dropping continual tears upon her Tomb.




within. Guard all the Chamber doors! fire and confusion
Consume these Spanish Dogs! was I for this
Sent to fetch back a Philip, and a Cardinal,
To have my Wife abus'd?










Patience and I am Foes! where's my Florella? 
The King! and in Florella's Bed-Chamber!
 Florella! dead too! 
Rise! thou Eternal Author of my shame;
Gay thing! to you I speak!
(King rises.
And thus throw off Allegiance.



Oh stay your fury, generous Abdelazer!






(throws her from him.


Villain! to me this language!



To thee, young Amorous King!
How at this dead and silent time of Night,
Durst you approach the Lodgings of my Wife?



I scorn to answer thee.



I'le search it in thy heart then.

They fight, Qu. and Elv. run out crying Treason.


The Devil's not yet ready for his soul,
And will not claim his due: Oh I am wounded!




No doubt on't, Sir, these are no wounds of Love.



Whate're they be, you might have spar'd 'em now,
Since those Florella gave me were sufficient:
 And yet a little longer fixing thus 
Thou'dst seen me turn to Earth, without thy aid.
 Florella! Florella! is thy soul fled so far
It cannot answer me, and call me on? 
And yet like dying Ecchoes in my Ears,
I hear thee cry, my Love! I come I come, fair Soul!
 Thus at thy feet my heart shall bleeding lye,
Who since it liv'd for thee, for thee will dye.




So thou art gone; there was a King but now,
And now a senseless, dull, and breathless nothing.





Oh Heav'ns! my Son the King! the King is kill'd! 
Yet I must save his Murderer: Fly, my Moor;

Alonzo, Sir, assisted by some Friends,
Has set upon your Guards,
And with resistless fury is making hither.



Let him come on.
Enter Alonzo and others, led in by Osmin, Zarrack, and Moors.
 Oh are you fast? 

(takes away their Swords.


What mean'st thou, Villain!



To put your Swords to better uses, Sir,
Then to defend the cause of Ravishers.



Oh Heavens! the King is murder'd!



Look on that Object, 
Thy Sister! and my Wife! who's doubly murder'd,
First in her spotless Honour, then her life.



Heaven is more guilty then the King in this!



My Lords, be calm; and since your King is murder'd,
Think of your own dear safeties; chuse a new King
That may defend you from the Tyrants Rage.



Who shou'd we chuse? Prince Philip is our King.



By Heaven but Philip shall not be my King!

Philip's a Bastard, and Traytor to his Country:
He braves us with an Army at our-Walls,
Threatning the Kingdom with a fatal ruine.
And who shall lead you forth to Conquest now,
But Abdelazer, whose Sword reapt Victory,
As oft as 'twas unsheath'd; and all for Spain!

 How many Lawrels has this Head adorn'd?
Witness the many Battels I have won;
In which I've emptied all my Youthfull Veins,
And all for Spain! ungratefull of my favours!
 I do not boast my Birth,
Nor will not urge to you my Kingdoms ruine;
But loss of bloud, and numerous wounds receiv'd,
And still for Spain! 
And can you think, that after all my Toy's
I wou'd be still a Slave! to Bastard Philip too!
That dangerous Foe! who with the Cardinal
Threatens with Fire and Sword. I'le quench those flames,
Such an esteem I still preserve for Spain. 



What means this long Harangue! what does it aim at?



To be Protector of the Crown of Spain,

Till we agree about a lawful Successor.







We are betray'd, and round beset with horrours;
If we deny him this, the Power being his,
We're all undone, and Slaves unto his mercy. 
Besides, Oh give me leave to blush when I declare,
That Philip is as he has rendred him. 
But I in love to you, love to my Spain,

Chose rather to proclaim my Infamy,
Than an Ambitious Bastard should be Crown'd.



Here's a fine Plot, 
What Devil reigns in Woman, when she doats!




My Lords, I see no remedy but he must be Protector.



Oh treachery! have you so soon forgot
The noble Philip, and his glorious Heir
The murder'd Ferdinand! 
 And Madam, you so soon forgot a Mothers name,
That you wou'd give him Power that kill'd your Son!



The modesty wherewith I'le use that Power,
Shall let you see, I have no other Interest
But what's intirely Spains. Restore their Swords,
And he amongst you all who is dissatisfy'd, 
I set him free this minute.



I take thee at thy word, 
And instantly to Philips Camp will fly.




By all the Gods my Ancestors ador'd,
But that I scorn the envying World thou'd think
I took delight in bloud, I wou'd not part so with you.
 But you, my Lords, who value Spains Repose,
Must for it instantly with me take Arms: 
Prince Philip, and the Cardinal, now ride
Like Iove in Thunder; we in Storms must meet them:
To Arms! to Arms! and then to Victory,
Resolv'd to Conquer, or resolv'd to dye.









COme Osmin, Arm me quickly, for the day
Comes on apace; and the fierce Enemy
Will take advantages, by our delay.





Oh my dear Moor!
The rude, exclaiming, ill-affected Multitude.
(Tempestuous as the Sea) run up and down,
Some crying, kill the Bastard, some the Moor;
These for King Philip, those for Abdelazer.




Your fears are idle, blow 'em into air.
I rusht amongst the thickest of their Crowds,
And with the awfull splendour of my Eyes,
Like the Imperious Sun, dispers'd the Clouds.
But I must Combate now a fiercer Foe,
The hot-brain'd Philip, and a jealous Cardinal.



And must you go, before I make you mine?



That's my misfortune; when I return with Victory,
And lay my wreaths of Lawrel at your feet,


You shall exchange them, for your glorious Fetters.



How canst thou hope for Victory, when their numbers
So far exceed thy Powers?



What's wanting there, we must supply with Conduct.
I know you will not stop at any thing
That may advance our Interest, and enjoyment.



Look back on what I have already done,
And after that, look forward with Assurance.



You then (with only Women in your Train)
Must to the Camp, and to the Cardinal's Tent; 
Tell him, your Love to him hath drawn you thither:
Then undermine his Soul, you know the way on't.
And sooth him into a belief, that the best way to gain your heart, is to
leave Philip's Interest; urge 'tis the Kingdoms safety, and your own;
and use your fiercest threats, to draw him to a Peace with me: not that
you Love me, but for the Kingdoms good: then in a Tent which I will
pitch on purpose, get him to meet me: he being drawn off, thousands of
Begots (who think to cheat the world into an opinion, that fighting for
the Cardinal is a pious work) will (when he leaves the Camp) de∣sert
it too.



I understand you, and more then I have time to be
Instructed in, I will perform, and possibly
Before you can begin, I'le end my Conquests.



'Twill be a Victory worthy of your Beauty.
 I must to Horse, farewell my generous Mistress.



Farewell! and may thy Arms as happy prove,
As shall my Art, when it dissembles Love.







'Tis a sad story thou hast told, Alonzo;

Yet 'twill not make me shed one single tear:
They must be all of bloud, that I will offer,
To my dear Brothers Ghost! 
But gallant Friend, this good his ills have done,
To turn thee over to our juster Interest,
For thou didst love him once.



Whilst I believ'd him honest, and for my Sisters sake;
But 〈◊〉 his Crimes have made a Convert of me.



Gods! is it possible the Queen should countenance
His horrid Villanies?



Nay worse then so, 'tis thought she'l marry him!



Marry him! then here upon my knees I vow,
To shake all Duty from my soul,
And all that reverence Children owe a Parent,
Shall henceforth be converted into hate.
 Damnation! marry him! Oh I cou'd curse my Birth! 
This will confirm the world in their opinion,
That she's the worst of women;
That I am basely born too, (as she gives it out)
That thought alone, does a just Rage inspire,
And kindles round my heart an active fire.





A disobedience, Sir, to such a Parent,
Heaven must forgive the sin, if this be one:
 Yet do not, Sir, in words abate that fire,
Which will assist you a more effectual way.



Death! I cou'd talk of it an Age;
And like a Woman, fret my anger high,
Till like my Rage, I have advanc'd a Courage
Able to sight the World against my Mother!



Our wrongs without a Rage, will make us fight,
Wrongs that wou'd make a Coward resolute.




Let us joyn both our several wrongs in one,
And from them make a solemn resolution,
Never to part our Interest, till this Moor,
This worse then Devil Moor be sent to Hell.







Hark, hark, the Charge is sounded, let's to Horse,
St. Iaques for the right of Spain and me.





Drums and Trumpets a far off, with noise of fighting at a distance: after a little while, enter Philip in Rage.


Oh unjust powers! why d'ye protect this Monster; 
And this damn'd Cardinal, that comes not up
With the Castilian Troops; curse on his formal Politiques; 
(Enter Alonzo.
 Alonzo, where's the Moor?



The Moor! a Devil! never did Fiend of Hell,
Compell'd by some Magicians Charms,
Break through the Prison of the folded Earth
With more swift horrour, then this Prince of Fate
Breaks through our Troops, in spight of opposition.



Death! 'tis not his single arm that works these wonders,
But our Cowardice; Oh this Dog Cardinal! 





Sound a Retreat, or else the day is lost.



'Ple beat that Cur to death that sounds Retreat.









Who is't that tempts my Sword? continue the Alarm,
Fight on Pell mell, fight kill be damn'd do any thing
But sound Retreat: Oh this damn'd Coward Cardinal! 





Not yet, ye Gods! Oh this eternal Coward 





Sir, bring up your Reserves, or all is lost;
Ambition plumes the Moor, and makes him act
Deeds of such wonder, that even you wou'd envy them.



'Tis well; I'le raise my Glories to that dazling height
Shall darken his, or set in endless Night.








By all thy Love, by all thy languishments,
By all those sighs and tears paid to my Cruelty,
By all thy vows, thy passionate Letters sent,
I do conjure thee, go not forth to fight:
Command your Troops not to engage with Philip,

Who aims at nothing but the Kingdoms ruine,
 Fernando's kill'd, the Moor has gain'd the power,
A power that you nor Philip can withstand;
And is't not better he were lost, then Spain?

Since one must be a Sacrifice. 
Besides, if I durst tell it,
There's something I cou'd whisper to thy soul,
Wou'd make thee blush at ev'ry single good
Thou'ast done that insolent Boy: but 'tis not now.
A time for stories of so strange a nature, 


Which when you know, you will conclude with me,
That every man that Arms for Philip's Cause,
Merits the name of Traytor. 
Be wise in time, and leave his shamefull Interest,
An Interest thou wilt curse thy self for taking;
Be wise, and make Alliance with the Moor.



And Madam, shou'd I lay aside my wrongs,
Those publick injuries I have receiv'd,
And make a mean and humble Peace with him?
 No, let Spain be ruin'd by our Civil Swords,
Ere for its safety I forgo mine Honour. 




Advance Sir, with your Troops, or we are lost.







That they stir not on their lives;
Is this the Duty that you owe your Country?
Is this your Sanctity, and Love to me?
Is't thus you treat the Glory I have offer'd
To raise you to my Bed?
To rule a Kingdom, be a Nations safety,
To advance in Hostile manner to their Walls,
Walls that confine your Countrymen, and Friends,
And Queen, to whom you've vow'd eternal Peace,
Eternal Love; and will you Court in Arms?
Such rude Addresses wou'd but ill become you.
No, from this hour renounce all claims to me,
Or Philip's Interest; for let me tell you, Cardinal,
This Love and that Revenge are inconsistent.







No more; disband your Rebel Troops,
And straight with me to Abdelazer's Tent,
Where all his Claims he shall resign to you
Both in my self, the Kingdom, and the Crown:
You being departed, thousands more will leave him,
And you're alone the Prop to his Rebellion.





Advance, advance, my Lord, with all your Force,
Or else the Prince and Victory is lost,
Which now depends upon his single Valour;
Who like some Ancient Hero, or some God,
Thunders amongst the thickest of his Enemies,
Destroying all before him in such numbers,
That Piles of dead obstruct his passage to the living. 


Relieve him straight, my Lord, with our last Cavalry and hopes.



I'le follow instantly 





Sir, but you shall not, unless it be to death: 
Shall you preserve the only man I hate,
And hate with so much reason? let him fall
A Victim to an injur'd Mothers Honour.
 Come, I will be obey'd, indeed I must. 




When you're thus soft, can I retain my anger? 
Oh look but ever thus in spight of injuries 
I shall become as tame and peaceable,
As are your charming Eyes, when dress'd in Love,
Which melting down my Rage, leave me defenceless.
 Ah Madam, have a generous care of me,
For I have now resign'd my power to you.




What shouts are these?





My Lord, the Enemy is giving ground,
And Philip's arm alone sustains the day;
Advance Sir, and compleat the Victory. 




Give order straight that a Retreat be sounded;
And whilst they do so, by me conducted
We'l instantly to Abdelazer's Tent: 
Hast, hast, my Lord, whilst I attend you here.


Cardinal going cut, is met by Philip.



Oh damn your lazie Order, where have you been, Sir?
 But 'tis no time for questions,
Move forward with your Reserves.



I will not, Sir.







Now to advance would be impolitique;
Already by your desperate attempts,
You've lost the best part of our hopes.











Yes, lye Sir: therefore come on,
Follow the desperate Reer-Guard, which is mine,
And where I'le dye or Conquer; follow my Sword
The bloudy way it leads, or else by Heaven
I'le give the Moor the Victory in spight,
And turn my force on thee; 
Plague of your Cowardice, Come, follow me.





As Philip is going off, he is overtook by Alonzo, Antonio, Sebastian, and other
Officers: At the other side some Moor, and others of Abdelazer's Party,
enter and fall on Philip and the rest; the Moors are beaten off; 
one left dead on the Stage. Enter Abdelazer, with Roderigo and
some others.


Oh for more work, more souls to send to Hell!
 Ha ha ha, here's one going thither, Sirrah Slave 
Moor who kill'd thee? how he grins: this breast,
Had it been temper'd and made proof like mine,
It never wou'd have been a mark for Fools.





I'le wear my Sword to th'Hilt, but I will find
The subject of my Vengeance. 
Moor, 'tis for thee I seek, where art thou Slave? 








Fate and Revenge, I thank thee! 



Why thou art brave, whoe're begot thee.



Villain, a King begot me.



I know not that,
But I'le be sworn thy Mother was a Queen;
And I will kill thee handsomely for her sake.

offer to fight, their Parties hinder them.


Hold ho'd, my Prince.



Great Sir, what mean you
(to Abd.

The Victory being yours, to give your life away
On one so mad and desperate.






We two will be the Fate of this great day.



And I'le forgoe all I've already won,
And claim no Conquest; though whole heaps of Bodies,
Which this right hand has slain, declare me Victor.



No matter who's the Victor; I have thee in my view,
And will not leave thee,
Till thou hast Crown'd those heaps, and made 'em all
The glorious Trophies of my Victory. Come on Sir 



You shall not fight thus single;
If you begin, by Heaven we'l all fall on▪



Dost thou suspect my power!
Oh I am arm'd with more then compleat Steel,


The justice of my Quarrel; when I look
Upon my Fathers wrongs, my Brothers wounds,
My Mothers infamy, Spains misery,
I am all fire; and yet I am too cold
To let out bloud enough for my Revenge:
 Therefore stir not a Sword on my side.






discover both the Armies, which all fall on and make the main Battel:
Philip prevails, the Moors give ground: then the Scene closes to the Grove.
Enter some Moors flying in disorder.








Oh fly, my Lord, fly, for the day is lost.



There are three hundred and odd days ith' year,
And cannot we lose one? dismiss thy fears,
They'l make a Coward of thee.



Sir, all the Noble Spaniards have forsook you;
Your Souldiers faint are round beset with Enemies,
Nor can you shun your Fate, but by your flight.



I can, and must, in spight of Fate:
The wheel of War shall turn about again,
And dash the Current of his Victories. 
This is the Tent I've pitch'd, at distance from the Armies,
To meet the Queen and Cardinal;
Charm'd with the Magick of Dissimulation,
I know by this h'as furl'd his Ensigns up,
And is become a tame and coward Ass.
a Retreat is sounded.
 Hark hark 'tis done; Oh my inchanting Engine!
 Dost thou not hear Retreat sounded?







She has prevail'd: a womans tongue and eyes,
Are Forces stronger then Artilleries.
Enter Queen, Cardinal, Women, and Souldiers.
 We are betray'd 



What means this jealousie? lay by your weapons
And embrace; the sight of these begets suspicion:
 Abdelazer, by my Birth he comes in Peace,
Lord Cardinal, on my Honour so comes he.



Let him withdraw his Troops then.



They're Guards for all our safeties:
Give me your hand, Prince Cardinal; thine, Abdelazer; 
(she brings them together, they embrace.
This blest Accord I do behold with joy.




I at the Queens command have met you here,
To know what 'tis you will propose to us.



Peace and eternal Friendship 'twixt us two▪
How much against my will I took up Arms,
Be witness Heav'n; nor was it in Revenge to you,
But to let out th' infected bloud of Philip,


Is to be King, which Spain will never suffer;

Spain gave me Education, though not Birth,
Which has intitl'd it my Native home,
To which such reverence and esteem I bear,
I will preserve it from the Tyrants rage. 
The People who once lov'd him, now abhor him,
And 'tis your power alone that buoys him up;
And when you've lifted him into a Throne,
'Tis time to shake you off.



Whilst I behold him as my Native Prince,
My Honour and Religion bids me serve him;
Yet not when I'm convinc'd that whilst I do so,
I injure Spain.




If he were so, the Powers above forbid
We shou'd not serve, adore, and fight for him;
But Philip is a Bastard: nay 'twill surprize ye,
But that 'tis truth, the Queen will satisfie you.



With one bold word he has undone my Honour:
(weeps.
Too bluntly, Abdelazer, you repeat,
That which by flow degrees you shou'd have utter'd.



Pardon my roughness, Madam, I meant well.





If by such Arts you wou'd divide me from him,
I shall suspect you wou'd betray us both.



Sir, he informs you truth; and I blush less
To own him so, then that he is a Traytor.




Philip a Bastard! Oh it cannot be: 
Madam, take heed you do not for Revenge,
Barter your dearer Honour, and lose both.



I know what's due to Honour, and Revenge,
But better what I owe to Spain, and you. 
You are a Prince oth' Bloud, and may put off


The Cardinal when you please, and be a Monarch.



Though my Ambition's equal to my Passion,
Neither shall make me act against those Principles
My Honour ever taught me to obey.
 And Madam 
'Tis a less sin, not to believe you here,
Then 'tis to doubt your Virtue.



I wish it were untold, if it must forfeit
The least of your Esteem; but that 'tis truth,
Be witness Heav'n, my shame, my sighs, and tears.




Why Madam was't so long conceal'd from me?



The Circumstances I shall at leisure tell you:
And for the present,
Let it suffice, he cannot rule in Spain,

Nor can you side with him, without being made
As much incapable to reign as he.



Though Love and Honour I have always made
The business of my life;
My soul retains too, so much of Ambition,
As puts me still in mind of what I am,
A Prince! and Heir to Spain!

Nor shall my blinded zeal to Loyalty,
Make me that glorious Interest resign,
Since Philip's claims are not so great as mine.
 Madam, though I'm convinc'd I've done amiss
In taking Arms for Philip,

Yet 'twill be difficult to dis-ingage my self.




Proclaim it in the head of all your Troops,
The justice of your Cause for leaving him;
And tell 'em, 'tis a work of Piety
To follow your example:
The giddy Rout are guided by Religion,
More then by Justice, Reason, or Allegiance.
 The Crown which I as a good Husband keep,
I will lay down upon the empty Throne;
Marry you the Queen, and fill it; and for me,
I'le ever pay you duty as a Subject.




On these Conditions all I am is yours;

Philip we cannot fear, all he can do
Is to retire for refuge into Portugal.




That wou'd be dangerous; 
Is there no arts to get him in our power?



Perhaps by Policy, and seeming Friendship,
For we have reason yet to fear his Force;


And since I'm satisfy'd he's not my lawful Prince,
I cannot think it an impiety
To sacrifice him to the Peace of Spain,

And every Spirit that loves Liberty;
First we'l our Forces joyn, and make 'em yours,
Then give me your Authority to Arrest him;
If so we can surprize him, we'l spare the hazard
Of a second Battel.



My Lord, retire into my inner Tent,
And all things shall be instantly perform'd.








Do not pursue 'em, Sir, such Coward Slaves
Deserve not death from that illustriate hand.



Eternal Plagues consume 'em in their flight:
Oh this damn'd Coward Cardinal has betray'd us!
When all our Swords were nobly dy'd in bloud,
When with red sweat that trickled from our wounds
We'ad dearly ern'd the long-disputed Victory,
Then to lose all! then to sound base Retreat!
It swells my anger up to perfect madness.



Indeed 'twas wondrous strange.



I'm glad Sir 



Art glad of it? art glad we are abandon'd?
That I, and thou have lost the hopefull'st day 



Great Sir, I'm glad that you came off alive.



Thou hast a lean face and a carrion heart 
A Plague upon the Moor and thee; Oh Alonzo,

To run away! follow'd by all the Army!
Oh I cou'd tear my hair, and curse my soul to Air!
 Cardinal thou Traytor Iudas, that wou'dst sell
Thy God again, as thou hast done thy Prince.
 But come we're yet a few,
And we will fight till there be left but one; 
If I prove him, I'le dye a glorious death.



Yes, but the Cardinal has took pious care
It shall be in our beds.



We are as bad as one already, Sir, for all our Fellows are craul'd
home, some with ne're a Leg, others with ne're an Arm, some with their
Brains beat out, and glad they escap'd so.



But my dear Countrymen, you'l stick to me.



Aye, wou'd I were well off. 




Speak stout Seeva, wilt thou not?




Sceva Sir, who's that?



A gallant Roman, that fought by Caesar's side,
Till all his Body cover'd o're with Arrows,
Shew'd like a monstrous Porcupine.



And did he dye, Sir?



He wou'd not but have dy'd for Caesar's Empire.



Hah, why Sir I'm none of Sceva, but honest Diego, yet
would as willingly dye as he, but that I have a Wife and Children; and
if I dye, they beg.



For every drop of bloud which thou shalt lose,
I'le give thy Wife a Diadem.



Stark mad, as I'm valiant. 





Oh Heaven! is not that the Cardinal?
Traytor, how dar'st thou tempt my rage and justice?



Your Pardon, Sir, I come in humble love
To offer happy Peace.



Was that thy aim when base Retreat was sounded?
Oh thou false Cardinal! let me go, Alonzo, 
Death! offer happy Peace! no offer War,
Bring Fire and Sword; Hell and damnation Peace!
Oh damn your musty Peace: No, will you fight, and cry,
Down with the Moor! and then I'le dye in peace.
I have a heart, two arms, a soul, a head,
I'le hazard these, I can but hazard all. 
Come I will kneel to thee, and be thy Slave, 
(kneels.
I'le let thee tread on me, do any thing,
So this damn'd Moor may fall.



Yes Sir, he shall 



Gods! shall he! thy Noble hand upon't,
And for this promise, take my gratefull heart.
(embraces him.
 Shall Abdelazer fall!



Yes, upon thee 
Like the tall ruines of a falling Tower,
As they embrace, the Guards seize him and the rest.
To crush thee into dust: 
Traytor, and Bastard, I arrest thee of High Treason.



Hoh! Traytor! and Bastard! and from thee!

they hold Phi∣lip's hands.


Guards, to your hands the Prisoner is committed,
There's your warrant: Alonzo, you are free.




Prithee lend me one hand to wipe my eyes,
And see who 'tis dares Authorize this Warrant:
 The Devil and his Dam! the Moor! and Queen!
Their Warrant! Gods! Alonzo, must we obey it?
Villains, you cannot be my Jaylors; there's no Prison,
No Dungeon deep enough; no Gate so strong,
To keep a man confin'd so mad with wrong.
 Oh dost thou weep, Alonzo!




I wou'd fain shed a tear,
But from my eyes so many showrs are gone,
They are too poor to pay your sorrows Tribute;
There's now no remedy, we must to Prison▪



Yes, and from thence to death: 
I thought I should have had a Tomb hung round
With tatter'd Ensigns, broken Spears and Javelins;
And that my body with a thousand wounds,
Shou'd have been borne on some Triumphant Chariot,
With solemn Mourning Drums and Trumpets sounding;
Whilst all the wondring World with grief and envy,
Had wish'd my Glorious Destiny their own:
But now, Alonzo, like a Beast I fall,
And hardly Pity waits my Funeral.









Enter Abdelazer, Cardinal, Alonzo, Ordonio, Roderigo, and other Lords, one bearing the Crown, which is laid on the Table on a Cushion; the Queen, Leonora, and Ladies. They all seat themselves, leaving the Throne and Chair of State empty. Abdelazer rises and bows, Roderigo kneeling presents him with the Crown.


GRandees of Spain, if in this Royal Presence
There breaths a man, who having laid his hold
So fast on such a Jewel, and dares wear it
In the contempt of Envy, as I dare;
Yet uncompell'd (as freely as the Gods
Bestow their blessings) wou'd give such Wealth away,
Let such a man stand forth: Are ye all fixt?
No wonder, since a King's a Deity!
And who'd not be a God! 


This glorious Prospect when I first saw the Light,
Met with my Infant hopes; nor have those Fetters
(Which e're I grew towards man, Spain taught me how to wear)
Made me forget what's due to that Illustrious Birth:
 Yet thus I cast aside the Rays of Majesty, 
kneels, and lays the Crown on the Table.
And on my knee, do humbly offer up
This splendid Powerfull thing, and ease your fears
Of Usurpation and of Tyranny.



What new device is this?




This is an Action generous and just; 
Let us proceed to new Election.



Stay, Peers of Spain, 
If young Prince Philip be King Philip's Son,
Then is he Heir to Philip, and his Crown;
But if a Bastard, then he is a Rebel,
And as a Traytor to the Crown shou'd bleed:
That dangerous Populas Spirit must be laid,
Or Spain must languish under Civil Swords;
And Portugal taking advantages in these disorders,
(Assisted by the Male-contents within,
If Philip live) will bring Confusion home.
 Our remedy for this, is first to prove,
And then proclaim him Bastard.




That project wou'd be worth your Politiques.
 How shou'd we prove him Bastard?



Her Majesty being lately urg'd Conscience,
And much above her Honour prizing Spain,

Declar'd this Secret, but has not nam'd the Man;
If he be Noble, and a Spaniard born,
He shall repair her same, by marrying her.



No; Spaniard▪ or Moor, the daring Slave shall dye.



Wou'd I were cover'd with a Veil of Night,
(weeps.
That I might hide the blushes on my Cheeks;
But when your safety comes into dispute,
My Honour, nor my Life, must come in competition.
 I'le therefore hide my eyes, and blushing own,
That Philip's Father is ith' Presence now.



Ith' Presence! name him.





(All rise in amazement.










I Philip's Father, Madam!



Lover is not all this done for thee!
Dost thou not see a Kingdom and my self,
By this Confession, thrown into thy arms?



On terms so infamous I must despise it.



Have I thrown by all sense of modesty,
To render you the Master of my Bed,
To be refus'd? was there another way? 



I cannot yield; this cruelty transcends
All you have ever done me: Heavens! what a contest
Of Love, and Honour, swells my rising heart.



By all my Love, if you refuse me now,
Now when I have remov'd all difficulties,
I'le be Reveng'd a thousand killing ways.



Madam, I cannot own so false a thing,
My Conscience, and Religion will not suffer me.



Away with all this canting; Conscience, and Religion!
No, take advice from nothing but from Love.



'Tis certain I'm bewitch'd; she has a Spell
Hid in those charming Lips.



Prince Cardinal, what say you to this?



I cannot bring it forth 



Do't, or thou'rt lost for ever.



Death! what's a womans power!
And yet I can resist it.



And dare you disobey me?



Is't not enough I've given you up my power,
Nay and resign'd my life into your hands,
But you wou'd damn me too? I will not yield. 
Oh now I find a very Hell within me:
How am I misguided by my passion!



Sir, we attend your Answer.



'Tis now near twenty years, when newly married,
(And 'tis the Custom here to marry young)
King Philip made a War in Barbary,

Won Tunis, Conquer'd Fez, and hand to hand
Slew great Abdela, King of Fez, and Father
To this Barbarian Prince.



I was but young, and yet I well remember
My Fathers wounds, poor Barbary; but no more.



In absence of my King, I liv'd retir'd,
Shut up in my Apartment with my Women,
Suffering no Visits, but the Cardinals,
To whom the King had left me as his Charge;
But he unworthy of that Trust repos'd,
Soon turn'd his business into Love.



Heavens! how will this story end?




A tale, alas! unpleasant to my Ear,
And for the which I banisht him my Presence▪


But oh the power of Gold! he bribes my Women,
That they should tell me (as a secret too)
The King (whose Wars were finish'd) would return
Without acquainting any with the time;
He being as Jealous, as I was fair and young,
Meant to surprize me in the dead of Night:
This pass'd upon my Youth, which ne're knew Art.



Gods! is there any Hell but Womans falshood!




The following Night, I hasted to my Bed,
To wait my expected Bliss; nor was it long
Before his gentle steps approach'd my Ears:
Undress'd he came, and with a Vigorous haste
Flew to my yielding Arms; I call'd him King!
My dear lov'd Lord! and in return he breath'd
Into my bosom in soft gentle whispers 
My Queen! my Angel! my lov'd Isabella!

And at that word I need not tell the rest.



What's all this, Madam, to the Cardinal?



Ah Sir, the night too short for his Caresses,
Made room for day, day that betray'd my shame,
For in my guilty Arms, I found the Cardinal!



Madam, why did not you complain of this?



Alas, I was but young, and full of fears;
Bashfull, and doubtfull of a just belief,
Knowing King Philips rash and jealous temper;
But from your Justice I expect Revenge.



His crime, my Lords, is death, by all our Laws.



Have you betray'd me by my too much Faith?
Oh shameless Creature, am I disarm'd for this?
Had I but so much ease to be inrag'd,
Sure I shou'd kill thee for this Treachery;
But I'm all shame, and grief. By all that's Holy,
My Lords, I never did commit this Crime.



'Tis but in vain, Prince Cardinal, to deny it.



Do not believe him, Lords; 
Revenge let Sentence pass upon the Traytor.



I own that name with horrour, which you drew me to,
When I betray'd the best of Men, and Princes;
And 'tis but just you fit me for despairs,
That may instruct me how to follow him in death:
Yet as I'm Prince oth' Bloud, and Cardinal too,
You cannot be my Judges.



You shall be try'd, Sir, as becomes your Quality.

Osmin, we commit the Cardinal to your Charge.



Heaven! shou'd I live to that! no,


I have within me a Private shame,
That shall secure me from the Publick one.



A pretty turn of State, we shall all follow, Sir.



The Powers above are just, 
Thus I my Prince a Sacrifice first made,
And now my self am on the Altar laid.




Madam, retire, you've acted so Divinely,
You've fill'd my soul with new admiring Passion; 
I'le wait on you in your Apartment instantly,
And at your feet pay all my thanks, and Love.



Make haste, my dearest Moor, whilst I retire,
And fit my soul, to meet thy kind desire.

Ex. Queen and her Train, Leonora advancing to follow is staid by Abd.



Stay, beauteous Maid, stay and receive that Crown,
leads her back.
Which as your due Heav'n and all Spain present you with.



But granting Philip is that thing you call him,
If we must grant him so, who then shall Reign?
Not that we do not know who ought to Reign,
But ask who 'tis you will permit to do so.




Who but bright Leonora! the Royal Off-spring
Of Noble Philip, whose Innocence and Beauty,
Without th'advantage of her Glorious Birth,
Merits all Adoration.



With joy we do salute her Queen.



Live Leonora! beauteous Queen of Spain!





From Abdelazer this! it cannot be,
At least not real.





Be it now your care magnificently to provide
Both for the Coronation, and the Marriage
Of the fair Queen;
Let nothing be omitted that may shew,
How we can pay, where we so vastly owe.




I am much bound to Spain, and you, my Lords▪
For this great Condescention.



My Lords, I thank ye all,
And most the gallant Moor▪ I am not well 
(turns to Alon.

Something surrounds my heart so full of death,
I must retire to give my sorrow breath.

Ex. Leon. follow'd by all but Abd. and Roderigo, who looks on Abd.



Sir, what have you done?



What every man that loves like me shou'd do;
Undone my self forever, to beget


One moments thought in her, that I adore her;
That she may know, none ever lov'd like me,
I've thrown away the Diadem of Spain: 
 'Tis gone! and there's no more to set but this 
(My heart) at all, and at this one last cast
Sweep up my former losses, or be undone.



You Court at a vast rate, Sir.



Oh she's a Goddess! a Creature made by Heaven!
To make my prosperous Toyls, all sweet and charming!
She must be Queen, I, and the Gods decree it.



Sir, is she not design'd Alonzo's Bride?



Yes, so her self, and he have ill agreed;
But Heaven and I, am of another mind,
And must be first obey'd.




Alonzo will not yield his Interest easily.



Wou'd that were all my stop to happiness; 
But Roderigo, this fond Amorous Queen
Sits heavy on my heart.



She's but a woman, nor has more lives than one



True, Roderigo, and thou hast dealt in Murders,
And know'st the safest way to 







Thou dar'st not sure pretend to any Virtue;
Had Hell inspir'd thee with less Excellency
Than Arts of killing Kings! thou'dst ne're been rais'd
To that exalted height t' have known my secrets.







Slave, look back upon the wretchedness I took thee from,
What merits hadst thou to deserve my bounty?
But Vice, brave prosperous Vice!
Thou'rt neither Wise, nor Valiant.



I own my self that Creature rais'd by you,
And live but to repay you, name the way.



My business is to have the Queen remov'd;
She does expect my coming this very hour,
And when she does so, 'tis her custom to be retir'd,
Dismissing all Attendance, but Elvira.




The rest, I need not be instructed in.







The Cardinal, Sir, is close confin'd with Philip.








And do you think it fit, Sir, they shou'd live?



No, this day they both must dye, some sort of death


That may be thought was given them by themselves:
I'm sure I give them cause. Osmin, view well this Ring,
Whoever brings this Token to your hands,
Without considering Sex, or Quality,
Let 'em be kill'd.



Your will shall be obey'd in every thing.










Elvira, hast thou drest my Lodgings up
Fit to receive my Moor?
Are they all gay, as Altars, when some Monarch
Is there to offer up rich Sacrifices?
Hast thou strew'd all the Floor his feet must press,
With the soft new-born Beauties of the Spring?



Madam, I've done as you commanded me.



Let all the Chambers too be fill'd with Lights;
There's a Solemnity methinks in Night,
That does insinuate Love into the soul!
And makes the bashfull Lover more assur'd.




You speak as if this were your first Enjoyment.



My first! Oh Elvira, his Power, like his Charms,
His Wit, or Bravery! every hour renews:
Love gathers sweets like Flow'rs, which grow more fragrant
The nearer they approach maturity.
(knock.
 Hark! 'tis my Moor, give him Admittance straight.
The thought comes o're me like a gentle Gale,
Raising my bloud into a thousand Curls.



Madam, it is a Priest 



A Priest! oh send him quickly hence;
I wou'd not have so cold, and dull an Object,
Meet with my Nobler sense, 'tis mortifying.



Perhaps 'tis some Petition from the Cardinal.



Why what have I to do with Priest or Cardinal?
Let him not enter. 


Elv. goes out, and returns with Roderigo, drest like a Fryer.






H'as nam'd a word will make all places free.



Madam, be pleas'd to send your Woman hence,
I've something to deliver from the Moor,
Which you alone must be acquainted with.



Well, your Formality shall be allow'd; retire 
(to Elv.
What have you to deliver to me now?





shews a Dagger, and takes her roughly by the hands.






You must not call for help, unless to Heaven.



What daring thing art thou?



One that has now no time to answer thee.

stabs her, she strug∣gles, her arm bleeds.


Oh ho'd thy killing hand! I am thy Queen.



Thou mayst be Devil too, for ought I know;
I'le try thy substance thus 





Thou hast well reveng'd me on my sins of Love; 
he seats her in the Chair.
But shall I die thus tamely unreveng'd? 
 Help murder help 

(he offers to stab again.
Enter Elvira, and other Women.


Oh Heavens! the Queen is murder'd! help the Queen!


Rod. offers to stab Elv.





Hah! the Queen! what Sacrilegious hand,
Or heart so Brutal 
Durst thus prophane the Shrine ador'd by me!
Guard well the Passages. 



Thou art that Sacrilegious Brutal thing, 
And false as are the Deities thou worship'st.



Gods! let me not understand that killing language!
 Inform me quickly, how you came thus wounded,
Lest looking on that Sacred stream of bloud,
I dye e're I've reveng'd you, on your Murderer.



Haste then, and kill thy self; thou art my Murderer:
Nor had his hand, if not by thee instructed,
Aim'd at a sin so dangerous. 



 Surely she'l live. (aside) This! 
Can mischief dwell beneath this Reverend shape?
Confess who taught thee so much cruelty!
Confess! or I will kill thee. 











The Cardinal! Oh impious Traytor! 
How came I mention'd then?







But why do I delay thy punishment!
Dye, and be damn'd together. (aside.)
(stabs him.


 But oh my Queen! Elvira, call for help!
Have I remov'd all that oppos'd our flame,
(kneels.
To have it thus blown out? thus in a minute!
When I, all full of Youthfull fire! all Love!
Had rais'd my soul with hopes of near delights,
 To meet thee cold, and pale; to find those Eyes,
Those Charming Eyes thus dying; Oh ye Powers! 
Take all the prospect of my future joys,
And turn it to despair, since thou art gone. 



Cease cease your kind complaints, my struggling soul,
'Twixt Death and Love holds an uneasie contest;
This will not let it stay, nor that depart; 
And whilst I hear thy voice thus breathing Love,
It hovers still about the gratefull sound.
 My Eyes have took an everlasting leave 
Of all that blest their sight, and now a gloomy darkness
Benights the wishing sense, that vainly strives 
To take another view; but 'tis too late, 
And life and Love must yield to death and Fate.




Farewell my greatest Plague 
(he rises with joy.
Thou wert a most impolitique loving thing,
And having done my bus'ness which thou wert born for,
'Twas time thou shou'dst retire,
And leave me free to Love, and Reign alone.
Enter Leonora, Alonzo, Ordonio, and other men and women.
 Come all the world, and pay your sorrows here,
Since all the world has Interest in this loss.



The Moor in tears! nay then the sin was his.



The Queen my Mother dead!
How many sorrows will my heart let in,
Ere it will break in pieces!




I know the source of all this Villany,
And need not ask you how the Queen came murder'd.



My Lord, that Frier, from the Cardinal did it.




'Tis possible, for the injuries she did him
aside.
Cou'd be repaid with nothing less than death.
 My Fair, your griefs have been so just of late,
I dare not beg that you would weep no more;
Though every tear those lovely Eyes let fall,
Give me a killing wound: remove the Body,
Guards remove the body. Ex. all but Alo. & Leo.

Such objects suit not souls so soft as thine.



With horrours I am grown of late familiar;
I saw my Father dye, and liv'd the while,
I saw my beauteous Friend, and thy lov'd Sister,

Florella, whilst her breast was bleeding fresh;
Nay and my Brothers too, all full of wounds!
The best and kindest Brother, that ever Maid was blest with,
Poor Philip bound, and led like Victims for a Sacrifice:
All this I saw, and liv'd 
And canst thou hope for pity from that heart,
Whose hardned sense is proof 'gainst all these miseries?
 This Moor, Alonzo, is a subtle Villain,
Yet of such Power, we scarce dare think him such.



'Tis true, my charming Fair, he is that Villain,
As ill, and powerful too; yet he has a heart
That may be reacht with this, but 'tis, not time,
(points to his Sword.
We must dissemble yet which is an Art
Too foul for souls so Innocent as thine.



Hell! will he not allow us sorrowing time.



Madam, I come to pay my humblest duty,
And know what service you command your Slave.



Alas, I've no Commands, or if I had,
I am too wretched now to be obey'd.



Can one so fair, and great, ask any thing
Of Men, or Heaven, they wou'd not grant with joy?



Heav'ns will I'm not permitted to dispute,
And may implore in vain; but 'tis in you
To grant me what may yet preserve my life.



In me! in me! the humblest of your Creatures!
By yon bright Sun, or your more splendid Eyes,
I wou'd divest my soul of every hope,
To gratifie one single wish of yours;
 Name but the way. 



I'm so unhappy, that the only thing
I have to ask, is what you must deny;
 The liberty of Philip. 



How! Philips liberty! and must I grant it!
I (in whose hands Fortune had put the Crown)
Had I not lov'd the good and Peace of Spain,

Might have dispos'd it to my own advantage;
And shall that Peace,
Which I've preferr'd above my proper Glories,
Be lost again in him, in him a Bastard!



That he's a Bastard, is not Sir believ'd;
And she that cou'd love you, might after that
Do any other sin, and 'twas the least
Of all the number to declare him Bastard.



How Sir! that cou'd love me! what is there here 
Or in my soul, or Person, may not be belov'd?



I spoke without reflection on your Person,
But of dishonest love, which was too plain,
From whence came all the Ills we have endur'd;
And now being warm in mischiefs,
Thou dost pursue the Game, till all be thine.








The little humble Mask which you put on
Upon the face of Falshood, and Ambition,
Is easily seen through; you gave a Crown!
But you'l command the Kingly power still,
Arm, and disband, destroy or save at pleasure.



Vain Boy, (whose highest fame,
Is that thou art the great Alvare's Son)
Where learnt you so much daring, to upbraid
My generous Power thus falsly? do you know me?



Yes, Prince, and 'tis that knowledge makes me dare;
I know thy fame in Arms; I know in Battels
Thou hast perform'd deeds much above thy years:
My Infant courage too,
(By the same Master taught) grew up to thine,
When thou in Age out-didst me, not in Bravery.
 I know thou'st greater Power too, thank thy Treachery!



Dost thou not fear that Power?



By Heaven not I,
Whilst I can this command.

(lays his hand on his Sword.


I too command a Sword,
(Abd. lays his hand on his, and comes close up to him▪
But not to draw on thee, Alonzo;

Since I can prove thy Accusations false
By ways more gratefull: take this Ring, Alonzo,

The sight of it will break down Prison Gates,
And set all free, as was the first born man.



What means this turn?



To enlarge Philip; but on such Conditions,
As you think fit to make for my security:
And as thou'rt Brave, deal with me as I merit.



Art thou in earnest? 



I am, by all that's Sacred.



Oh let me fall before you, and ne're rise.


Till I have made you know what Gratitude
Is fit for such a Bounty! 
Haste, my Alonzo, haste and treat with Philip;

Nor do I wish his freedom, but on such terms
As may be advantageous to the Moor.



Nor I, by Heaven! I know the Prince's soul,
Though it be fierce, 't has Gratitude and Honour!
And for a deed like this, will make returns,
Such as are worthy of the brave Obliger.





Yes, if he be not gone to Heaven before you come.
(aside.
 What will become of Abdelazer now?
Who with his Power, has thrown away his Liberty.



Your Liberty! Oh Heaven forbid that you,
Who can so generously give Liberty,
Should be depriv'd of it!
It must not be whilst Leonora lives.



'Tis she that takes it from me.



I! Alas, I wou'd not for the world
Give you one minutes pain.



You cannot help it, 'tis against your will!
Your Eyes insensibly do wound and kill!



What can you mean? and yet I fear to know.



Most charming of your Sex! had Nature made
This clouded face, like to my heart, all Love,
It might have spar'd that language which you dread;
Whose rough harsh found, unfit for tender Ears,
Will ill express the business of my life.



Forbear it, if that business, Sir, be Love.




Because I want the Art to tell my story
In that soft way, which those can do whose business
Is to be still so idly employ'd,
I must be silent, and endure my pain;
Which Heaven ne're gave me so much tameness for.
Love in my soul! is not that gentle thing
It is in other breasts; instead of Calms,
It ruffles mine into uneasie Storms.
 I wou'd not Love, if I cou'd help it, Madam;
But since 'tis not to be resisted here 
You must permit it to approach your Ear.



Not when I cannot hear it, Sir, with Honour.




Nay I can talk in the defence of that:
By all that's Sacred, 'tis a flame as virtuous,
As every thought inhabits your fair soul,


And it shall learn to be as gentle too;
 For I must merit you 



I will not hear this language! merit me!




You're but the Daughter of the King of Spain,

And I am Heir to Great Abdela, Madam.
I can command this Kingdom you possess,
(Of which my Passion only made you Queen)
And re-assume that which your Father took
From mine, a Crown as bright as that of Spain.




You said you wou'd be gentle 



I will! this sullen heart shall learn to bow,
And keep it self within the bounds of Love;
Its language I'le deliver out in fighs,
Soft as the whispers of a yielding Virgin.
I cou'd transform my soul to any shape;
Nay I could even teach my Eyes the Art
To change their natural fierceness into smiles.
 What is't I wou'd not do to gain that heart!



Which never can be yours! that and my vows,
Are to Alonzo given; which he lays claim to
By the most Sacred tyes, Love and Obedience;
All Spain esteems him worthy of that Love.



More worthy it than I! it was a Woman,
A nice, vain, peevish Creature that pronounc'd it;
Had it been Man, 't had been his last transgression!
 His Birth! his glorious Actions! are they like mine?



Perhaps his Birth wants those advantages,
Which Nature has laid out in Beauty on his Person.



Aye! there's your cause of hate! Curst be my Birth,
And curst be Nature, that has dy'd my skin
With this ungrateful colour! could not the Gods
Have given me equal Beauty with Alonzo!

 Yet as I am, I've been in vain Ador'd,
And Beauties great as thine have languish'd for me.
The Lights put out! thou in my naked arms
Wilt find me soft and smooth as polisht Ebony;
And all my kisses on thy balmy lips as sweet,
As are the Breezes, breath'd amidst the Groves▪
Or ripening Spices in the height of day:
As vigorous too,
As it each Night were the first happy moment
I laid thy panting body to my bosom.
On that transporting thought! 
See, I can bend as low, and sigh as often,
(kneels.


And sue for blessings only you can grant,
As any fair and soft Alonzo can; 
If you could pity me as well. 
(rises with anger.
But you are deaf, and in your Eyes I read
A scorn which animates my Love and Anger;
Nor know I which I shou'd dismiss or cherish.



The last is much more welcome than the first;
Your Anger can but kill, but Sir your Love 
Will make me ever wretched, since 'tis impossible
I ever can return it.



Why kill me then! you must do one or t'other,
(kneels.
For thus I cannot live: why dost thou weep?
Thy every tear's enough to drown my soul! 
How tame Love renders every seeble sense!
(rises.
 Gods! I shall turn Woman, and my Eyes inform me
The Transformation's near▪ death! I'le not endure it,
I'le fly before sh'as quite undone my soul. 
(offers to go.
But 'tis not in my power, she holds it fast, 
And I can now command no single part. 
(returns.
Tell me, bright Maid, if I were amiable,
And you were uningag'd, cou'd you then love me?



No! I cou'd dye first.



Hah! awake my soul from out this drowsie fit,
And with thy wonted Bravery, scorn thy Fetters.
 By Heaven 'tis gone! and I am now my self: 
Be gone, my dull submission! my lazie flame
Grows sensible! and knows for what 'twas kindled.
 Coy Mistress, you must yield, and quickly too:
Were you devout as Vestals, pure as their Fire,
Yet I wou'd wanton in the rifled spoils
Of all that sacred Innocence and Beauty.
 Oh my desires grow high!
Raging as Midnight flames let loose in Cities,
And like that too, will ruine where it lights.
 Come, this Apartment was design'd for pleasure,
And made thus silent, and thus gay for me;
There I'le convince that errour, that vainly made thee think
I was not meant for Love. 



Am I betray'd! are all my Women gone!
And have I nought but Heaven for my defence!



None else, and that's too distant to befriend you.



Oh take my life, and spare my dearer Honour!
 Help! help! ye Powers that favour innocence.




Iust as the Moor is going to force in Leonora, Enters to him Osmin in haste.


My Lord, Alonzo 



What of him, you Slave, is he not secur'd?
Speak, dull Intruder, that know'st not times and seasons,
Or get thee hence.



Not till I've done the business which I came for.



Slave! that thou cam'st for.

(stabs him in the arm.


No, 'twas to tell you, that Alonzo,

Finding himself betray'd, made brave resistance;
Some of your Slaves h'as kill'd, and some h'as wounded.



'Tis time he were secur'd;
I must assist my Guards, or all is lost.




Sure Osmin from the Gods thou cam'st,
To hinder my undoing; and if thou dy'st,
Heaven will almost forgive thy other sins,
For this one pious deed! 
But yet I hope thy wound's not mortal.



'Tis only in my arm; and Madam for this pity,
I'le live to do you service.



What service can the Favourite of the Moor,
Train'd up in bloud and mischiefs, render me?



Why Madam, I command the Guard of Moors,
Who will all dye, when e're I give the word.
 Madam, 'twas I caus'd Philip and the Cardinal
To fly to th' Camp,
And gave 'em warning of approaching death.



Heaven bless thee for thy goodness.



And I am weary now of being a Tyrants Slave,
And bearing blows too; the rest I could have suffer'd.
 Madam, I'le free the Prince!
But see, the Moor returns. 



That Monsters presence I must fly, as from a killing Plague.

Ex. with her Women
Enter Abdelazer, with Zarrack and a Train of Moors.


It is Prodigious, that a single man
Should with such Bravery defend his life,
Amongst so many Swords; but he is safe.

Osmin, I am not us'd to sue for Pardon,
And when I do, you ought to grant it me.



I did not merit, Sir, so harsh a usage.



No more, I am asham'd to be upbraided,
And will repair the injury I did thee.



Acknowledgment from you is pay sufficient.



Yet Osmin, I shou'd chide your negligence,
Since by it Philip lives still, and the Cardinal.



I had design'd it, Sir, this Evenings Sacrifice.




Zarrack shall now perform it, and instantly:

Alonzo too must bear 'em company.



I'le shew my Duty in my haste, my Lord.





Death! I'm undone; I'le after him, and kill him.





Osmin, I've business with you 

(Osm. comes back bowing.
As they are going off, Enter Leonora, Ordonio, other Lords, and Women.


Oh Prince! for pity hear and grant my suit.




When so much Beauty's prostrate at my feet,
What is't I can deny? rise, thou brightest Virgin
That ever Nature made;
Rise, and command my life, my soul, my honour!



No, let me hang for ever on your knees,
Unless you'l grant Alonzo liberty.



Rise, I will grant it, though Alonzo, Madam,
Betray'd that Trust I had repos'd in him.



I know there's some mistake; let me negotiate
Between my Brother, and the gallant Moor.
I cannot force your Guards,
There is no danger in a Womans arm.



In your bright Eyes there is, that may corrupt 'em more,
Than all the Treasures of the Eastern Kings.
Yet Madam, here I do resign my Power,
Act as you please, dismiss Alonzo's Chains.
And since you are so generous, to despise
This Crown, which I have given you,

Philip shall owe his Greatness to your Bounty,
And whilst he makes me safe, shall Rule in Spain.






And will you trust him, Madam!



If he deceive me, 'tis more happy far
To dye with them, than live where he inhabits.



It shall be done. 



Go Osmin, wait upon the Queen: 
And when she is confin'd, I'le visit her,
Where if she yield, she reigns; if not, she dyes.


Ex. Abd. one way, Leon. Osm. and the rest another.



Discovers Philip chain'd to a Post, and over against him the Cardinal and Alonzo in Chains.


Oh all ye cruel Powers! is't not enough
I am depriv'd of Empire, and of Honour!
Have my bright Name stoln from me, with my Crown!
Divested of all Power! all Liberty!
And here am Chain'd, like the sad Andromede,
To wait destruction from the dreadfull Monster!
Is not all this enough without being damn'd,
To have thee, Cardinal, in my full view!
If I cou'd reach my Eyes, I'de be reveng'd
On the officious and accursed Lights,
For guiding so much torment to my soul.



My much wrong'd Prince! you need not wish to kill
By ways more certain, than by upbraiding me
With my too credulous, shamefull past misdeeds.



If that wou'd kill, I'de weary out my tongue
With an eternal repetition of thy Treachery; 
Nay, and it shou'd forget all other language,
But Traytor! Cardinal! which I wou'd repeat,
Till I had made my self as raging mad,
As the wild Sea, when all the Winds are up!
And in that Storm, I might forget my grief.



Wou'd I cou'd take the killing Object from your Eyes.



Oh Alonzo, to add to my distraction
Must I find thee a sharer in my Fate!



It is my duty, Sir, to dye with you. 
But Sir, my Princess
Has here a more than equal claim to grief;
And fear for her dear safety, will deprive me
Of this poor life, that shou'd have been your Sacrifice.





Kind Murderer, welcome! quickly free my soul!
And I will kiss the Sooty hand that wounds me.



Oh, I see you can be humble.



Humble! I'le be as gentle as a Love-sick Youth,
When his dear Conqu'ress sighs a hope into him,
If thou wilt kill me! Pity me, and kill me.



I hope to see your own hand do that office.



Oh thou wert brave indeed,
If thou wou'dst lend me but the use of one!



You'l want a Dagger then.



By Heaven no, I'de run it down my throat,
Or strike my pointed fingers through my breast.



Ha, ha, ha, what pity 'tis you want a hand.






Osmin! sure thou wilt be so kind to kill me!
Thou hadst a soul was humane.



Indeed I will not, Sir, you are my King!








To set you free, my Prince!



Thou art some Angel sure, in that dark Cloud.



What mean'st thou, Traytor!



Wait till your eyes inform you.



Good Gods! what mean'st thou!



Sir, arm your hand with this.

Gives Phil. a Sword, goes to undoe Alonzo.



Thou art half damn'd for this!
I'le to my Prince! 



I'le stop you on your way, lye there; your tongue
(kills him.
Shall tell no tales to day: Now Cardinal but hold,
I scorn to strike thee whilst thou art unarm'd,
Yet so thou didst to me;
For which I have not leisure now to kill thee.
 Here, take thy liberty; nay do not thank me,
By Heaven! do not mean it as a grace.



My Lord, take this; 
to Alon. and the Card.
And this to arm your Highness.



Thou dost amaze me!



Keep in your wonder with your doubts, my Lord.



We cannot doubt, whilst we're thus fortify'd 
looking on his Sword.
Come Osmin, let us fall upon the Guards.



There are no Guards, Great Sir, but what are yours;
And see your Friend l've brought to serve ye too.

(opens a back door.





My dearest Sister safe!



Whilst in your presence, Sir, and you thus Arm'd.



The Moor approaches, now be ready all.



That name I never heard with joy till now;
Let him come on, and arm'd with all his Powers,
Thus singly I defie him.





Osmin secures the door.


Hah! betray'd! and by my Slaves! by Osmin too!



Now thou damn'd Villain! true born Son of Hell!
Not one of thy Infernal Kin shall save thee.




Whom the admiring world mistakes for brave;
When all thy boasted Valour, fierce and hot
As was thy Mother in her height of Lust,
Can with the aid of all these treacherous Swords
Take but a single life! but such a life,
As amongst all their store the envying Gods
Has not another such to breath in man.



Vaunt on, thou monstrous Instrument of Hell!
For I'm so pleas'd to have thee in my power,
That I can hear thee number up thy sins,
And yet be calm, whilst thou art near damnation:



Thou ly'st, thou canst not keep thy temper in;
For hadst thou so much bravery of mind,
Thou'dst fight me singly; which thou dar'st not do.




By Heaven if thou wert twenty Villians more,
And I had all thy weight of sins about me,
I durst thus venture on: forbear, Alonzo.




I will not, Sir.



I was indeed too rash; 'tis such a Villain,
As shou'd receive his death from nought but Slaves.



Thou'st reason, Prince! nor can they wound my body,
More then I've done thy Fame; for my first step
To my Revenge, I whor'd the Queen thy Mother.



Death! though this I knew before, yet the hard word
Runs harshly through my heart; 
If thou hadst murder'd fifty Royal Ferdinands,

And with inglorious Chains as many years
Had loaded all my limbs, 't had been more pardonable
Then this Eternal stain upon my name:
 Oh thou hast breath'd thy worst of venom now.



My next advance, was poisoning of thy Father.



My Father poison'd! and by thee! thou Dog,
Oh that thou hadst a thousand lives to lose,
Or that the world depended on thy single one,
That I might make a Victim
Worthy to offer up to his wrong'd Ghost. 
But stay, there's something in thy count of sins untold,


That I must know; not that I doubt, by Heaven,
That I am Philip's Son. 



Not for thy ease, but to declare my malice,
Know Prince, I made thy amorous Mother
Proclaim thee Bastard, when I miss'd of killing thee.



Gods! let me contain my rage!



I made her too, betray the credulous Cardinal,
And having then no farther use of her,
Satiated with her Lust,
I set Roderigo on to murder her:
Thy death had next succeeded; and thy Crown
I wou'd have laid at Leonora's feet.



How! durst you love the Princess!



Fool, durst! had I been born a Slave,
I durst with this same Soul do any thing:
Yes! and the last sense that will remain about me,
Will be my Passion for that charming Maid,
Whom I'de enjoy e're now, but for thy Treachery.




Dflowr'd my Sister! Heaven punish me Eternally
If thou out-liv'st the minute thou'st declar'd it.



I will, in spight of all that thou canst do:
 Stand off, Fool-hardy Youth, if thou'dst be safe,
And do not draw thy certain ruine on,
Or think that e're this hand was arm'd in vain.



Poor angry Slave, how I contemn thee now.



As humble Huntsmen do the generous Lion;
Now thou dar'st see me lash my sides, and roar,
And bite my snare in vain; who with one look,
(Had I been free) hadst shrunk into the Earth
For shelter from my Rage:
And like that noble Beast, though thus betray'd,
I've yet an awfull fierceness in my looks,
Which makes thee fear t' approach; and 'tis at distance
That thou dar'st kill me: for come but in my reach,
And with one grasp, I wou'd confound thy hopes.



I'le let thee see how vain thy boastings are,
And unassisted by one single rage,
Thus make an easie passage to thy heart.
Runs on him, all the rest do the like in the same minute: Abd. aims at the Prince, and kills Osmin: and falls dead himself.
 Dye with thy sins unpardon'd, and forgotten. 




Great Sir, your Throne and Kingdom want you now;
Your People rude with joy do fill each Street,
And long to see their King, whom Heaven preserve.




Long live Philip King of Spain: 



I thank ye all; and now my dear Alonzo,

Receive the recompence of all thy sufferings,
Whilst I create thee Duke of Salamancha.




Thus low I take the bounty from your hands.




Rise Sir, my Brother now has made us equal.



And shall this joyfull day, that has restor'd you
To all the Glories of your Birth and merits,
That has restor'd all Spain the greatest Treasure
That ever happy Monarchy possess'd,
Leave only me unhappy? when, Sir, my crime
Was only too much Faith: thus low I fall,
And from that store of mercy Heaven has given you,
Implore you wou'd dispense a little here.



Rise, (though with much a-do) I will forgive you.



Come, my dear Brother, to that glorious business
Our Birth and Fortunes call us, let us haste,
For here methinks we are in danger still.



So after Storms, the joyful Mariner
Beholds the distant wish'd-for shore afar,
And longs to hring the rich-fraight Vessel in,
Fearing to trust the faithless Seas again.

