



WAtt, have you deliver'd the Letter, as I or∣der'd you?



Yes, Sir, I have to your Uncles
Friend Mr Save-all, but he says, he has
made your peace so often and to so little purpose, that he now
absolutely despairs of a Reconciliation between you.



But then thou shouldst have told him, I wou'd not take
that for an answer.



Then he wou'd have answer'd me, Let your precious
Master take his course, for he is like to have no better answer.



Couldst thou not tell him again, that I have taken all
the Courses, a young Gentleman can, to maintain himself like
one; but they are all run out, and I have not one trick to man∣age,
and may perish unless that damn'd Uncle of mine, set me
again, nor know I how to arrive to that but through his
intercession.



Puh, Sir, then I know what he wou'd have told me a∣gain,
and muster'd up all your Vices: then that this same
Uncle (so despis'd a thing) before he discarded you, had re∣least
you out of Prison, within the space of Thirteen months, a
Dozen times.



Well, Coxcomb, that was not once a Month then. Why
  2
shou'd he upbraid me with it? I am sure 'twas I that suffer'd for't,
and so you might have told him.



Yes, and then he wou'd have answered me, that your
extravagant courses have cost your Uncle at least Fifteen hundred
Pounds, and upon your last debauch (when he resolv'd never to
concern himself for you again, about a year ago) he cast ano∣ther
Five hundred Pound after you, with this Proviso that you
shou'd never trouble him any more; and at last finding you in∣corrigible,
he Marry'd on purpose to disinherit you.



Ay, that damn'd Marriage has ruin'd me but, damn
it, let it go, and let my Uncle go to the Devil, and let Save-all
go, and be damn'd for a Cynical Ass as he is. I confess he
has by his formal Solicitation, made up breaches between my
Uncle and me, at least a Score of times, what a Devil had it
been for him to have try'd his Interest for me once more?



I wish you wou'd consider what is to be done, for your
own sake, besides you ought to take some care of me your
Creature, that have stuck to you through all Fortunes, to main∣tain
and keep up your Gallantry, and think in time before these
Cloths are worn out, for you'll find it somewhat difficult to E∣quip
your self again.



I care not, I will not give my self one Minutes trouble
about it, I ll rather dye here in New Alsatia, or sell my self a
Slave to the Galleys. Consider quoth a? what shou'd I con∣sider?



Consider your poor Whore Sir, for she (as you have
manag'd her) is in a worse Case than your self; her Cloths grow
somewhat shabby.



Ay there's it, I wou'd willingly do somewhat for her,
but how the Devil knows. Have I not already done all that
possibly can be done by a distressed hopeless heir?



Has the Die quite fail'd you, and all the Cheats that
thereupon depend? Your Marrabone bowling Booties forsaken
you? your Tennis Court Betting? your Cock-Pit Cozenages
too? and all your Arts of borrowing?



All, all Arts are quite confounded.



I wonder your Father shou'd leave you nothing to
live upon but Wit, and that not for life.



Hold thy peace; I am contriving a way how (tho it
cost me my life,) to disgrace my Uncle.



There's a Plot! I beseech you think of your poor
Whore, Sir what do you think will become of her, if you
shou'd cast away your self?



Thou knowst I must leave her once.



If you cou'd leave her handsomly and betake your
self to other Women.



To other Women? what to do? to empty my Bones?
I have had enough of variety.



Ay but, Sir, you are handsom and young; I have known
such in this Town, who have brought in as good a Living, as
any Miss of 'em all; kept their Coaches too, with only being
a little Snout Fair.



Damn it, I'll ne're fall so low to do the drugery of any
Old Lady.



Very good! many a younger Brother wou'd leap at
such preferment.



No I'll pursue my first Resolves, and will commit some
death-deserving Crime, tho' these Cloths go to the Hangman
for't, in spight to him that was my Uncle, and that ridiculous,
grave, formal Nonsensical speaking Friend of his Saveall, that
calls People Pe-o-p-le.





 Cou'd I expect this honour? how am I oblig'd
to you for this Visit?
 Sir, being inform'd my Uncle was come to Town and
you with him, I did presume to write to you.



Send away your Servant.








One Servant is not sit to be employ'd in all Offices.
 It was a bold thing indeed, to write to me, considering how
often I have interceded for you, and reconcil'd you to your
overgrateful Uncle, therein was your good thoughts of your
self.



The wretchedst Creature breathing! in having wea∣ried
out my best of Friends, on whom my chiefest happiness de∣pended.



No, I am not wearied, but have the same good wishes
still to serve you, but cannot strive against impetuous Torrents.



My Uncle's then resolv'd that I shall perish. But did you
speak on my behalf this time?



O Sir! I have try'd him even unto his displeasure.



But did you mention that good deed of mine; which
he once swore shou'd ever be remember'd?



All, Sir, all; but 'twas in vain to urge your merits to
him, tho' to say truth, it was a worthy Action to save him,
from the inhuman Violence of Thieves and Murderers 
but 



Watt, and I, made Four of the stoutest Rogues fly for't,
that ever cry'd Stand upon the Kings high way. After they had
dismounted him, and set their Pistols to his Bosom; he crying and
roaring out for Assistance, I happen'd by meer Accident to
pass by, which was a miraculous chance, nay it was, when I was
out of his Favour too, and had been so for six Months; and yet
Nature prevail'd and I sav'd him nay more 



Fare you well, Sir, I cou'd have said all this as well as
you but 




Good Mr Saveall, do not leave me.



Good Mr Careless, give me leave to be heard as well as
to hear.



I cry you mercy, Sir, pray proceed.



I was saying what you did then for your Uncle was a
worthy Action, and you exprest your self a perfectly kind Ne∣phew;
the Action too drew blessings on your head, notwith∣standing
you were then cast off to Reprobation, he then receiv'd
you into his Bosome again, Adopted you his Son, tho but his
Sisters Son, allow'd you Three hundred Pounds a year, and gave
Walter Fifty Pounds for the good Service he then did.



And he deserv'd it, I'll say that, he receiv'd a flash over
the Coxcomb, he never bore his drink well since.



God be with you the second time.



Nay sweet Mr. Saveall 



I came not altogether to hear you speak, but to speak
unto you my self.



Sir, I will attend with all due submission.



As I was saying Sir Oliver being thus gracious un∣to
you, you presumed upon your Merit still, and flew to new ex∣travagancies,
till for one good service you did him, he repaid
you a hundred, by paying of Surgions Bills for Claps, Wounds,
&c. Redeeming you out of Prison, till wearyed with your Ex∣travagancies
he turn'd you off for ever, nay even at that
time 



Even at that time I could have liv'd, and might do so
still, only by being imagin'd his Heir, had he not been Marry∣ed:
a Curse upon that Marriage, it turn'd the hearts of all well
minded Citizens from me.



A Third time I will take my leave.



Sir, You shall see the last of me first and that immedi∣ately,
that you may let my Uncle know, I'll be no more a Vexa∣tion
to him, unless in Charity he will see me buried; 'tis all I ask.





I hope you will not kill your self and thereby damn
your Soul.



O Sir, you need not disarm me, I can die without
that help I feel my heart ready to break; alas Sir, my Un∣cle
has abandon'd me, and so have you, and then 'tis high time
to dye Watt 








I have delay'd too long to tell him the good News I
bring him.









Mrs. Phebe is come indeed, but I hope you will not go
to Bed with her before him.




Put me to Bed, I say come undress me quickly.



Lord, Lord, Sir, how his heart pants! pangs of death
I fear.



Alas! I hope not so, good Mr. Walter. I will now be
brief Mr. Careless, pray look up.



No, no, Sir, I am well prepar'd to die, I thank my Stars.



Why Sir Oliver is Friends with you!



Alas, alas Sir, 



Why I thought you a Man of more resolution.



Ay, Ay Sir, I have made a resolution.



Come Sir, I profess, all that I have done was only to
search your temper.



Ay, Ay, Sir, but I am a fraid you have searcht too deep.







Come Sir, look up, Sir Oliver intends to take you into
Grace again, and make a farther Tryal of you you may be yet
his Heir, for your New young Aunt is now out of hopes of a
Child, having been Marryed at least 20 Months, and no signs of
Issue.



Ah Sir, can this be possible?



Most possible. Come Sir, you must along with me to
your Uncle; and all things shall be well again.



Your Generosity has reviv'd me, Sir, Watt, my
Sword. tell Phebe I am now in haste, going to see my Uncle,
and cannot stay to speak with her.





Good Gentleman, how feebly he stands! but his Uncles
kind Aspect will recover him.



Sir, what if I shou'd first (to shew the Reformation of
my mind) leave off my unbecoming Perriwig, and put off these
gay Cloths, and Equip my self in a Students Gown? I can be
furnisht at the Brokers, Sir.



The Reformation of your mind's sufficient; and these
Cloths become your Quality.






What? he is departed, it seems.



Call'd by his happy Fortune.



Refuse to see me? but I'll fetch him back.




Hold, hold, sweet Phebe, you will not ruine him; he's
gone to be Friends with his Uncle, and I dare promise you with∣in
a day or two, a New Gown and Petticoat.



You know how to dissemble too pray let him make
me amends for the wrongs he has done me, for I neither can nor
will any longer bear with him.



Nor bear him neither? You had best have a care what
you say.



Nor with him neither, Sawcebox, unless he Marry me,
as he promis'd, and save my honour.



Your honour, with a Pox!



Yes, Sirrah, my honour, which was unspotted before he
seduc'd me, which e're long I'll make him know nay and thou
shalt assist me in it.



Why look you, Mrs. Phebe, be not so passionate, and I'll
do all I can to serve you.



'Tis your safest way, or I'll be the death of you.



Bless me, how desperate Poverty makes a Whore?
 but what Course do you intend to take with him?



Why I intend to send my wealthy Kinsman that lives
  7
in the City to demand satisfaction of him, which if he re∣fuses,
I don't doubt but he'll hamper him.



What I'll warrant you, you mean Saleware, he that
has the slanting Wife?



Why how now Impudence! do you mock my misery?
 I'll make him know what it is to abuse simple Innocence. He
had no way to accomplish his wicked design, but by promising
to Marry me, and at the same time made me refuse the offers
of a good match in the Country, by which I incurr'd the dis∣pleasure
of all my Friends; and does he think to leave me now
at last, without making some provision for me? but he shall
find that my Kinsman has mony, and will stretch his purse to
right me by Law. for I have already given him an Account
of his ill usage to me.



But I hope you have not told him how often he has
enjoy'd you, and the Wheres, and the Whens.



Sirrah, I shall teach you and your Master too, to use me
with more Civility ere it be long.



Why truly, Mrs. Phebe, for all my Fooling I have a
perfect sense of the injuries he has done you, and have not been
wanting in my perswasions to make him less cruel; but
I'll warrant you will refuse me a kiss now for all the good Of∣fices
I have done you.




Away you impudent Raseal.



Come prethee tempt me no farther, for if you do, by
Heaven I shall be most desperately in Love with you.



You in Love with me, you pittiful Creature!



Yes, faith Madam, I am your Creature as well as my
Masters, and can satisfie my appetite very well upon a dish after
he has done with it, and you know the Servingman is always
allow'd to break his Fast upon his Masters leavings Oh, how
Devillish hungry that frown makes me.



You are no Impudent Rascal you?



Come, come, you know a good stomach needs no sawce,
and you may save your self the charge and trouble of going
to Law, nor shall you need the assistance of any other Friend,
to make my Master do you reason, but your Friend and Ser∣vant
honest Watt.







Come take my Counsel, and if I do not handle mat∣ters
  8
so (if you'll but joyn with me) as shall content you, then
say I'm a Man of no Abilities.



How joyn with you?



In the next Room I'll shew you; there I'll dictate a
Letter, which you shall write too him, which shall sting him to
the quick.



Nay I intended to write to him before I departed the
house Oh Cozin, are you come?





The Devil take this sniveling Cuckold for spoiling our
sport. hark ye, Mrs. Phebe, is this your Worshipful Knis∣man
you told me of.



I am the Gentleman, Sir, if you have any thing to say
to me my Kinswoman has told me all, and so pray tell your
Master, and that he's a dishonest Gentleman if he does not Mar∣ry
her according to his promise; 'tis that I came to demand in
her right, or to denounce the Law against him.



'Twas well, Sir, that you came too late to tell him so,
for he wou'd have so swinged you else 



Oh, oh, Sir, these great Speeches cannot fright me, I
neither fear, nor care for swinging, I'll not be dasht, nor basht,
nor cross him out of my Book for such payments; for, Sir, take
notice he is in my Books for Sixscore pounds, as you can wit∣ness,
tho you have lost the remembrance of me; but Sapi∣entia
mea mihi; Stultitia tua tibi.



Oh your Servant, sweet Mr. Saleware, I had indeed for∣got
you how does Mrs. Saleware, your most beautiful Wife?
the Flower de Luce of Pater Noster Row.



No matter to you, Sir, how my Wife does; 'tis, my Kins∣woman
that I talk of, whom your Master has deflowr'd, and
deluded, and led into a Fools Paradise, as the saying is, by swear∣ing
he wou'd make her his Wife, and here he has held her off,
and held her on, till she is with Child by him, and I'll have you
to know, Sirrah, my Cozin is a Gentlewoman.



Pray, Sir, how many Children have you, by your most
exquisite Wife?



Why what's that to you? again Sirrah still medling
with my Wife?



I only spoke it, because you were talking of Children, Sir,
 but how shall I know this is my Masters Child, if she has con∣ceiv'd?



I shall make him know 'tis his. Come, come, there's
Law to be had for money, money to be had for Friends, Friends
to be had in the Spiritual Court; and so, if you please, you
may tell your Master. Come, Cozin, come.



But pray, Sir, give me leave to ask you one question:
From whom doth your Cozin derive her Gentility? Is it from
you or your Wife?



Sirrah, you are a sawey Jackanapes, to offer to meddle
with your betters; for I'll have you to know, I am a Common
Council Man, and as for my Wife, let me advise you not to
mention her but with respect, or I shall bring you, where you
shall be taught to mend your manners.



I cry you mercy, Sir, I know she's for great Persons.



Are you at it again? Well, Sirrah, remember this.
 Come away, Cozin.









Why shou'd you harbour so ill an opinion of me?



Your late unkindness is too visible; did you not take me
in your Arms last night, with exstasie? And when you discover'd
that 'twas I, you coldly turn'd away, as if you had dreamt the
while.



Methinks you dream now, or else you cou'd not talk
so idlely.



This will not do, for I'm resolv'd, I ll never let you rest,
till I know what 'tis has caus'd this Melancholy. I am sure,
be it what it will, it has been but very lately entertain'd. 
Come be free with me, have you enter'd into Bonds for Friends,
and are forc'd to satisfy 'em?



No, no, prethee give o're.



Or has any sad distaster befallen some dear Friend of yours?







Or is it your extravagant Nephews wicked Courses that
afflcts you? I was in hopes you had been Friends with him,
you made your Friend Mr. Saveall and I believe so. You said you
wou'd send for him; have you not? or do you repent the pro∣mise
which you made us?



Neither, upon my life; when e're he comes, he shall
be wellcome to me, prethee leave to be Inquisitive.



Indeed I shall not, Sir, till I know:



Nay good wife 



No persuasion shall prevail, I will know't tho it be a sin
against my self: and Ile forgive it too.



Now shall I play the Fool, and tell her.




You will not tell me then?



Yes, I will, if you will be so good as to forgive it, tho
you are most concern'd to punish it:



Sir, 'tis my duty to forgive any thing, and here again,
I swear I will forgive it.



Let me confirm your mercy and on this Altar
which I have transgrest, offer new vows, of Love and Faith for
ever.




Again, Sir, I forgive what ere it be.



Ile sin no more so, yet I scarce know a man that is not
guilty this way 



Dear Husband, to the business. You've lov'd a pretty Wo∣man,
Is't not so? I mean unlawfu•ly? 



Your guess is right; and I expect my sentence.



Ha, ha, ha, what a Coyle was here, about a thing of no∣thing?
Where shall you find from the Carman to the States-man,
one free from such a fault? 



And can you pardon it then?



Never fear it: tho I've been jealous ever since your last
being in Town.
 But pray, how many Women have you thus lov'd? 



Upon my life but one.



Tell me her name; tho I fancy I suspect who 'tis already.



Saleware my Silkmans Wife.



'Tis she I meant. Pray what price? for she's a handsome
woman;



Faith after a tedious Courtship which she withstood,
with much put-on Coyness and fain'd scorn, crying I had mi∣stook
my woman, she was not of that lewd sort and so
forth, at last I offer'd her a Hundred Guinies, which soften'd
her into a yielding; and then I once enjoy'd her.



I guess the time too. 'T was last Term when you stay'd out
all night, and said you'd been amongst the Wits.



Still you guess right, but that for which
I hate this jilting Quean, is, having purchast her at such a
price, I thought to have lov'd on still on the old stock. But
  11
she turn'd tail and cry'd, Another Hundred Guinies;
and you're welcome; this answer I receiv'd but yesterday.



O unmerciful! how rich would the City be, were
every kindness that their Wives granted, so return'd and pay'd!
Why, twould begger the Court and Country. But here comes
Mr. Saveall and Mr. Careless, I believe. Faith 'tis a handsom Gen∣tleman 






Sir, I have according to your desire brought home
your Nephew Careless; a Penitent he is, and so I recommend
him.



George, thou art welcome, nor will I perplex thee with
any upbraiding of thy past offences.



I humbly thank you, Sir,



Nay, not so grave, good George: Ile have thee live with
all thy wonted Spirit. Leave but thy wonted lewdness and
'tis enough.



Sir, they only serv'd to teach me how I ought to be,
by seeing my own defermity in them, and I hope, have wrought
that Effect in me which you desire 



'Tis well sayd, and, George, thank Mr. Saveall and your
Aunt too, for they were your Advocates,



Hah! my Aunt! how beautiful she is!




Salute her, George 



I dare not, Sir, approach her.



I like that Modesty.





Nay, nay, Sir, he is transform'd from what he was.



Madam, the goodness you have shown me, cannot
be pay'd but with that reverence and respect we pay to Hea∣ven;
for when I wou'd approach you as a Lady to whom I owe
obedience as an Aunt, your bounty and your Beauty gives me
Laws, and thus commands my distance.



This distance is too much. You'le be more welcome, if
you approach more near.



I'd rather offend in my respect, than in my obedience,
and since you command it thus take the humble boldness
 Ah, she's a Heavenly creature 




George, come hither take notice; George, my
  12
house here is yours, my table yours: and all my Servants to
be commanded by you: but you have Watt still?



Yes, Sir, a very harmless honest true hearted Fellow 'tis:
as I have instructed him, he has left off swearing now, and
can say Grace.



'Tis well. Send for him to wait on you: to morrow
Ile pay your debts if you owe any thing.



Some few, Sir, hardly worth taking notice of: they
shall not be your trouble 



You speak well, Sir.



Well, George, what ere they be, they shall be pay'd.
Come lead you Aunt in to Dinner 








Discovers Alitia Saleware: a Prentice, the Lady Thrivewel,
and a Footman.



I Assure your Ladyship, there cannot be better ware in
London, and your Ladyship will find it such in the
wearing.



Have you made a Bill Mrs. Saleware? for I am satisfied in
the goodness of your Commodity; a Note of the particu∣lars
I pray: and at as low a Rate as you can afford for ready
money; for I am never in the City Books, like Heirs under age
and Courtiers:



Your Ladyships pay was ever good, and I have made the
Prices according. Here 'tis, Madam 



Let me see Boy, take you the Box, 'tis all put up.







Give me my Purse, Boy, and go you home with the
Lace. I have only Gold, Mrs. Saleware, which you will weigh be∣fore
you take, I suppose.




That's no great pains, Madam.



How ever Ile not give you the trouble now, pray
send your man for a Glass of beer 



Some beer for my Lady 




That I may take the opportunity to tell you, what possi∣bly
you wou'd be loth he should hear: for 'tis more the
business of the Fore-man of the Shop to keep his Mistresses
secrets.



Your Ladyship is merry.



Not very merry, because I find by your Bill here that I
have laid out more mony than my Husband allow'd me: here
is a Hundred and Eight Pounds and Two shillings, and I am
allow'd but the Hundred.



The rest is no great matter, Madam,



Oh, very great in a Norfolk Ladys Pocket: and wou'd
supply her Credit at Picket, and Lantraloo a whole Christmas in
the Country: tho you great Gamesters of the City here, can
lose and win your Hundreds, whilst 'tis so easily commanded
out of the Pockets of those Country-Ladys Husbands 



I understand not your Ladyship.



Ile tell you then: Sir Oliver, when he was last in Town,
lent you, or left with you, a Hundred Guinies, which he has
given to me: now here is in the Bill one Hundred and Eight
Pounds and Two Shillings, so here is Twelve shillings for you,
and all is paid.



What mean you, Madam?



Why, have you forgot the Money my Husband lent you?
'tis strange, when 'twas to do you such a service.







Yes, a service; have a care you don't make me suspect
that you deserv'd it from him some dishonest way.



Please you to drink, Madam?






After you Mrs. Saleware.
 This Notes right cast up, Boy?



To a Farthing, Madam.





I hope your Ladyship will find your self so well us'd, that
you will always be pleas'd to Honour me with your Ladyships
Custom.



On these Terms always, Mrs. Saleware, and so, Your Servant.



Your Ladyship obedient. Open the Coach for my Lady.



My Footman's there, he need not.



Woud your Coachman wou'd carry your Ladyship to
the Devil.

La. returns still gazing upon Bell.




Hark you, Mrs. Saleware. sure 'tis the same.




Your command's an honour, Madam.



Do you know that Gentleman?



Yes, Madam, he is Gentleman to the Lord Loveless, and
call'd Bellamy.



'Tis a hansom youth, I thought I had seen his Face before.
I commend you for placing your Love here now: but an old
Country Knight is a dangerous man; have a care of such, for
likely, they have handsom Ladys of their own; adieu sweet
Mrs. Saleware 




The Devil take her, how she shot Darts at Bellamy: she
Loves the Beardless Boy, this chast Lady.



Now, Madam, may I be heard?



Yes, if you please to speak.



But you are frowning, Madam, why do those Eyes put on
such Marks of anger, threatning a death to him, whom they
have made their slave?



Fie upon't, what stuff's this, I am out of Humour, and
this will increase it.



Who durst offend you?



An unlucky accident that has happened to me, I have
cozened my self in the Sale of a parcel of Goods, which if my
Husband shou'd know, here wou'd be such a life 



Hang him Mercenary fool, why shou'd he set you here
to forward such mean Trade?



Ay, this talk pleases me.



Ranking his Wife but with his Prentices,



'Tis very true, Mr. Bellamy: 'tis a mean thing as you say,
but I have reveng'd it to day, in the mistake I have made.



I hope it was not much?



Not much; but so much as has spoil'd a Shop-Trader of
me: your Lord told me, I shou'd not be at this Servile pass long:
that he wou'd take me from it, and carry me to the other End
of the Town, and take me a House in the Pellmell 



He still designs it; If I prevent him not.




He said I shou'd have new Cloths, too, and sent the Mercer  15
to me with Patterns of Brocados de or: but I have heard nothing
on't since.



Perhaps this Letter will satisfie you.

 What a cursed office is this, to play the Pander for the man
I love, I am well born, and but for his slattery, had still remain'd
with Honour and in Virtue: but his bewitching tongue wrought
on my easine's, and rob'd me of my Fame: 'twas well in this
disguise I was conceal'd, my sister else had knowri me, and then
I'd been undone: 'tis this that keeps me too, conceal'd, from
the false Loveless, who takes me for a Boy, and makes me do
what even in this bold shape I am asham'd to Act, to Pimp for him:
 Oh heavens! that word but I'll prevent his longer doting
here; to wast his fortune and his love on one, common, ingrate∣ful,
and insensible.



O what a sweet Letter's here, and yet I have a kind of a
mind to this Bellamy too at Shatliens at six, good 
 Sir, I find my Lord is all honour.




But, Madam will you think on me that languish for you.



Because I am kind to your Lord, you imagin I must be so
to you? but I wou'd have you to know I am none of those: I am
not faln from his favor yet, or if I were, I shou'd not fall to
Pages there be more Lords.



Madam, you have silenc'd me.




Nay, not so hasty, come back Mr. Bellamy.



Can you take his mony forsooth? d'ye hear, Sir.



Stay you behind the Counter, Sirrah; cannot I handle
the Gentleman without you? What, fly for my first denial?
 Come, let a smile encourage you again 



Oh how you bless me! 



 Come, come, leave off to talk like a Player, and if you
have a passion for me, let me know't Are you asham'd? that
blush wou'd seem to say so come then, whisper it in my ear 

Oh strange, is that the highest price you dare venture? I can∣not,
Sir, afford it so: yet this before you go I'm sure you
cannot match it.




I shall forget my duty to my Lord 



Prithee do so, and so will I, and tell me what you wou'd
have me to do with you.



I wou'd intreat you 



Forward, Sir, without a blush.



That you wou'd vouchsafe 



To do what, I pray?



To wear this Watch by your side and every minute
think of me.



I could have done that without all this intreaty is
this all?



No, there is something more, but when I think how
fair you are, and what a blessing my Lord injoys in you 



Prithee no more of him: but ask me something.



I dare not hope you can grant me any thing.







Because you love my Lord so well.



Perhaps not when he is present but tell me what is it?



That you'd be pleas'd 







To grace this Ring with your fair hand.



And what hurt will that be to your Lord? come,
come, I must divine your meaning now, and what returns I must
make you for all these presents but 



But you'll be cruel and betray me to my Lord.



But I will not, tho' I have you at my mercy; for it is evi∣dent
you wou'd lye with me deny it if you can.



Did I name such a word now? I swear you make me
blush.



Then you're a fool; come, take courage, and be more a
man, for you shall 







Why you shall you understand me, do what I said you
wish't to do.



Oh how happy you will make me!



But 'tis on this condition.



Let it be what it will I'll do't.



Why you saw here e'n now, a young Lady.







'Tis my Lady Thrivewell.



Wife to Sir Oliver Thrivewell?



Yes; it seems you know her then.



I have seen her, I think, when she was a Maid.



Well, she's passionately in love with you you saw her
speak to me, and how unwilling she was to go, and lose the pleasure
of looking on you.



What does all this tend to?



Nay, I speak against my self, to oblige that sweet person,
which few women do; but I have particular reason for't, and you
must make love to her. You know what I mean.



Alass, how shou'd I get access?



O, my Lord's to borrow mony of her husband, and you're
to be employ'd, I know upon the Message, then you'l have opportunity,
and she being willing, the bus'ness may soon be done: 
and 'tis the only way to win my love.



This is to try my constancy.



I vow I do not, but will be yours intirely, when this is
done; but see my husband: We must sup to night at Shaltines.





How does my dear Ali.? Mr. Bellamy, your servant,
I hope my Honour'd Lord's well. Why what, you are not brisk
and gay! I hope my wife has not couzen'd you in any Wares; or
are you and she upon some bargain, that you cannot agree about?
You must comply with Mr. Bellamy, my sweet Aly. he is my Noble
Lord's Favorite, and must be us'd well, and shall, whether I am
within or without doors.



Sir you mistake, and I must take my leave.




What an Asenego's this? he might a return'd my Com∣plement,
tho' I care not a fart for him. I hope thou hast couzen'd
him indeed, Ale.



Thomas, you are mistaken, Thomas, in setting me to
couzen any body; I am weary of this sneaking Trade, Thomas,
and of this taudrum City dress, Thomas, as I have often told
you, Thomas; but you think a wife shou'd obey her husband.



Never the sooner for a hasty word, sweet heart; but for
these Tawdrums, as you call them, I say, they are the City-fashion:
yet you may follow your own humor, and my Lord's fancy, as I
promis'd before I had you.



Why, that's well said, Friend.



Nay, now I am sure she's pleas'd, she calls me Friend, she
ever did so when she was in good humor.
 But, Friend, I have found a chapman for the Lace my Lord
  18Lack-Land bespoke, and wanted mony to pay for: a chapman that
will buy it all.



I have sold it, Friend, already.



How, Friend, and is't paid for?



Yes, tis paid for.



Well, it comes as pat to stop a Gap.



It has stopt a gap already. I have bought me things I
wanted, fine Clothes, and Tours, and Points and Knots, and 



And never the sooner for a hasty word.



'Tis so, Friend, what City-Wife can draw in Customers to
her Shop, that is not Lady-like? and therefore I have done it.



Say you so, say you so? 



What are you angry at it?



I were a beast if I should no, no, Friend, I am not angry:
let it go & sapientia mea mihi, is my Motto.



Well Thomas, look to your Shop, for I must go abroad.







How, dare you ask that question?



I am Corrected. Sam, wash your Face, and get your Cloke
and Gloves and wait on your Mistriss.



I'le have no Sam, to tell you all he fees: In good time, is
that friendly? 



I am again Corrected, but you'l return by supper time?



Again are you at it?



I've don, I've don.



I'l neither come to supper, nor to bed, perhaps.



Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope.



Nor when I do come home, you shall not ask me, Where
I have been, what I have done, or what Company I had?



No, no; sapientia mea mihi, I say still.







Enter Careless: Watt with a Candle.


Are not we in another world, Watt? And have not I im∣prov'd
my time well, already, look you here, firrah?




 'Tis a comfortable sight, Sir, may it long conti∣nue so.



I'll score no more Reckonings in Taverns now, nor hide
  19
my self in Priviledged places, to prevent the Alarms of damnable
Duns, that besiege a Chamber-door as soon as day. I owe nothing
now, Boy, and here's delicious Gold, besides, substantial Met∣tal
 hark, how it rings. 



Yes, 'twill ring the Changes shortly.



So let it, Watt, for necessaries and chime all out too, for
I can manage my Unkle now, and drain new showrs when this
is gone.



And do you call Claret, Whores, Hectors, and Fidlers, Ne∣cessaries?



Why yes, or the devil's in't.



What, Sir, shall go for Pious Uses, for you'l have little
left?



Pious Uses! Art mad?



No, Sir, but I call it a pious thing, to have regard in
some degree to your poor whore Phebe; she'l come railing home
else, and spoil all.



She cannot injure me, the World's my own. Do's not all
the House adore me? the Servants and the Tenants call me young
Master. Do's not my Unkle let Leases, take Mortgages, and let
Money in my Name? And has he not taken care I shall have
a thing, call'd a Wife, worth ten thousand pound? And can I fear
the Clamour of a little whore, thinkest thou? No.



'Tis very well, Sir, and I admire your luck, but most, to
see the fine young Lady, your Aunt, so kind to you; Why she out∣does
your Unkle that way.



She shall be no loser by that, I have resolv'd she shall not
go un-rewarded by me.



But still, Sir, Mrs. Phebe is forgotten.



You are, methinks, damnable careful of Mrs. Phebe, but
I have answer'd here her impudent Letter she sent me, wherein
she desir'd me to marry her, a Pox upon her: Here, carry it
her, with these ten Guineys, but do not give them her, till she pro∣mise
to write, nor come no more, till I think fit to send to her.



That may be long enough, for ought I know.



Why, faith it may be so: for I must leave off this lewd
whoring life, for reasons I have.



I Sir, I shou'd like it well, if you wou'd do so, and make
it your bus'ness to court the Widow in an honourable way; you
were about her once, and I think not ill receiv'd; Faith, Sir, try her
gain. 



Well, well, Sir, go you about your bus'ness. 



I'm gone, Sir. 
Ex. Watt.





Mr. Saveall, I see you are a man of Ho∣nour,
and mean to keep your word in carry∣ing
a Letter to the Widow for me here 'tis ready. 
Careless is Sealing the other Letter.








Faith I have been hard imploy'd, writing News into the
Country, to several persons of Quality, of how Affairs stand in
Court and City: of News of State, and News of Gallantry, all,
all that has come within my knowledge.



A handsome and commendable Imployment, and will
improve your knowledge, and in time you may become a Parlia∣ment-man,
and assist in the great Affair of the Rule of the Nation.



When I am married, Sir, I shall take up.



I shall be over joy'd to see such good effects of my nego∣tiation
of this bus'ness.



Faith, Sir, I am unus'd to write to Ladys, and a little
awkard in such matters, but I shall mend with practice. In the
mean time I beseech you, Sir, to beg my pardon for the roughness
of the Language.



To the most Incomparable, and most Virtuous

of her Sex, Mrs. Crosstil, present. The outside is handsome,
and promiseth the in-side to be courtly and civil.



Pray Heaven she have the same opinion of it: which
with your kind interpretation may do much.



I shall not be wanting to say all things to your advantage,
and doubt not but I shall prevail in your behalf.



Oh, Sir, how you continue your goodness!



Well, Sir, expect me and your Fortune modestly early
in the morning.



Your Servant, Sir. Now the Devil takeme if can wish him
good luck, only ten thousand pound is a most delicious sum: But
who comes here? my Aunts Governant? how very like a Bawd
she wou'd look in any other place? but being an Attendant on my
Aunt I may be mistaken.




Not to interrupt your Cogitations, Sir, I have here from
my Lady brought you. 



What dear Closett, any thing from her is precious 



A Caudle, Sir, the same her Ladyship eats to strengthen
her. O, 'tis a most profitable Cordial Restorative; I made it,
Sir, my self.




How am I oblig'd to her Generosity, which so far ex∣ceeds
my merits!
How she graces me in all companies, and conversation, with
her particular Favors: recommending me, and commending me
to all the Ladys that pay her visits: Then what a care she takes
of my Lodging, my Chamber, Furniture, my Table drest up,
my fine Twilights, my Persumes, and my Plate: and what not?
 Why here are rich things in this Caudle too. 



Have you perceiv'd that? Ile assure you, theirs Amber
Greece. 



Ah! Closett, what pitty 'twas this fair young Aunt of
mine was not married to a young man?



Alas, Sir! Aye, great pitty.



She is the Charmingst Lady!



Indeed she is so, Sir, I have known her, and serv'd her from
a Child, and then she was a Charming Child: And as she grew to∣wards
Woman she was a Charming Maid. And now she is a charm∣ing
Lady, as you say, Sir: And cou'd I live to see a Child of hers,
I shou'd think I had liv'd long enough, unless I might live to see
that have Children too: which I cou'd wish withal my heart.



I had rather see you at the Devil, and your Charming
Lady too; but I hope my Uncles Impotence; or her honesty,
will preserve her from my curse.



 But, alas Sir, I shall never see her have one 







Say you so, Sir, because 'twill hinder your being
Heir? But, I thought you had valu'd your Aunt above all that.



So I do, Closett, I spoke of the bottom of the Caudle:
that that was Excellent;

 But, dost think there are no ways, Closett, to get my Aunt
with Child?



Ways? Yes, yes, Sir, there are ways enow, did not her
too nice Virtue spoil all.



Canst not thou perswade her to her good?







Nay, do not mistake me, Closett, By this good Guiney,
I meant no harm, 



No, in my Conscience, Sir, yon spoke in pure Love to
your Aunt.



 Nay, nay, Nay, you shall take it; Nor do I care
if thou tell'st my Aunt, how dearly I love her, and how well I
wish her: Nay, Gad and she were not my Aunt, tell her, I had
rather get her a Son and Heir, than inherit all my Uncles Estate
my self.



Good heart! how passionately, and honestly he speaks!
Well, 'tis a good thing to be grateful:




Alas! that's my Lady calls.



Kiss her dear hands from me, and tell her oh,
tell her, that I know not what, I love her so, I cannot ex∣press
it.



I had forgot her message to you, I have the dullest brain
of my own 







My Lady intreats you wou'd 



That I wou'd? with all my Soul, I wou'd 



My Lady, desires you 



Thy Lady desires me? By Heaven, and she shall have me.



Lord, Sir, she desires you, 



The Devil take me, if I do not desire her too, for all she's
wife to my Uncle.



Will you not hear me out, Sir? she desires you to go a∣broad
with her.



Oh, any whither, to Chelsey, Knights-Bridge, Bran∣ford,
 Geernwich, I know all the convenient houses at every
place; and will be as secret 



I do not understand you, Sir.



The Pox take this tongue of mine, it will be talking in
the wrong place. 




Well, Sir, you'll go with my Lady, Ile tell her.



I will: Tell her, she shall command my life.





Closett, you make good hast.



Madam, I was just coming. But, Mr. Careless, was talk∣ing
so affectionately of your ladyship, and so tenderly, that me∣thoughts,
I cou'd have stay'd a whole day to have heard him.



I am oblig'd to him. But, Nephew, you must go abroad
with me, to the Park, and to the Exchange; if you can leave
your Study so long.



All the world to wait on you. My dear Aunt, I have no
Business, that can or shall hinder me, from sacrificing the
whole time I have to live, to your Service.



Dear George, use less Complement to me.



Give it a kinder name, I do beseech you. 



Come, the Coach-man waits, and we shall have no time
between this and Supper. You must not talk now, good Ne∣phew.



I'm all obedience Madam, but a Pox on't, I must
meet my Gang at the Rose to night. 




O that Heaven had sent my Lady such a Husband.








Discovers old Sim the Butler asleep in a Chair, a Candle burning
almost out. After a great Noise of calling Sons of Whores, &c.
and bouncing at the Door, Enter Careless drunk, all loose;
and without his Perriwig.


MOney, ye Sons of Whores? ask me for money? As if,
George Careless ever paid Coach, or Chair Men 
unmerciful Villains money no, no! This is not an Age of
Payment.
SINGS.A Pox of the cautious Fool,
That limits his time, and his Glass:
Who drinks, and who Wenches by rule,
Is Damn'd for a Cynical Ass.
But give me the Boy that is gay,
Whose time is his slave, and will drink
Beyond the dull limits of day,
And ne'r from his Company shrink.

  24 Who's yonder? Old Sim my Uncles Butler? a 
very honest Fellow, now is he diligently sleeping for my
coming home, and most carefully and kindly left the Door open
for me: So, ho, ho, Old Simon, so, ho, ho, up, up,
dull Mortal.

I have use for thee. Lord,! Lord! what Sots and Beasts,
some Men make of themselves, to sleep away half that short
life Heaven has given them! What will this wicked World
come too? Why Sim, ye drowsie Slave, up I say, 








Why, Sim, ye Son of a Whore, is this a time to sleep in?
Open thine Eyes, behold me, and guess what Business I have
for thee.



Au, au, anon, Sir.



Nay now, good Sim, now. 



Shall I never sleep more?



Unconscionable Simon, no reason in thy Sleep? Come
hither, Sim, I have honest lawful business for thee, prithee
 fetch me a Whore. 



'Tis my young Master George's voice, Au, au, deli∣ver
me well out of this lewd Town again, that I may have my
fill of Sleep, and Pudding. Au, au, mercy on me, who's here?
Aye, 'tis he, my young Master George, at this late hour.



You lie, Sim, you lie, 'tis early 



So it should be, by my blinking Candle. But how, Sir,
came you in this lamentable pickle?



How do you mean, Sir? 



Why, Sir, wheres your Sword, and Periwincle? sure
you have been Fighting, Sir.



Only kickt a Couple of Chair-men that, had the impu∣pudence
(wou'dst thou think it, Sim,) to ask me money.



Alas, Sir, that they shou'd offer it 



I, to me. Sim! me that always bilk the Slaves. 
Enter Chair-men, with Sword and Perriwig.



The Constable and Watch! well, a my Conscience he
never came home in's life but 'twas thus attended.



These, these, are the Sons of Whores, that had the
Impudence to ask me money.
I. Cha Your Worship was mistaken, we scorn to ask your
  25
Worship money, we know you better then •o, as they say, ••.
But, if your Worship wou'd be pleas'd to give us something
o drink your Worships health, after our cold sitting up all
Night, we shou'd be bound to your Worship.



Alas, poor Devils! Sim, give 'em a Guiney to drink.
But no paying, good Sim, 'tis an ill Precedent. 



Good Mr. Simon, consider us, for we have waited all
night at the Rose Door; and he fearing only that we wou'd ask
him money, fell on us, and beat us, we disarm'd him, and then
to Cuffs we went: I protest, Sir, no Fault of ours.



Well, get you gone: and come again anon, and you shall
be paid.



God bless your Worship.




Come, Sir, will you not please to go to Bed? 'tis
broad day light, and you'll wake your Uncle, and you know that
may be fatal to you.



My Uncle! Damn my Uncle. Sim, I tell thee in pri∣vate,
my Uncle's an old Cuckold; dost hear? a Cuckold, Si∣mon. 



God forbid, Sir, my Lady's a Virtuous Lady, tho I say't.



Why so she is too, Sim, but I speak of my Uncle 
I say, and I say, again he is a Cuc-Cuckold, or shall
be a Cuckold before I have done, Sim, my conscience urges
me to't. 'twill be a work of great Humility, and Charity,
and this is a wicked world, Sim, a very wicked world; and
'tis time some should mend for Example, and now we
talk of mending, Sim, fetch me a Whore. 



A Whore, Sir? 



I, Sim, a Whore. 



Bless me, Sir! Why we have nonei'th' house, nor can
fetch any out of Doors.



Sim, you lie, Sim, do not give your mind to lying,
'twill spoil thee, no Whores i'th' house, why where's
Mrs. Figit, my Ladies woman? Doll the Chamber-maid? Starcht
Susan, of the Landry? or greasie Bess, that's under the Cook?
Or my Ladies Nurse, old Winter? Or where's my Lady her
self? she'l serve now. No Whores i'th' house!



Deliver me! What do you mean, Sir?



What all sober discreet persons shou'd mean, to know
  26
all the she-things in the house, therefore, Sirrah, fetch me a
Whore; or I shall untile, I shall. 




O hold, Sir, I wou'd not for the world you shou'd be
heard.




Hold! hold! there's a Female, come hither, Wench,
 come hither, I say. Why you drunken Baggage, can't
you stand still?



Pox on you, he cou'd no sooner ask for a Whore, but
you must bolt out. 



I was going to clean up my Kitchen. 



Hang thy Kitchen, thou must along with me, I have
need of thee. 



Any service that I can do that's honest, Sir. 



Honest, I, I, we'll be very honest, thou shalt only
go to Bed with me a little; dear Bess, let me kiss thee.

Well, 'tis a rare Wench! she wou'd victual a whole Camp; a
kiss a day to each man, were a plentiful meal, she smells so of
Beef and Mutton: and I have a raw stomach, and cou'd digest
her now finely. Come honest Bess, let's up. 



I hope you do not take me for a Whore, Mr. George?



A Whore, why what wou'd you be taken for, a
Cherubin? Can I take thee for a Nobler Creature?



Ah, fie upon you, Mr. George, I did not think you had
the Face to seduce a young thing as I am. Well, my Lady
shall know't.



Come away, I say, come, you do not know
what I design you, when my Nuncle dies. 



I, when will that be, trow?



Canst not thou put a little ingredient into his Potage?
 That will do his business, and send him to Heaven without the
help of a Doctor, and then 







Then, Ile marry thee, by this hand, marry thee. 
Come away, and do not stand in thy own light.



Tell him you'l come, you Slut.



Well, Sir, you have overcome me; go you to bed, and
I ll but pull off my Shoes, and steal up to you presently.



Sim, will she keep her word?



I, I warrant you, Sir; we have all found her a kind soul,
and honest in that point, tho I say't. Pray go to bed.



Give me some wine first. 



Wine, Sir? you have had Wine enough of all con∣science,
a vast quantity of Wine, a vast quantity.



What thou takest me to be drunk now, I'll warrant, dost
thou? No, Sim, I have that rare quality, the more I drink
the soberer I am, 'tis a Miracle to me now that, therefore
give me some Wine, to set me right, that I may look thus 
gravely on my Uncle.



Nay, pray, Sir, go to Bed, 



Dam me, Sim, I'll have your Leathern Ears, if I have no
wine. So, ho, some Wine you Rascal some Wine.




Ah, good. Sir, speak softly.



Softly, you Bitch? why who do I fear? Softly! 
there's softly for you, and there's hola. 




I, I, Sir, you shall not hear me cry out, for all your
Kicking for your sake. 



Softly, quoth a, I'll softly ye. 




So here's fine doings! you'l be turn'd out for this anon,
and I after you for my kindness in setting up for you all night.




Now am I compassionate, dear Sim, come kiss me,
 kiss me, I say. Why you scurvy coy Rascal, why don't
you kiss me? So dry your Eyes, and hear me sing a Song
that will make thee weep afresh, Listen with reve∣rence.
SINGS.There was two Cats sat on a Well,
And one Cat there fell in;
But the Cat that sate by,
Wept bitterly;
Because that Cat was t'other Cats Cozin Germin.
But the Cat, &c.








Enter Mrs. Crostill, Saveall and Betty.




Ha, ha, ha, I suppose you know the inside of this,
Mr. Saveall?



No, Madam, but I believe it passionate and Courtly, as
he that sent it: only indeed he commanded me to excuse the
roughness of the Stile, he being unus'd to write Epistles of
this Nature.




Ha, ha, ha. Pray Sir, read it: you must be acquainted
with his excellent Stile.



I am overjoy'd to see her so well pleas'd; wou'd I had
brought it last night.





Read aloud, Sir, for I can never be weary of hear∣ing
it.




Thou damnable impudent Woman, hah, 
how darest thou, tho but in thy Dreams, imagin I am, or can be
so great a Coxcomb as to marry thee; a sin which thou art Damn'd
for but believing. 
 O Heavens! the Devil himself was sure his Secretary.




O Sir, proceed I pray.




Dost thou not hear I am again establish't in my Un∣cles
favor, and dost thou think I can want 5 or 10 Guinies to
give a Wench, or that there are not Wenches to be found for such
Sums; that I must be destined to marry you with a Pox. 



I, I, 'twas the Devil that Dictated to him.









No, therefore let me advise you, since you are so mad
for a Husband, (tho I believe you love me, and only me,) mar∣ry
a Blockhead, either in the City, or Country, that thinks there's
Joys in Marriage, and I may chance to be so kind to be your
Friend, by the by; and so you may have Children, like
Yours, (that way,) G. Careless.




You have not read many such Love-letters.



This injury to you, Madam, is irreparable; but the af∣front
done to me I'll fight him for.




Oh, Sir, he has oblig'd me beyond expression, and I
beseech you tell him so: nay I'm in earnest. For what concerns
your self, do what you please.



I do unsay all I said in his behalf, and beg your par∣don. 




'Tis all one, Sir, I love him still the better; and tell
him, this Letter has made such impressions here, as nothing can
remove: and if you will oblige me indeed, you must bring him to
me, and let me alone to speak to him, and tell him of his Letter.



Sure you're not in earnest, Lady?




By my life, I am, and I beseech you credit me, and bring
him to me to day; bring him in good humor too, and then I'l say
you are my friend indeed. 



I will not fail you, Lady.






Was there ever so extravagant a creature as this Care∣less?



Madam, will you not be reveng'd on him?




Yes, Betty, the most severe way that ever woman
took. I'll love him! love him to that degree, he shall confess
no hate was ever so perplexing.



I confess, Madam, you were ever of a contradictive hu∣mour,
and possibly you'l love him the better, because he has af∣fronted
you.




I do so, and am all impatience till I see him. Prithee
give me the Song he made to me the last time he was in the
Country. 
SONG.Prithee, Widow, give o're, I cannot comply,
What shall I lie mew'd, and kept tame till I die?
A Pox of the noose, and the fools it has made,
I ne're can submit to keep up the dull trade.
In Wine and in Love, I will spend all my life,
Give me the kind Damsel, and damn the Fop-wife.
In Wine and in Love, &c.











'Tis a meer folly to go to bed now, 'tis time to rise. Well,
Simon, well, thou art bound to give God thanks, thou wert not
born a Gentleman, some comfort that. Mercy upon us, what
lives they lead! never rise till three of the clock after noon, (or
very rarely) and then they are damnable dry, and crop-sick, 
but not at all hungry, so they lose both breakfast and dinner,
(two great blessings;) instead of Prayers, the first words they
speak, as soon as awake, are Damn me, how cursed drunk
was I last night! Hay, Jack some small Beer, you Vermin, 
(very fine) well at last he gets himself dress'd, calls for his
Coach (and not a word of dinner) rouls to Play-house, to that
that has the bawdiest Play (for that settles his stomach,) tells as
many as he meets (that he knows) how he was claw'd away last
night, but forswears drinking again, for at least a day or two;
then spys me a Vizard, over the benches he stalks, and there
thunders a deal of leud bawdy, till he has won her heart quite;
away they go, sup and get drunk in spight of vows of sobriety, and
then to some convenient Mansion of pleasure, where they spew
and snore away the remaining part o'th' night, and then comes
repentance, and never till then have they any grace before their
eyes.




Mr. Simon, where's your pretious young Master?



So, my pretious young Master; he has heard of his morn∣ings
revel-rout. Sir, I know you are dissatisfi'd, as you have
reason, but as you have ever been, be so good to pardon this fault
too.



Pardon him! I'd sooner pardon the man shou'd cuckold
me. No, Sir, where is he?



Alas, Sir, you know he has not been abed above an hour
or two, 'tis pity to disturb him.



So, the old trade too still; I say, he must be disturbed,
and that quickly too, or I shall make a soul house, and so tell
him.



Why, Lord, Mr. Saveall! 



Lord me no Lords, Mr. Simon, I say I will speak to him, go
tell him, or I'l go to him, on such a message as shall not please him
very well.



Well, Sir, I'l go, tho' it grieves my heart to wake him.




This affront has rais'd an unusual storm in my breast,
had not the Lady been of my acquaintance, and the Match of my
proposing, it had never griev'd me: My comfort is, she is so hu∣morous,
that this Letter will rather bring her on, than put him
off: but what she'l think of me the while 'tis for that I will be
reveng'd, that I may let her see I had no hand in't.





Oh, Mr. Saveall 



Make your self ready.




Faith, I sat up a little late last night. 



Dress you, I say.



Dress me, for what? 'tis too early.



The better, Sir. 



Why do's the Widow intend to marry me instantly?



No, Sir, but I intend to fight with you.







Bless my soul, here's fine doings!



What injury have I done you, that you shou'd ruin my
Reputation?







You have put me on a base imployment, to carry a
Letter to a Noble Lady, stuft with such Language, as your Lust,
the Devil and all your Cabal of Hectors cou'd never have invented
such another.
Enter Watt.

Cou'd not your Pimp there serve for the base Office?



I do not understand you.



You had better have eaten fire, or sent it with your
ears, than have provok'd me thus by being the Messenger.




Forbear, and hear me, Sir, before you take a resolution to
abandon me: If I must lose the Widow, by Heaven 'tis by the most
unlucky mistake in the world. Watt, come hither, Did you
carry the Letter I sent to Phebe?



Yes, Sir, and the poor soul's overjoy'd at the good News
you sent her.



The Devil take her for a lucky whore. That Letter, Sir,
was it I writ to the Widow, and that which you carried was meant
for this Damsel: I know 'tis so.



How cou'd it be possible you shou'd so mistake?



Sealing them before I had superscrib'd them, a Pox upon
me: and to be charg'd with rudeness to the Widow, when I
was so religiously bent to lead a virtuous Matrimonial life. The
Letter, Sir, (for I'l confess to you) was written to a poor retaining
whore of mine, whom I have turn'd off.



It was not so directed.



No, no, Sir, there was the mistake; and Fortune's al∣ways
kind to whores, those of her own trade. Well, hang
me, if 'twere not the sweetest well-pen'd thing, Sirrah, go and
fetch it back.



Lord, Sir, she'l n'ere part with it.



Then take it by force, you Rogue you.







Thus, you dog, thus. 

This was a Plot of your's, sirrah, I believe you lye with her, you
are so ready to cheat me to serve her but I'l be reveng'd on
you both.




I, I, now we may go hang, now you are in favour with
Sir Oliver but if I do not fit you for't 




I am in your debt for being absent last night too, and let∣ting
Sim sit up for me, whom Iabus'd. A rogue 




'Tis all upon account, Sir. 



No more, Mr. Careless, 'tis sufficient and since 'twas a mis∣chance,
I am pacify'd, and will set you right with the Widow again.



But then she I know of this Mistris I have had, but the
truth is, 'tis now grown so common a thing amongst the married
men too, as well as the Gallants, that she cannot but forgive it, I
think. But who's here? my Aunt with a young handsom fel∣low;
she's undrest too, Death! now am I jealous, but for my
Uncles sake, I must needs beat him.



By no means, Sir, I wou'd not have you commit such
an outrage in your Aunts presence, and your Uncles house, for all
the world.



You do not know him, Sir?



Yes, Sir, I do, he is both friend and servant to a person
of Honour, whom I value, the Lord Loveless.



Mr. Saveall, I must speak with you.




In the name of pleasure, what is this stripling imploy d
for to my Aunt? I perceive they have been in private too toge∣ther,
not so much as Bawd Closset to overlook 'em: 'tis a pretty
youth, and I must beat it, when I see time convenient.



Mr. Saveall, pray speak to Sir Oliver, for my Lord is go∣ing
to marry a rich Fortune, and will redeem his mortgaged
Land that's forfeit to Sir Oliver.



Six hundred pound, you say, Madam? I will get it
done for his Lordship.



Here's a pretty come-off! as if he were chamber'd up with
her all this while to borrow mony: Ah woman, woman, what
Politicks you have!



Your servant, Mr. Bellamy.



I go your way, Sir, and will wait on you.




I wou'd wait on him too. 



George, come back whither go you?



To bring the young Gentleman to the gate.



Oh, you are too ceremonious, George, 'tis below you.



So; I am instructed, Madam. 



You know not whose servant he is.



So, she loves him, I know it by her slighting him. 

Oh, Madam, there are Lords servants that may deserve the favour
of Knights Ladies.



Not so, good George.



As the Lady may like 'em, Madam.



Sure you're not sober yet, George, or melancholy. I hope
nothing troubles you?







Come, come, I know your grief, you think I am angry
with you for the pickle you came home in last night, or rather
this morning: but I excus'd your absence to your Uncle, pre∣tending
I had sent you to my Brother's, five mile out of Town, to
do a little bus'ness for me: and you may see I am not much dis∣pleas'd
by that, tho' you were with your blades, George.



Did you do me this good office to my Uncle?



Yes indeed, and he believ'd me.



Cou'd you be so good? Indeed I was amongst 'em,
but will be better temper'd for the future.



I shall be glad to see't, for your own sake.



I will obey your will in every thing.



Oh, had you beheld your self, and how you were hung
together.



A drunkard is a beast, but I'l be so no more. 



That's well promis'd; and I'l reward it thus, George, there's
a small stock of Gold. 




Dear Aunt, let me kiss the hand from whence such
bounty flows.



Not to afflict you with all you said and did: I will only
chide you for calling for whores, George.



Oh Lord! why did I? did I? what a wicked dog was I!



You frighted poor old Sim, with Fetch me a whore: 
the poor wretch blest himself, and cry'd, There was none i'th'
house! then you roar'd out, How! no whores i'th' house?
where's Figet? where starcht Susan? where's Doll, greasie Bess,
or old Winter? meaning Closet, or my Lady her self? No
whores! But why me, George, up in your Catalogue?



God forgive me, was I so prophane a Rogue? such an un∣hallow'd Rascal?



Yes, consider it well, George, and lay it to your heart, so
fine, so handsome a young Gentleman to spoil himself with such
lewd courses, 'tis great shame and pity.



A Pox on this damn'd Wine, 'tis that debauches me to all
the other sins.



'Tis true, had you not been drunk, you wou'd never have
medled with so sad a dirty creature, as Bess the scullion. 



I, that's it she's most offended at, she's not displeas'd I
call'd for her Ladyship last night; she presents me too with Gold:
I will apprehend her meaning: she wou'd have me leave
off debauching, and give her a proof of my passion and my man∣hood. 




Come, come, be not melancholy, tho', George, for I wou'd
have you still gay and pleasant, tho' not lewd.



Madam, you have reform'd my soul, and now I beseech
you take the fruits of your good advice: I am all yours.







As I say, the most passionate Lover, the most secret Ser∣vant,
  35
that ever was blest with a Lady's favour.



Sure, Sir, you are not well?



Not well? Gad I defie all the Surgeons in London, that
can say the contrary I am found, as a Bell. 



Not well in your senses, Sir.



Do you doubt my secresie? I'l never be drunk more
to endanger my blabbing in that humour. My Uncle shall ne∣ver
know it.



Can you name your Uncle, and yet pursue me this shame∣ful
way?



Who the Devil can do you this kindness more natu∣rally
and less sinfully than my self? am I not his own flesh and
blood?



Surely you do but rally?



By Heaven I am in earnest: try. In earnest? yes. Come
let me lead you to my chamber, and give you the first clear
proof of my intire passion. 




I know you can but jeast.



I'l convince you above. Dear, Madam, come.



And wou'd you wrong your Uncle?



Why do you name him? he's not so just to you, you may
Cuckold him with less sin, than lye with him; for then you are in
danger, for he's a spark abroad, I can assure you.



How can you tell?



Oh, I have heard it every where. But what needs all
this Ceremony? come let's up. 



Unhand me. If you provoke me, I'l undo you. 



She's angry, what a Pox, have I mistaken her?




Is this the best construction you can make of all my kind∣ness
to you?



Pox on't, I am not mistaken in her neither, but

apply'd my self to her, too soon after her young Monsieur had left
her. E'gad I'l tell her so too. 



Well, I see a penitence in your face, George, for what you've
done; and if 'tis true, I can easily forgive you; but here comes
my woman. 





The Devil take her.







Look that you never tempt me so again.




Then I must dye, unless you'l yield without it.



Look handsomely, and do not betray your self, and for once
you are safe.



So, she'l come about again.




Well, go Cozin, and do that Affair for me I spoke of.



I go, Madam, I have my instructions all?



Yes, George, if you can remember. 



Oh, witty Devil, how she has turn'd the discourse! by
which I find she puts no faith in old Maulkeena there: I love her
invention.




Now what's the news with you?



A Citizen waits to speak with you, Madam.











Sure his Aly has impudently told him what I have done.



There's a Gentlewoman too, Madam.





Re-enters with Tom Saleware and Phebe.




Madam, I humbly desire a word or two with your Lady∣ship,
concerning my Cozen Phebe here: She's abus'd by a Gentle∣man
that lies here, as I understand; Mr. Careless, Madam, who has
damag'd her much.







Read this, Madam, 'twill inform you of the truth of what
I say, hold up your head, Phebe, we'll not be dasht in a good
Cause. 





My Uncle's favour has incourag'd me to make my humble adres∣ses
to you in the way of holy Marriage, I shall not be altogether
unworthy the Honour of being your Husband, since I may justly
enough hope my Estate may be sutable to your desires: 'Tis long
that I have had a passion for you, and impatient till I find whe∣ther
'twill be receiv'd well by you. If you vouchsafe to do so, I
shall not only declare my self a good and grateful Husband, but live
the happyest of all men,
Ever yours,
G. Careless.
This is so far from injury, that me thinks 'tis very kind.



O but Madam, he is gone from his word, and denies
this his Act and deed, like a disloyal man; and having born her
in hand thus long, wou'd now cast her off: Sent his man to
ravish the Letter from her, but never the sooner for a hasty
word. Cozin, we'll not be dasht nor basht, I'll warrant thee.




To the fair hands of Mrs. Phebe Gimcrack. 
Is that your name?



I am the wretched thing that owns it, Madam.



Never the sooner for a hasty word.



I will endeavour to serve you, Mr. Saleware, if I
knew how.



O Lord, Madam, you are discreet, and if your Ladyship
takes this matter in hand, I doubt not but to see my Cozin happy,
and a good end of the business; but if it cannot be, I shall find
Friends, nor shall her Cause be starv'd for want of monies, as
they say: For we will not be dasht, nor basht; Sapientia mea
mihi, is my word, and so dear Madam, I have discharg'd my
mind.



Well, Mr. Saleware, I'll take care of your Kinswoman,
and do my best for her.



I humbly thank you, Madam. Phebe, do you mind
me? Bear your self to this Noble Lady handsomly, and high, as
becomes the Family you came off; She may chance do you
more good than all my high talking: I pray carry it high; 
or, Sapientia mea mihi, Stultitia tua tibi; that's my Motto.



O doubt not me, Sir; nor my Carriage. 



Closett, take this young Woman up to your Chamber,
and treat her well; I will do something for her: doubt not,




How I shall be bound to your Ladyship. 
Ex. Lady.
 So, now will I home, and see if my Wife be come yet, or
not, she has been out all day, and night too; but this I must bear,






Discovers Alitia in it fine, with Bellamy.



I see you design to kill me, you wou'd not else let me
be a witness to those Joys, which my Lord only reaps, and
  38
must look on and languish for, to conduct you to him; after
that undress you, and lay you, O, I dare not name where,
but, wou'd I might never live to see him embrace you more.



Come, come, you shall not soften me so, you dissembling
thing you?



By all that's good, I am not, I speak truth. O how
you lay this morning wrapt in his dear embraces. 



Well, and did not you come from being wrapt in dear
imbraces too, those of my Lady Thrivewell? once more, let
me hear the pleasing story,



O if you lov'd me, as you say, you cou'd not take a
pleasure in hearing what Joys I took with another?



Joys which you give, I can. Come let me hear how kind
she was, and how well she lik'd you.



So well she lik'd me, that she swore and I believ'd her,
she never lik'd her Husband half so well.



Some other man perhaps she did.



She vow'd, and I again believ'd; she never knew a man
besides her Husband. 



And your self, but then she was kind?







And cou'd you, when you pretended to me, cou'd
you? Ah you're a cozening thing.



Inspir'd with thoughts of you; I was grateful to her
Ladyship, and she in requital to your kindness, for sending me,
has sent you a hundred Guinies.



I, was she so obliging? Where be they?







O the Subtilty of these men! for fear I shou'd not keep
my assignation, yon think to oblige me that way, to come to
you; but you may believe, my dear Bellamy, I am all yours,
and will be so when e're you name the time.





On my Conscience, my wife's not come home yet: Well,
thus it must be, in spight of chance, and high heel Shoes which
will go a wry sometimes. How a Lady there, and my Wife
not with her? hah, my Wife? Stay, are my Eyes mine
own? 'tis she my friend Wife, in that t'other end o'th'
  39
Town habit she has so long wisht for: but, Mr. Bellamy, and she
are whispering, I must not yet advance.



This night let it be. 



You have had enough of your Lady, sure for one day?



Doubt me not, dearest, Madam?



So, Madam, is't come to that? wou'd they had done,
that I might approach without interruption.



And with all faith and secresie, I am undone else: for
you know my vows to my Lord.



You undo me with these suspitions.



See my Husband. Pray, Sir, present my service, and
humble thanks, to my Lord, and my Husbands too. 



Yes, I beseech you, Sir. 



I will obey you, Madam. 




 Still, I say, this is an Assenego, he will never stand a
Complement with me: But, Sapientia mea mihi; but, what
new Graces has his Lordship done us, that you have made me
send him thanks for? For you say, you bought these rich Cloths your self.



'Tis enough, I am sensible, and you may leave your silly
impertinent inquisitions.



I stand corrected, Friend.



And stand still corrected, or I shall break the Peace with you.



Never the sooner for a hasty word.



Before I marry'd you, did not my Lord make you Indent
with me, to ask me no Questions, to deny me nothing I had a
mind too, either for wearing, or eating, or going abroad
where and with whom I pleas'd; and did you not agree to all this?



I did, and will still hold to my Indentures with my
Noble Lord: whose favor I wou'd not loose, for Forty Indentures.



O wou'd you not so.



And what the dickins care I for my spightful Neigh∣bours,
who because they cannot maintain their Wives so fine as
thou art, asperse thee, and cry there's Tom. Salewares fine
Wife: but Sapientia mea mihi, is my Motto; Let the Assenegoes
tattle their hearts out, for I am resolv'd to show my self a dutiful
Husband, in spight of Fortune and foul weather.



To prevent their talking, I'll remove out of their sight,
and leave your pittiful Shop keeping.



Never the sooner for a hasty word.



Nay, I'll do't. I have been about it: have all under one
done other Business too.



I cou'd tell her under who, if I durst too.




What's that you mumble there, to your self?



I was only Divining what that business shou'd be,
which you did all under one; Ile warrant, you have taken fine
Lodgings in the Mall, as you intended.



No, but I have taken a house there, by my Lords dire∣ctions.



How, how, what must I then break up Shop?



No indeed, look to your Shop, and keep your City house
too, for your self to lie in.



Must I not then lie in the same house?



No, Friend, not unless you mean to break with me for ever.



Well, I will not disoblige thee, nor my Noble Lord,
for any Consideration, for you know my Motto; Sapientia
mea mihi; Stultitia tua tibi. And so let's in to Dinner.












MAdam, I'm but a bashful Lover, unskill'd to court
a Widow, to swear I love you, must and will
have you; And want the moving confidence to stir your
blood by putting you to't, before the Priest declare it lawful;
 But, I have Love and tenderness, which you will find in all
the Actions of my life.



This modest Courtship will do no good on the Widow,
he has mistook her humor. Blest mistake!





My Lord, I am not worthy your regard, my Birth,
  41
and Education, are not sutable to your great Fame. Fortune,
'tis true, was kind and gave me wealth, which sets me up a Mark
for every Man, that aims at riches: Whilst all my little Beau∣ties
lie dead upon my hands, none court for that in a Wife;
'Tis enough, his Mistris shall be fair.



Madam, you seem to upbraid me with a sin, I vow, I
never knew, I am so Innocent. 




That 'twere pitty Marriage shou'd de bauc h yor Lordship.



It cannot, Madam, I'll be so true to you, so faith∣ful, and so just 




Impossible! I wou'd not have you so degenerate from
the true gallantry of your Sex, and Age, to be a constant Husband.
O how vile a sound it has! a young Lord, and constant to his
Wife! Not for the World, wou'd I be that Woman, that shou'd
be guilty of making you so strange a Monster.



Madam, by my Honour, I never lov'd till now, and you
may rally as you please; but, I again protest 'tis not your wealth,
but Virtue I admire: and you I must possess, or be for ever wretched.





 Stay, let us retire again, here is the Lord Love∣less.



Let there be the Devil, I'll not retire an Inch, 
 Save you, Widow. 





What rudeness is this?



Widow, I am in hast, and have not leasure for long
whining Courtship.



Mr. Saveall, what Fellow's this, you have brought to affront me?



Your Pardon, good my Lord, we knew not of your
Lordships being here; 'tis Mr. Careless, Nephew to Sir Oliver
Thrivewell, of whom I have procur'd the Five hundred pound,
your Lordship desir'd by Mr. Bellamy.



For that I thank you; but for him, I must have an
account of his rudeness.



Pray have respect to the presence of the Widow, my good Lord. 



I shall do as becomes me, Sir.





Then it seems, you do not deny the Letter, to be your own hand?








Have you the impudence to confess it?



Yes, and will not ask your Pardon for't; why what
the Devil was there, that was not kind? I offer'd, if you Mar∣ry'd,
to do your Drudgery, 'Egad I think you're beholden to me.



Madam, I made my first Addresses to you, and desire
the favour of being first heard.



Sir, she shall hear me first, whoere came first I care
not, she has heard you first already; or you have lost time.



Sir, I have been heard, and I will be heard again, and
what's all this to you?



But you shall not, Sir; let me see you dare speak a
Syllable to this Widow; or but tell her you love her with
your Eyes, and it shall be your last; by Heaven it shall.



Unhand me, Saveall. 




How dare you, Sir, use this insolence in my house?
On what incouragement, or by what Authority is it?



Good pert thing, hold thy prating, for let me tell thee,
I neither love thee, my self, as you perhaps vainly imagin, nor
will I suffer any other to do so.




I beseech your Lordship, to Pardon him, he's cer∣tainly mad.



The fitter for you, Widow.



Madam, the respect I bear you ties my hands, or
you shou'd see I wou'd not be affronted. Mr. Careless,
you know me I suppose, and pray expect me to morrow morning.



I shall, Sir, I shall. You have your answer, Sir, and may be gone.



Death, shall my fears of angring her, make me en∣dure all this?




Sir, what's your business here? what have you
to say to me? If any thing, say it quickly, and leave me free.



Softly, good Widow, you are so impatient, till you
hear me say, I love you, well, know then I do love you
  43
most abominably, and am resolv'd to Marry you, and then to
use you as I list.




Pray, Sir, how old are you?



O parlous Wit! what, I warrant you expect to be
Courted in fine Language; Ah, cruel Woman, how can you
treat a Gentleman that loves you dearer than his Eyes, so ri∣gorously?
One that cannot, nay, will not, (whilst there are
ways to dye,) live out of your favor.





Who is't, you speak of, Sir? 



I am the wretched Man. 




All this, and more, Sir, my heart directs to an un∣known
youth, who loves not me.




Death, but you shall not, Ile have you love none but me.




I cannot chuse, you're such a civil Person, and write
such passionate stuff in your Letter. 



O does that Letter trouble you? In good time, Ile write
more, and worse to you hereafter, and in earnest too. Did
I not tell you the mistake, unreasonable Creature?




Sir, I have nothing to say to you; and beg your
Pardon, if I tell you, I desire you no more to visit me.



Why, then fare you well. Ile have as good a Widow,
on every Ale-house Chimney.






O how his humour pleases me, yet now Ile be re∣veng'd
on't. Sir, your Servant, will your Lordship please to
walk in? This rude Fellow has disorder'd you?



Madam, you honour your servant, and fully make
amens, for all I've suffer'd, in the Allowance of this favor.




But, Sir, I am not pleas'd she shou'd allow it you.




Death, Sir, But she shall. 





Shall you control me, in my own house?
 Pray learn to know your self. Mr. Saveall, pray carry
him away; or Ile have it done more indescently.




I will endure it for once; because I know 'twas done
only in revenge to me. But who's here? My fine young
  44
dandy-prat, and at the Widows too! Sir, I have
seen you but twice, and 'twas at places where I cannot allow
of your coming, first at my Aunts, and now, here at my Widows.




Your Widow, good Sir? I thought she had been the Wi∣dow
of one deceas'd?



Thou art a pretty witty child; but, Sirrah, let me find
you here no more, nor at my Aunts, I charge you: if I do, I
shall have you whip't.



I hear your Charge, Sir; but you must leave it to my
discretion, whether I will obey you, or not.



Well, Sir, remember I have given you fair warn∣ing.



Sir, will it please you to walk homeward?



You must excuse me, Sir, at present.



It will not be convenient, Sir, to visit the Widow a∣gain to day.



O fear it not, Sir, I do not like her so well now.



Do your pleasure, Sir, Farewell.




This damn'd Widow sticks in my Stomach, I am resolv'd
she shall not have me now, unless she court me to't, to which
end, I will go drink her out of my head, for to my heart she
is not yet arriv'd; and then Ile home, and do that which only
my Aunt and I must be acquainted with: this is her Night of
grace, she has promis'd me to be kind; if she keep touch with
me, O how I shall love. 




So, they are gone. And now must I prepare to meet
Mrs. Saleware, I have a mind to try her honesty, which I be∣lieve
is as little, as her faith to my Lord: I have appointed her
to meet me at a certain convenient house, where I have got
a Bed ready; but how to supply her with a bedfellow suitable
to her humour, I cannot tell: I have therefore writ this, in
an unknown name, to her Husband, who shall come and pre∣vent
the Plot, and save my credit; but if he fail? 
wou'd that were my greatest grief; but here I leave the man
my soul adores, courting another, may she be deaf to all his
Love, as I was to my reason, when it pleaded against his false addresses. 





The Lady Thrivewell's Chamber.
Enter Lady Phebe, and Closet.



In troth, I pity you, but you were to blame too, Phebe, I
must needs say, to yield.



'Twas the effects of Love, Madam, and his solicita∣tions.



Well, well, I'l see what I can do for you, tho' it be but for
the pleasure of revenge for attempting me: Closet, you know
my mind, and how to order our design?



Doubt me not, Madam.



I hope he will get himself fudled to night, to further it.



Then he may forget your Ladyships promise.



No, no, then he'l be the more earnest.



You know his humor best that way, it seems, but away,
here comes Sir Oliver. 







Make love to my wife? a fine young Rogue! 
Well, Watt, for this discovery, I'l reward thee bountifully.
 Sweet-heart, I have a sute to you.



Pray what is't? you may command me.




'Tis for my absence from thee, to accompany a friend
to Dover, who is going for Holland.



I hope this is no excuse to go again to your Citizen's
wife.




Think no more of that, Sweet-heart, but expect me to
morrow at dinner; if I be not here before, and catch you nap∣ping,
my free Lady.





lest there shou'd happen any noise in the house by his unruly Ne∣phew,
in case he shou'd discover the cheat I put upon him, his
own wench instead of my self. I thought I had sufficiently chid
him for his rash attempting me: and he to pursue it, and urge
me to a promise! which I made to be rid of him, is what I must
be reveng'd on him for.






Your Nephew is come, Madam, and very much uppish
(as they say) but not so far gon as to forget your Ladyships Pro∣mise,
and he is gone to bed, in expectation of your coming.



And have you drest his Mistris up, as I directed?



Oh, most famously, Madam.



But have you charg'd her to steal from him, before it is
light?



Yes, I have, Madam.





Why Lord, Mr. Bellamy, you are the strangest man in the
World, to think I am jealous, because I ask for my Aly. I am an
Asenego, if I be. .But yet I know she's here.



Why look you now, is not this jealousie, not to believe me?



Oh, you equivocate, Mr.Bellamy, I protest you do; she
is not indeed here at the door, but I'l warrant you she's above, but
what's that to me? Alas, Sir, it cannot make me jealous. 
I hope I shall see her safe at home, some time or other, at her own
leisure. But it is a hard case tho.



Now are you relapsing into your jealousie again?



What an Asenego's this? there's no man in the City more
confident of his wife, than I am of my Aly: nor will I be dasht
or basht at any scandalous reports that go of her, therefore
tell me, whether she's here or no, for I don't come to disturb
her.



There, you are jealous again. But to end all di∣sputes,
Sir, your wife is here, and I believe going to bed by this
time.



Why what a notable merry Scab are you, Mr. Bellamy?
 Away, away, I faith you're a Wag now.



What, you will not believe me now?



Believe you? why no, by my troth, not I.



What made you fancy she was here?



I fancy, Sir, I have as few fancies as any man breathing,
 but I receiv'd a Note from one Mr. Spywell, hinting that my
Aly was to lye with a certain Friend here all night. A very
pleasant bus'ness; as if I believ'd it: not I, Sir, I protest, for
  47
she has no friend but my Lord, and as if he wou'd bring her to
such a place as this, he having such Lodgings of his own, and she
a House is a ridiculous bus'ness. 



Why did you come then?



To see the meaning of this Spywell's Letter, who bid me
come and inquire for you.



Well, and here I am.



Well, and what of that? he's an Asenego that inquires
further: and so farewell to you.



Stay, Sir, I was that Spywell that writ to you, for I
knowing you had not lain with your wife this three months,
out of pure kindness, laid this Plot, that you might come and lye
with her here.



Why, and is she here indeed?



Come along with me, and be convinc'd.



This is a Plot laid by my wife to oblige me: I am sure
'tis so. Ah little Rogue, how I will pay thy kindness!







Ali. sitting in her Night-gown at a Table, undres∣sing
her. To her Bell. and Tom at the door.


If you say I sent for you, you'l spoil all, but you must say
you came by inspiration, or that you were inform'd in a dream, or
a vision, or so forth.



I warrant you, Mr. Bellamy, for Acting my part well.
My wife has laid this Plot to give me a sure proof of her ho∣nesty. 



Credulous fool! well stand you behind this door,
and I'l go in and speak to her.



Ay, ay, Sir, I'l warrant you, I'l stand close.



Ah, Mr. Bellamy, are you come? you are a fine man, to
make me languish thus long without you, are you not? Come,
hast to undress you, and let us to bed.



So, very good, ha, ha, ha. 




What does your Passion that was to day so high, decay al∣ready?



That's pleasant again, as if I were such a fool, to think
such an Asenego as he had ever had a Passion for her, ha, ha,
ha. 




Did you only court me to a consent to despise me for it
afterwards?



As if she had ever consented to lye with my Lord's
man; a pretty bus'ness, that.




Or you perhaps, malitious as you are, courted me only to
try me, and then betray me. Will you not answer me?



Oh Madam, I am so surpris'd with an accident that you
little dream of, that I am not able to utter a word.



Was there ever such witty waggish Rogues seen as
these two? what a pretty Plot have they laid to make me jea∣lous?



Speak again, what is it has happen'd?



Death, I cou'd find in my heart to kill the cuckoldly
Idiot, the horn'd beast, for preventing my dear expectations
thus. 



As I am a Christian, this is very pretty sport, ha, ha, ha.



What's the matter? what Cuckold, my husband? 



Ay, ay, I know not by what damn'd Witchcraft, but
he knows we are here; the Devil assisted him sure to find us.



Oh, I am ruin'd then: he'l tell all to my Lord.



Never the sooner for a hasty word. I shou'd ruin my
self then too: no, no, sapientia mea mihi, is my Motto; be not
dasht or basht for that, good Friend.





Hath, my husband's here indeed.



As sure as you are there, sweet Ali. What, you thought
to make me jealous now? but I thank my reason, I have more
grace than so: no, I know what's what, as my Friend Hudibras
has it. Make me jealous! honest Tom? no, Mr. Bellamy, I am
beholden to you. But how I came hither, you shall never know,
nor, do you hear me talk of any Letter or Porter that came
to give me intelligence, no, nor name, Mr. Spywell, not I, sa∣pientia,
is my Motto.



Death! the fool will out with all.




What means all this?



I mean? I know what you mean; come, come, never
blush for the matter, you might have told me you had a mind
to. 







Ha, ha, ha, I, I, never put on this fain'd anger, the Plot is
discover'd, and I am not jealous.







That you had a mind to do me the honour of letting
me lye with you to night, and now 'tis out. Mr. Bellamy, I
hope we shall have your company, tho not in the same bed,
and E'faith, we'l have a Sack-Posset before we go to bed, sweet
Ali.



What a defeat is here! 

Mr. Bellamy, hark ye. Thomas, be at a distance.







You have betray'd me every way: I see it plain, and will
be reveng'd on you, if I live.



Who, I by all. 



No swearing, you are a young Hypocrite: where's the
hundred Guineys you had for me, you said?



And have; but shall I give them you before your
husband?



Come, come, I see I am abus'd and fool'd; who was it sent
for him, hath? not you, I'l warrant.



Not I, I vow by your fair dear self, and am so mad, that
he has defeated me, that if you'l give me leave, I'l kill him, to enjoy
thee. 



No, hold; if this be true, I'm reconcil'd again, and pray
let's meet again to morrow.



May all that's man about me forsake me, if I lose any op∣portunity:
and so I'l take my leave. 




Nay, E'faith we'l have a Sack-Posset, as I said, before we
go to bed. 



Well, tho I seem to believe him, I am resolv'd he has done
me this injury.
And when a willing woman is so crost,
All thoughts, but of revenge, are lost.



Tell me, Ali. indeed, how you came hither.



You will not be angry then?



I am an Asenego, if I be.



It was indeed to make thee jealous.



Now hang me, if I did not imagin so: nay, nay, I can
prophesie right sometimes.



And how do you think you were brought hither?



Nay, I can prophesie that too: Mr. Spywell's Letter 
but I'l say no more.



Ha, ha, ha, let's see the Letter.



Hah, where is't? hum, have I lost it? and sacks
so I have. 




Well, well, 'twas I that sent it, Simpleton. 



Why didst thou indeed, and indeed? Well, let's to
bed, for I am now so in love with thy pretty Project, that I fancy
strange things: Come, let's to bed, we'l get a Sibyl or a small
Prophet this night.
Exeunt.





Enter Phebe, passing over the Stage in a Night-Gown, Careless
after her, groping as in the dark, in a Night-Gown.


Oh stay, my dear Aunt, stay, 'tis not near day yet, we
have many minutes of joy to come ere that approach. She's
gone, I heard her Chamber door open, wou'd I cou'd find
it, my Uncle's not at home, and I'l go to her there. Who's
this? one with lights?




Is the Devil in you, that you make such a noise at this
hour.



Wou'd it not make a man distracted to be so soon left by
so sweet, so dear a Creature? Come let's retire again. 



Sure you are mad to desire it, 'twill ruin us both.



I'l warrant you: my charming obliging Aunt! 





Oh Madam, don't you hear some body knock at the door?
on my conscience 'tis Sir Oliver, by the authority of clamour he
makes there.







E'gad and so do I, I hope 'tis that Rogue Watt, having
forgot I have turn'd him away, and is drunk. Come, let's re∣tire
again, can we be sensible of any thing but joy?



Hark ye, Closet, go. 




It shall be so.




That was kind, and well thought on, to give her instru∣ctions
what to do.



You cannot guess at what I said.



Why, to tell my Uncle, that you are not well, and
desire him to lye by himself to night, or 



Thou art so lewd a fellow, thou canst not think one sober
thought of me, which makes me now repent the favors I have
done thee: be gone, and see my face no more. 



How unreasonable is a woman when her own turn's
serv'd! Hark ye, dear Aunt. 



Approach me not; if thou dost, I'l raise the house.



Unmerciful creature! do not provoke my love, which is
so high, 'tis arriv'd almost to rage, do not; you know not what
'twill make me do, for now you are in my power, have a care, 
I say, have a care. 





Dare you do so base a thing, as to proclaim my shameful
kindness? perjur'd man!



Why do you provoke me then, do you think to kindle
a fire in my heart, and let it burn out alone?
No, I am resolv'd it shall be laid. Come, come, by all that's
good, dear Aunt, I love you; and love you ten times more
since you were kind, then before, and I think the Devil's in you
if you desire a man shou'd do more.







Alas, that ever you were kind. How prettily this pe∣nitence
becomes you. Come, now a tear or two, and then thou
wilt be fit to be undone again.





Oh Monster, Villain, Rascal, what dost thou merit
for this baseness, but death immediately from my hand? And
thou false woman, that hast thus betray'd me. 



What Devil sent him hither?



Pray hear me, Sir.




Can I hear more to convince me thou art false, or I
unhappy, then what I've heard already?



I was not so unreasonable when Mrs. Saleware and you
were kind.




And did you, perfidious woman, pardon me that, to
be reveng'd on me this way.



Mistake me not, nor wrong me: I have only show'd you
what some wou'd have done. Sir, 'twas my design, to let you
see this extravagance of your Nephew.



O witty, dear Devil, how I love thee for thy rare quality
 of dissembling.




Oh, she's the falsest woman. 




Mr. Saveall, you have ever been most obliging, pray per∣swade
Sir Oliver to retire into my Chamber, and hear with pa∣tience
what I have to say to him, he shall find there the cause of
this mistake.



I'l do my best to serve you, Madam.




And dost thou think ever to reconcile me? 



'Twill not be the part of a judicious man to condemn be∣fore
the cause be heard, good Sir Oliver, as I take it, let me intreat
that justice from you.




Well, Madam, I will hear you, tho no false tale thou
canst devise, shall perswade me against my senses. But, Sirrah, for
your part get you out of my doors, I'l see thee starve and beg,
for an ungrateful reprobate, as thou art. 



Indeed you must not put him out of doors.




How! dare you take his part?



Yes, I dare and will justifie it, nor shall you give him a
word or look, that declares anger, you shall not, Sir, 'till you have
heard me, and then take your course.



Kind soul! I cou'd kiss her all over for this.





You're very confident, but I'l forbear, till I've heard
you, tho thou canst say nothing to make me think thou'rt inno∣cent.



Go, go to bed again, George, and sleep, without fear of
any thing, all shall be well again.




Sweet dear charming gilt, how I love thee! now will she
manage my Uncle so, that 'tis ten to one but I shall be rewarded
for my nights work to morrow: but Lord, how she thought to
terrifie me, with chiding me, and repenting her kindness to me.
Now go to bed, George, ha, ha, ha. 
Well go thy ways; I know thy Plots will hit:
There's nothing like a womans sudden wit.







Act Fifth. Scene, The Lord's Lodgings.





TO speak with me?












Pray, Thomas, attend at a distance.



Face about, Tom. Saleware, and March forwards;
that I learnt at Finsbury Muster.





How now, in tears, why is that lovely face where
all my souls delight dwells, thus strangly drest in sor∣row?



Alas, my dear Lord. 



Who is t dares injure thee? I know thy Husband is
better manner'd, than to offend thee; and any other cannot
escape with life. Come name the cause.



There is a man has Injur'd me; but one below you,
my dear Lord, to take notice of, your servant Bellamy may do't.
Do you believe him honest, my dear Lord?



Most perfectly so, if I have any judgment.



I know, my dear Lord, you ever esteem'd him so: but,
 if your Lordship had a Jewel, or any other thing, you va∣lu'd
and wou'd reserve for your own wearing, wou'd you let
him enjoy it too?



I know not any thing I shou'd refuse him the use of:
except, thy dear self, where I can brook no Rivals.



Yet he, my Lord, has wickedly attempted me, and in
that has wrong'd your Honour, and your trust.







My Lord, 'is truth.



It cannot be. I know he durst not do't.



Must I not then find credit?



Give me some circumstances, but to prove it.



Tho if I had said it only, 'twere sufficient: yet you shall
have circumstances. Thomas, come hither Thomas. Pray tell
his Lordship, what you heard and saw, last night between
Mr. Bellamy, and I.



Why may't please your Lordship, my Ali. was abroad
all the afternoon yesterday, as she often is, may't please your
Lordship, and may as often be again, an't please your Lord∣ship.







Well, out she was, an't please your Lordship, it grew
late, and no Ali. came, it grew later and no Ali. came yet,
so that Ie'en concluded she wou'd stay all night, an't please your
Lordship, as she has done many a night, an't please your Lord∣ship.







I shall, an't please your Lordship. It being late, an't like
your Lordship, as I said before, an't please your Lordship, I had
word brought me, an't please your Lordship, that my Ali.
was to lye with a Friend, an't please your Lordship, at a cer∣tain
house in Drury Lane, an't please your Lordship; well, I went,
and because I hate to be tedious, or hold your Lordship in a
long tale, I will only say, an't please your Lordship, I went thi∣ther,
as I said, and found my Ali. just undrest for Bed, Mr.
Bellamy, ready to go into Bed to her.







Be? why Ile justifie it, an't please your Lordship.



Then your Wife's guilty too; how came she thither?



I hope you will not think so ill of me, my dear Lord,
alas, I was betray'd, the cunning Villain told me your Lord∣ship
was to be there, and desir'd my company; when I came
and found you not, he bid me undress me, and get me to bed,
and you, my dear Lord, wou'd come to me. At last I finding
'twas but a Cheat, and not knowing how to get away, writ a
Note to my Husband, to come and relieve me.



Is't possible a man that weeps, and blushes, shou'd be
such an one?



I vow to Gad, an't please your Lordship, I fancy'd all
the while they had but play'd the wag, to make me jealous;
and Ali. (ah, the little cunning Gipsie) knowing I was peep∣ing
at the door. Cry'd come to bed, Mr. Bellamy, make hast and
undress you, Mr. Bellamy.



Peace, Fool, he'll spoil all. 








I do not like this. Where's the Letter?



Here, an't please your Lordship. 




The Devil take you for giving him the Letter. You said
you had lost it.



I thought so Friend; but I found it since.



Thou'dst better have swallow'd it full of Opium.



I wou'd I had so too, for me, rather than have offended
thee.




Mr. Saleware, If you wou'd not be a worse Cuckold
than you are, come away to the Joyners in Drury Lane, it be∣ing
a convenient Bawdy-house, and you will find your Wife
there, ready to add to your Horns.
Yours,
Spywell.
 What means this? 'tis Bellamy's own hand.



How shall I come off now? Why does not your Lord∣ship
see how excellent I am at counterfeiting hands? I fain'd
Mr. Bellamy's Character, a purpose: It's not well.



This Woman's, false, I see't. Who waits?
Enter Page.





He has not been at home to night, my Lord.



I hope your Lordship will believe me now; but I was
told he pay'd his visit to my Lady Thrivewell, this morning.



He is to receive money there for me, pray Heaven he
be true, I scarce dare trust him. Tho I cannot believe what
this false Woman says. Get my Coach ready, Ile go to Sir Oli∣vers,
my self.



I can tell you another circumstance of his dishonesty
too.







He loves, and is belov'd, (I mean dishonestly) by my
Lady Thrivewell; and this he told me himself boastingly, that I
might yeild the sooner.



Dare you justifie this?



Yes indeed, dare I to their faces.



And so you shall. Mr. Saveall, your servant.




Mr. Bellamy, my Lord, is telling out the hundred pound
at Sir Olivers, for you; but my Lord, there is a little difference
in Sir Olivers Family, that my Lady desires your Lordship to
compose, if possible.



With all my heart. My Coach: You must along,
Mrs. Saleware.
Exit Lord, leading Mrs. Saleware,
Tom. and Saveall, follow.





To sir Olivers House.
Enter Sir Oliver, Lady Thrivewell, Careless, Phebe, Closett,
and Wat.




No, Villain, Ile have no more to do with thee. Ile leave
thee to thy own shame and poverty.



It may be so.




All that's thine, Ile turn out after thee; your Phebe,
too, your virtuous Mistris, take her, and be gone.



I thank you for nothing, this was a moveable that be∣long'd
to me, before your virtuous Wife lay'd us together. 
Who the Devil wou'd have imagin'd, she shou'd have Gilted me
so? a young hansome proper fellow as I am to?




Sirrah, sirrah, have a care what you say of my Wife
for I shall lay you fast enough else.



Is this your witness, Sir; this pretious villain?




No villain neither, Sir, since I have not betray'd my
Master, for you turn'd me off basely.



Here's another of your Engins, this old Deceptio visus,
that put me to Bed to the wrong Woman.



Alas, good Gentleman, ha, ha, ha.



But if, Mr. Bellamy, had been the Man, I suppose, Madam,
you wou'd have kept your word; and old Mother Damnable,
wou'd have brought the right party.








Fie, George, you'll be asham'd of this anon?



Faith, I shall not, and since you have betray'd me, I'll
  57
ruine you; therefore hear me, Oh thou credulous Knight, what
I've to say unto thee. 



What canst thou say, good George, to my prejudice? Hold
yet, whilst thy credit may be saved.



Not I, it shall out, unless you bribe me.



Not a farthing, and see who'l have the worst on't.




What would the Villian say to thy dishonour?



That, which if you are no contented Cuckold, will make
you mad, Sir, it will: you think I have done so lewd a thing
in courting her, but there's that smooth-fac'd young fellow,
Bellamy, has courted her, and all the rest I can assure you.




Mr. Bellamy! it cannot be.



But it can, Sir; there's her procurer, old dark Lanthorn can
tell you more.



Who I? oh Lord!



Oh, she was chamber'd up with him at least two hours,
fair time, under pretence of borrowing money; but you may
guess his farther bus'ness, if you have any sense.




I'l not believe this, Sir; 'tis malice.



'Tis fit you shou'd see't done, indeed, and great pity you
did not.




Oh, Mr. Saveall, if this be true, where's all my Re∣putation? 



And for that Rascal, Watt, there, I'l give you an account
of him, which yet you never had: have you forgot, how we res∣cu'd
you on Hounslow-heath, when you believ'd your self set on by
Thieves?




No, I have not forgot it; wou'd I had lost my Money
nay a Limb, rather than have been by thee preserv'd. 



That project, Sir, was his, to get me into your favour
gain; the Robbers, as you thought 'em, were his acquaintance,
Rogues of his managing, but to say truth, we meant no hurt, on∣ly
I was forc'd, to colour the bus'ness, to give him a cut over the
Pate, wou'd 't had kill'd him.




Was't his Plot? I am glad to find him a fellow of that
ingenuity: I love him for't.



Do you? then pray take notice, 'twas my own Plot, mine,
Sir, to get my self into your favour.



Truly, Sir, my Master's in the right, 'twas his Plot.




'Twas witty whose soe're 'twas, and I like it well,
  58
wou'd all the rest of the Actions of your life were as well.



Well, Sir, now you know my mind, and I'l take my
leave; farewel, Nuncle. Come away, Phebe, I have been an
unkind Dog to thee, that's truth: but come, I'l e'en make thee
amends, and marry thee, and having no better way to live, e'en
fell Coffee with thee. Come away. 




Pray call him back; to let him go in this condition will
undo him, and I desire to be clear'd too, before he goes of, the
aspersion he has laid on me.




Yes, Sir, you shall stay, and answer it before Au∣thority.



Why, Sir, if you have a mind to have your house thought
a Bawdy house, I can stay, and prove it.





Mrs. Crostil is come to wait on your Ladyship.




This is a great favour, Madam. Sir Oliver, pray entertain
Mrs. Crostil a little. 






Methinks you all look disorder'd, I hope, Sir Oliver,
you and your Nephew have a good understanding.




No, Madam, nor do I desire to have any with such a
Villain.




How, Sir? nay, if you rail at him 'twill make me love
him.




Then you are wretched.




Nay, then I'm resolv'd to love him Pray what's
she he makes such love to?




A common wench, that's with child by him; she
pleads a Contract with him, and he'l marry her.




Still you raise my flame to a greater height. Mr. Care∣less,
pray let me speak with you.



Who mean you, Madam, me? I'm not at leisure now?




What the Duce was I made of, that his contempt of
me increases my fire. Sir, I must needs speak with you.



What have you to say? Widow, you are come too late,
Widow.




Pray walk a little this way. I must speak to you
alone.





here presently, and shall do you reason; he has mortgag'd a great
part of his Estate to Sir Oliver, and the Forfeiture's out, and he
shall be just to you, or we'l undo him. Sir Oliver, pray whatever
reason you have to be displeas'd with your Nephew your self, do
not ruin his fortune with the widow. 




Tempt me not, widow, to your own ruin, if I shou'd be
so unlucky as to marry you, you are certainly undone, for I am
one you cannot live with above a fortnight, you are fine limb'd
and delicate, and I shall spoil you. Here's one that knows my
strength, and will hold me tack. 




I know not what you mean.



Nor prithee never try, I advise you in time, widow,
this wench here is only fit for me.



Is my profer'd passion scorn'd? 



Faith no, widow, but I shall never merit you: besides,
I am ingag'd, widow.




To that woman? 



Yes, to that woman; what exceptions have you to her?




Why she's a wench, a common prostitute.



Hark ye, have a care what you say (I advise you) before
witness, do not abuse a woman I design to make a wife of, lest
I hamper your Estate, widow.




She shall not be your wife, no woman but I shall marry you.



Have a care what you say before witness again, widow.




Call all to hear me, Sir Oliver, and the rest be witness
I give my self to this Gentleman. 



Here's one forbids the Banes, widow.





You shall compound with her.



But what said King Harry? Conscience, conscience,
widow.




No matter, Sir, give me your hand, beer witness all,
I plight my Faith to this Gentleman.




Then you are ruin'd.




Sir, 'tis too late to advise, I am resolv'd.



Have I caught you, widow, hah, ha. Farewel,
Nuncle. And yet Conscience pulls me back. Besides, wi∣dow,
the woman is not satisfi'd.




I'l give her three hundred pound.



The woman is not such a fool to take it.



But the woman shall be so wise to take it, for what ever
you all think, I do not love my Master so ill, to spoil his Fortune.
And, Sir, truth is, I have receiv'd some favors, as they
say, from Mrs. Phebe, as well as you, that is, she has been kind, Sir.







And I'm content to marry and make her honest, if she
can get any addition to this Lady's bounty, to make her any for∣tune.



That was well said, Watt, and I'l promise the other hun∣dred,
in lieu of that I had in Wares of her Kinswoman, with your
permission, Sir Oliver.




With all my heart.



Watt, go for the Parson then, we'l have 'em married pre∣sently.






Madam, in obedience to your commands, I am come to
wait on you.



You have honor'd me, my Lord, tho our difference is al∣most
at an end, yet I have something to deliver to your Lordship
in private.



Madam, I have also a question to ask you in private too.



I shall be glad of any occasion to serve your Lordship.



Madam, will you withdraw a little? only this Gentle∣woman
may be witness of what I have to ask you.



I fancy what 'tis already, and must intreat your Lordship
to speak it out, what e're it be.



'T wou'd not be for your Honor, Madam.



I am not of your opinion, my Lord, and that I may let you
see I am not, I'l speak it for you: You come to ask me, and this
woman to accuse me with dishonourable Love to a servant of
yours, Bellamy I mean, is't not so?







This pleases me, indeed she has reveng'd her self handsome∣ly;
I have a Kinsman here of that opinion.



But, Madam, I recant, 'twas in the days of my debauch
and brutality, I am reform'd now by your vertues only, and
humbly beg your pardon.



Madam, is not Bellamy, here?



He will be presently, my Lord, but now your Lordship,
has question'd me, I hope I may have the same freedom with
you?



Madam, you may command me any thing.



Pray where's my Sister Clara?



Is that a question for me to answer, Madam?



Yes, and which in Honour you are bound to answer:
Did you not betray her to shame and infamy, and rob'd her of
her Virgin purity?



I did not ravish her, Madam.



I do not say you did. But you had Flattery which did much
more than force; I ask not her Honour back, but her life, and
self, for we have never heard of her since that fatal Treachery
of yours, and 'tis of you that I demand her.



You, cannot sure comple me to return her, if I cou'd?



But she shall, Sir, and I will be her Champion.



Her loss, Madam, is a greater Grief to me, than 'tis to
you; but for you, Sir, I shall find a time to try your prowess.



But you shall not, Sir, Ile end the controversie.



I am amaz'd, Clara, and my Bellamy's the same.



Yes, your Bellamy, is the wrong'd Clara. Do you not
blush to see me? I'm come to claim your vows, so often
sworn, and so long broken. 



So, I was like to have made fine work.



Bless me! Bellamy, a Woman?



Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope.





Sir, the Parson's come.



Come, Widow, dare you sign, seal, and deliver?




With all my heart, Sir.




Being by you undone, and made unfit to look abroad
with Honour, and more unfit to live, but in the presence of
you whom I ador'd; I did assume that Masculine habit, to let you
see that I had rather live but by your sight alone, than be my
self in any other part o'th' world; and by your sight alone,
cou'd better contain my self, than she, the Mistris whom you
so admir'd could, with the dear possession of you.



You melt my soul. Pray let me make new vows to
you, or well confirm the old. 




Well, I am absolutely lost and undon in my Lords fa∣vor.



Never the sooner for a hasty word. Come, come, I do
suspect this is all but a plot to make me jealous.



Wou'd you not be laught at now, sweet Mrs. Sale∣ware?



No, indeed, Madam; nor shall she be by the proudest
she that wears a head; or if she be, it will not make me jealous:
Sapientia mea mihi, is my Motto still.



Yet I confess, this young Bellamy, and I have been bed-fel∣lows
some years since. Come be not out of countenance, I will not
tell what my Husband did with you last term.



Nor shall you make me jealous, Madam, what'ere they
did. Efacks not I, sweet Ali.



Can you forgive what's past, and take a penitent man to
your mercy?



My Lord, if you'll repair my Sisters honour, Sir Oliver,
shall give you in your Mortgage?



'Tis all I wish on Earth to do so, Madam.




Then, Sir, Ile restore your writings, and by it make
her as good a Fortune as the Widow, and there's within a Par∣son
shall end the difference.



It shall be done, Sir Oliver.
 For you, Mrs. Saleware, go home, look to your Shop,
and please your Husband; for from this day, Ile never see you
more.



I see all things are transitory, and will turn Honest,
and Thomas, you shall have no more fears of jealousie.



A Pox of jealousie, I wish that were the worst griev∣ance
in the Nation, the jealousie that troubles my Noddle. No,
no; Sapientia, &c. is my Motto.





See, they are already Married.



What, my Cozin Phebe Gimcrack, too, and 'efack, Ile
take a frisk for joy. Watt get some Musick.




You shall not need, Sir, I have 'em at hand.



Well, Uncle, I hope we shall now be Friends, and
  63
according as I behave my self, let me have your favour, you
must all Dine with me to day; and at night, Widow Ile
say no more. 




Well, Sir, as I shall see how you behave your self, I
shall prove my self a loving Uncle.



I will be your Heir yet, in spight of ill Luck, and all my
damn'd Debaucheries, which now farewell to. 



See, the Musick's here indeed, we'll lead the Bride a Dance,
and then they shall do as much for us, Clara.




Now, Clare, that you and I may happy prove,
The Priest within shall consummate our Love.



