





HEreabouts is the House wherein dwells, the Mistriss of
my heart; For she has money Boyes, mind me, money
in abundance, or she were not for me the Wench her
self is good natur'd, and inclin'd to be civil, but a Pox
on't She has a Brother a conceited Fellow, whom the world mistakes
for a fine Gentleman, for he has Travell'd, talks Languages, bows with a
bone meine, and the rest, but by fortune he shall entertain you with nothing
but words 







No He's no Countrey Squire Gentlemen, will not Game,
Whore, nay, in my Conscience you will hardly get your selves Drunk in
his Company He Treats A-la-mode, half Wine, half Water, and the
rest But to the business, this Fellow loves his Sister dearly, and will not
trust her in this lewd Town, as he calls it, without him, and hither he
has brought her to marry me.



A Pox upon him for his pains 



So say I But my comfort is, I shall be as weary of her, as
the best Husband of 'em all But there's conveniency in it; besides, the
match being as good as made up by the old Folks in the Countrey, I must
submit The Wench I never saw yet, but they say she's handsom 
But no matter for that, there's Money, my Boyes!



Well Sir, we will follow you but as dolefully as people do
their Friends to the Grave, from whence they're never to return, at least
not the same substance, the thin aiery Vision of a brave Good Fellow, we
may see thee hereafter, but that's the most.



Your pardon, sweet Sharp, my whole design in it is to be
Master of my self, and with part of her Portion to set up my Miss, Betty
Flauntit, which, by the way, is the main end of my •arrying, the rest
you'll have your shares of Now I am forc•d to take you up Suits at
treble Prizes, have damn'd Wine and Meat put upon us, 'cause the
Reckoning is to be Book'd: But ready Money ye Rogues! What Charms
it has! Makes the Waiters flie Boyes, and the •aster with Cap in hand 
excuse what's amiss, Gentlemen Your Worship shall command the
best and the rest How briskly the Box and Dice dance, and the ready
Money submits to the lucky Gamester, and the gay Wench consults with
every Beauty to make her self agreeable to the Man with ready Money.
In fine, dear Rogues! All things are sacrific'd to it's pow'r; and no Mor∣tal
conceives the joy of, Argent Content. 'Tis this pow'rful God that
makes me submit to the Devil Matrimony; and then thou art assur'd of
me, my stout Lads of brisk Debauch.



And is it possible you can be ty'd up to a Wife? Whil'st here in
London, and free, you have the whole World to range in, and like a wan∣ton
Heifer, eat of every Pasture.



Why dost think I'll be confin'd to my own dull Enclosure?
No, I had rather feed coarsly upon the boundless Common, perhaps two
or three dayes I may be in Love, and remain constant, but that's the
most.



And in three Weeks, should you Wed a Cinthia, you'd be a
Monster.



What, thou meanest a Cuckold, I warrant? God help thee▪
But a Monster is only so from its Rarity, and a Cuckold is no such•strange
thing in our Age.


But who comes here?

Bellmour! Ah my little dear Rogue! How dost thou!
 Ned Friendlove too! Dear Lad, how dost thou too?
Why welcome to Town i'faith, and I'm glad to see you both.



Sir Tim. Tawdrey! 



The same, by fortune, dear Ned; And how, and how Man,
how go matters?







Why any body Man: But, by fortune, I'm overjoy'd to meet
thee: But where dost think I was going?



Is't possible one shou'd divine?



Is't possible you shou'd not, and meet me so near your Sisters
Lodgings? Faith I was coming to pay my Respects and Services, and the
rest Thou know'st my meaning The old business of the Silver
World Ned; by Fortune it's a mad Age, we live in Ned, and here be so
many wicked Rogues, about this damn'd lewd Town, that 'Faith I
am fain to speak, in the vulgar modish stile, in my own defence, and
Rally Matrimony, and the rest.



Matrimony! I hope you are so exactly refin'd a Man of
the Town, that you will not offer once to think of so dull a thing, let
that alone for such cold complexions as Bellmour here, and I that have
not attain'd to that most excellent faculty of keeping yet, as you, Sir
Timothy, have done, much to your glory, I assure you.



Who I Sir? You do me much Honour: I must confess I do
not find the softer Sex cruel; I am received as well as another Man of
my Parts.



Of your Money, you mean Sir.



Why Faith Ned, thou art i'th' right, I love to buy my plea∣sure,
for, by Fortune, there's as much pleasure in Vanity and Variety, as
any Sins I know; What think'st thou Ned?



I am not of your mind, I love to love upon the square; and
that I may be sure not to be cheated with false Ware, I present 'em no∣thing
but my heart.



Yes, and have the consolation, of seeing your frugal Hus∣wifery
Miss, sit in the Pit, at a Play, in a long Scarf, and Night-gown,
for want of Points, and Garniture.



If she be clean, and pretty, and drest in Love, I can excuse
the rest, and so will she.



I vow to Fortune Ned, thou must come to London, and be a
little manag'd: 'Slife Man, should'st thou talk so aloud in good Compa∣ny,
thou would'st be counted a strange Fellow, Pretty and drest with
Love a fine Figure, by Fortune; No, Ned, the painted Chariot, gives a
Lustre, to every ordinary Face, and makes a Woman, look like Quality;
ay, so like, by Fortune, that you shall not know one from t'other, till
some scandalous, out-of-favor'd-laid-aside-Fellow of the Town, cry 
Damn her, for a Bitch how scornfully the Whore regards me She
has forgot since Iack such a one, and I, club'd for the keeping of her,
when both our Stocks, well manag'd, wou'd not amount to above seve•
shillings six pence a week; besides now and then a Treat of a Breasto•
Mutton▪ from the next Cooks Then the other laughs, and cryes 
I Rott her And tells his Story too, and concludes with who ma•nages
the Gilt now? Why Faith some dismal Coxcomb or other, yo•
may be sure, replies the first: But Ned, these are R•gues, and Rascals, th•
value no Mans Reputation, because they despise their own: But Faith 〈◊〉
have laid aside all these vanities, now I have thought of Matrimony; b••
I desire my Reformation may be a secret, because, as you know for 〈◊〉  4
Man of my Address, and the rest 'Tis not altogether so
Jantee.



Sir, I assure you, it shall be so great a Secret for me, that I will
never ask you who the happy Woman is, that's chosen for this great work
of your Conversion.



Ask me! No, you need not, because you know al∣ready.



Who I? I protest Sir Timothy 



No Swearing, dear Ned, for 'tis not such a Secret, but I will
trust my Intimates; these are my Friends, Ned; pray know them 
This Mr Sham and this by fortune, a very honest Fellow 
Mr Sharp, and may be trusted with a bus'ness that concerns you as well
as me.



Me? What do you mean Sir Timothy?



Why Sir, you know what I mean.







What, not that I am to marry your Sister Celinda?







O this unsufferable Sott!




My Sister, Sir, is very nice.



That's all one, Sir, the old People have adjusted the matter,
and they are the most proper 〈◊〉 a Negotiation of that kind, which saves
us the trouble of a tedious Courtship.



That the old People have agreed the matter, is more than I
know.



Why Lord Sir, will you persuade me to that? don't you know
that your Father (according to the method in such cases, being certain of
my Estate) came to me thus Sir Timothy Tawdrey! You are a young
Gentleman, and a Knight, I knew your Father well, and my right wor∣shipful
Neighbor, our Estates lie together, therefore Sir, I have a desire to
have a near Relation with you At which, I interrupted him, and cry•d
 Oh Lord Sir! I vow to Fortune, you do me the greatest Honour Sir,
and the rest 



I can endure no more, he marry fair Celinda?



Prethee let him alone.




To which he answer'd I have a good Fortune Have
but my Son Ned, and this Girl, call'd Celinda, whom I will make a For∣tune,
sutable to yours▪ your honoured Mother, the Lady Tawdrey, and I,
have as good as concluded the match already. To which I (who, tho I
say it, am well eno•gh bred for a Knight) answer'd the Civility thus 
I vow to Fortune Sir I did not swear, but cry'd I protest Sir,
Celinda, deserves no, no, I lye again, 'twas merits I, Celinda 
merits a much better Husband than I.



You speak more truth than you are aware of.

Well, Sir, I'll bring you to my Sister, and if she likes you, as well as my
  5
Father does, she's yours; otherwise, I have so much tenderness for her,
as to leave her choice free.



Oh Sir you Compliment. Alons, Entrons.









I wonder my Brother stayes so long; sure Mr Bellmour is not yet
arriv'd, yet he sent us word he would be here to day. Lord how impa∣tient
I grow.



Ay, so methinks if I had the hopes of enjoying so sweet a
Gentleman, as Mr Bellmour, I shou'd be so too But I am past it 
Well, I have had my pantings, and heavings, my impatience, and qualms,
my heats, and my colds, and my I know not whats But I thank my
stars, I have done with all those Fooleries.




Is there any thing in life but Love?
Wou'dst thou prai•e Heaven for thy Being,
Without that grateful part of it?
For I confess I Love.



You need not, your sighs, and daily (nay, and nightly too)
disorders, plainly enough betray the truth.



Thou speak'st as if it were a Sin;
But if it be so, you your self help'd to make me wicked.
For e're I saw Mr Bellmour, you spoke the kindest things of him,
As would have mov'd the dulle•t Maid to Love;
And e're I saw him, I was quite undone.



Quite undone! Now God forbid it: What, for Loving?
You said but now there was no life without it.



But since my Brother came from Italy,

And brought young Bellmour to our house,
How very little thou hadst said of him;
How much above thy praise, I found the Youth?



Very pretty! You are grown a notable Proficient in Love 
And you are resolv'd (if he please) to Marry him.



Or I must dye.



I, but you know the Lord Plotwell, has the possession of all his
Estate, and if he Marry without his liking, has power to take away all
his Fortune, and then I think it were not so good Marrying him.



Not Marrying him! Oh canst thou think so poorly of me?
Yes, I wou'd Marry him, tho' our scanty Fortune,
Cou'd onely purchase us
A loanly Cottage, in some silent place,

  6All cover'd o•re with Thatch,
Defended from the outrages of storms
By leafless Trees, in Winter, and from heat,
With shades, which their kind Boughs wou•d bear anew,
Under whose Covert, wee'd feed, our gentle Flock;
That shou•d in gratitude repay us Food,
And mean and humble Cloathing.







There we wou•d practise such degrees of Love,
Such lasting, innocent, unheard of joyes,
As all the busie World should wonder at,
And ami•st all the•r Glories, find none such.



Good lack! how prettily Love teaches his Scholars to prattle?
 But hear ye, fair Mrs Celinda, you have forgot to what end and pur∣pose
you came to Town, not to Marry Mr Bellmour, as I take it but
Sir Timothy Tawdrey, that Spark of Men.



Oh name him not Let me not in one moment
Descend from Heaven to Hell 
How came that wretched thing into thy Noddle?



Faith Mistriss I took pity of thee, I saw you so elevated with
thoughts of Mr Bellmour, I found it necessary to take you down a degree
lower.



Why did not Heaven make all Men like to Bellmour?

So strangely sweet and charming.



Marry come up you speak well for your self;
Oh intolerable loving Creature!
But here comes the utmost of your wishes.



My Brother and Bellmour! with strange Men!





Sister, I've brought you here a Lover, this is the worthy per∣son
you have heard of, Sir Timothy Tawdrey.



Yes, •aith Madam, I am Sir Timothy Tawdrey, at your ser∣vice
 Pray are not you Mrs Celinda D•esswell?



The same, but cannot return your Compliment.



Oh Lord, oh Lord, not return a Compliment, faith Ned thy
Sister•s quite spoil'd, for want of Town Education; 'tis pity, for she•s
Devilish pretty.



She•s modest. Sir, before Company; therefore these G•ntle∣men
and I will withdraw into the next Room.



Inhumane Brother, will you leave me alone with this Sott?



Yes, and i• you would be rid of the trouble of him, be not
coy, nor witty; two things •e hates.



'Sdeath! Must she be blown upon by that Fool?



Patience dear Frank, a little while.




when Celinda should speak.


Oh dear Nurse, what shall I do?



I that ever help you at a dead Lift, will not fail you now.



What a Pox not a word?



Sure this Fellow believes I•ll begin.



Not yet sure she has spoke her last 



The Gentleman's good natur'd, and has took pity on you, and
will not trouble you, I think.



 Hey day, here•s Wooing indeed Will she never begin
trow This some would call an excellent quality in her Sex But a
Pox on•t I do not like it Well, I see I must break silence at last 
Madam not answer me shaw this is meer ill breeding by For∣tune
 it can be nothing else Oh my Conscience, if I should kiss her,
she w•uld not bid me stand off I'll try 



Hold, Sir, you mistake your Mark.



So I should, if I were to look in thy mouldy Chaps, good
Matron Can your Lady speak?











Why speak to her first.



I never knew a Woman want a Cue, for that, but all that I
have met with, were still before-hand with me, in tittle tattle.



Likely those you have met with may, but this is no such Crea∣ture
Sir.



I must confess, I am unus'd to this kind of Dialogue,
And I am an Ass, if I know what to say to such a Creature,
 But come, will you answer me to one Question?



If I can Sir.



But first I should ask you if you can speak?
For that's a Question too.



And if I cannot, how will you be answer'd?



Faith that's right; why then you must do't by signs.



But grant I can speak, what is't you'll ask me?







Oh yes, Sir, many things; I love my Meat, I love abundance of
Adorers, I love choice of new Cloaths, new Playes, and like a right
Woman, I love to have my Will.



Spoke like a well-bred person, by Fortune; I see there's hopes
of thee Celinda; thou wilt in time learn to make a very fashionable
Wife, having so much Beauty too. I see Attracts, and Allurements, wan∣ton
Eyes, the languishing turn of the Head, and all that invites to Tem∣ptation.



Would that please you in a Wife?



Please me, why Madam, what do you take me to be? a
Sott? a Fool? or a dull Italian, of the humor of your Bro∣ther?
 No, no, I can assure you, she that Marries me, shall have
Franchise But my pretty Miss, you must learn to talk a little
more. 



I have not Wit, and Sense enough, for that.



Wit! Oh la, O la, Wit! as if there were any Wit requir'd
in a Woman when she talks; no, no matter for Wit, or Sense: talk but
loud, and a great deal, to shew your white teeth, and smile, and be very
confident, and 'tis enough. Lord what a •ight 'tis to see a pretty
Woman stand right up an end in the middle of a Room, playing with her
Fan, for want of something to keep her in countenance. No, s•e that is
mine, I will teach to entertain at another rate.



How Sir? Why what do you take my young Mistriss to be?



A Woman and a fine one, and so fine as she, ought to
permit her self to be seen, and be ador•d.



Out upon you, would you expose your Wife; by my troth and
I were she, I know what I wou'd do. 



Thou do what thou wouldst have done sixty Years ago,
thou meanest.



Marry come up, for a stinking Knight, worse than I have gone
down with you, e're now Sixty Years ago quoth ye As old as I
am I live without Surgeons, wear my own Hair, am not in Debt to
my Taylor, as thou art, and art fain to kiss his Wife, to persuade her Hus∣band
to be merciful to thee who wakes thee every morning with his
Clamour and long Bills, at thy Chamber door.



Prethee good Matron peace, I'll Compound with thee.



'Tis more than thou wilt do with thy Creditors, who, poor
Souls, despair of a Groat in the Pound for all thou ow•st them, for Points,
Lace, and Garniture for all in fine, that makes thee a complete
Fopp.



Hold, hold, thy eternal Clack.



And when none would trust thee farther, give Judgments for
twice the Money tho• borrowest, and swear thy self at Age; and lastly,
 to patch up your broken Fortune, you wou'd fain Marry my swe•t
Mistriss Celinda here But 'faith Sir, you're mistaken, her For•une shall
not go to the maintenance of your Misses, which being once sure of, she,
poor Soul, is sent down to the Coun•rey house, to learn Housewifery, and
live without M•nkind, unless she can serve her s•lf with the handsom
Steward, or so whil'st you tear it away in Town, and live like Man and
Wife with your Jilt, and are every day seen in the Glass Coach, whil'st
your own natural Lady is hardly worth the hire of a Hack



Why thou damnabie confounded torment, wilt thou never
cease?



No, not till you raise your Siege, and be gone; go march to
your Lady of Love, and debauch go You get no C•linda
here.



The Devil's in her tongue.



Good gentle Nurse, have mercy upon the poor Knight.



No more Mistriss, than he'll have on you, if Heaven had so
abandon'd you, to put you into his power: Mercy quoth ye no,
no more than his Mistriss will have, when all his money's gone.



Will she never end?







No more, than the Usurer would, to whom he has mortgag'd
his best part of his Estate, would forbear a day after the promis'd pay∣ment
of the money. Forbear 



Not yet end: Can I Madam, give you a greater proof of my
passion for you, than to endure this for your sake?



This thou art so sorry a creature, thou wilt endure any thing,
for the lucre of her fortune; 'tis that thou hast a passion for: not that
thou carest for money, but to sacrifice to thy lewdness, to purchase a Mi∣striss,
to purchase the Reputation of as errant a Fool, as ever arriv'd at
the honour of keeping, to purchase a little Grandeur, as you call it; that
is, to make every one look at thee, and consider what a Fool thou art,
who else might pass unreguarded amongst the common crowd.



The Devil's in her tongue, and so 'tis in most Womens of her
Age; for when 't has quitted the Tail, it repairs to her upper Tire.



Do not persuade me, Madam, I am resolv'd to make him weary
of his Wooing.



So God be prais'd, the storm is laid And now Mrs. Celin∣da▪
give me leave to ask you, if it be with your leave, this affront is put
〈…〉 of my Quality?







Yes, I am a Gentleman, and a Knight.



Yes, Sir, Knight of the ill-favour'd Countenance is it?



You are beholding to Don Quixot for that, and •tis so many
Ages, since thou couldst see to read, I wonder thou hast not forgot all that
ever belong•d to Books.



My eye-sight•s good enough to see thee in all thy colours, thou
Knight of the Burning Pestle thou.



Agen, that was out of a Play heark ye Witch of Endor, hold
your prating tongue, or I shall most well-•avourdly Cudgel ye.



As your Friend the Hostess has it in a Play too, I take it, Ends
which you pick up behind the Scenes, when you go to be laught at even
by the Player Women.



Wilt thou have done, by Fortune I'll endure no more.














Read here, the worst of News, that can arrive,

 What's the matter here? Why how now Sir Timothy,

What up in Arms with the Women?



Oh Ned, i• m glad thou•rt come never was Tom Dove bait∣ed
as I have been.



By whom? my Sister.



No, no, that old Mastiff there; the young Whelp, came
not on, thanks be prais'd.



How, her Father here to morrow, and here he sayes, that shall be
the last moment, he will defer the Marriage of Celinda, to this Sott 
Oh God, I shall grow mad, and so undo 'em all I'll kill the Villain at
the Altar By my lost hopes I will And yet there is some left Could
I but speak to her I must relie on Dresswells friendship Oh God
to morrow Can I endure that thought Can I endure to see the Tray∣tor
there, who must to morrow rob me of my Heaven I'll own my
flame and boldly tell this Fopp, she must be mine 



I assure you, Sir Timothy, I am sorry, and will chastise her.



Ay Sir, I that am a Knight a Man of Parts and Wit, and
one that is to be your Brother, and design'd to be the glory of marrying
Celinda.



I can endure no more How Sir You marry fair Ce∣linda!



Ay Frank, Ay Is she not a pretty little plump white Rogue,
hah 







Oh I had forgot, thou art a modest Rogue, and to thy eternal
shame, hadst never the Reputation of a Mistri•s Lord, Lord, that I
could see thee address thy self to a Lady I fancy thee a very ridicu∣lous
Figure, in that posture, by Fortune.



Why Sir I can Court a Lady 



No, no, thou'rt modest; that is to say, a Countrey Gentle∣man;
that is to say, Ill-bred; that is to say, a Fool by Fortune, as the
World goes.



Neither Sir I can Love and tell it too and that you may
believe me look on this Lady Sir 



Loo• on this Lady Sir Ha, ha, ha, Well Sir 
Well Sir And what then 



Nay view her well Sir 



Pleasant this Well Frank I do And what then?



Is she not charming Fair Fair to a wonder!



Well Sir, 'tis granted 



And canst thou think this Beauty meant for thee, for thee dull
common Man?



Very well, what will he say next?



I say, let me no more see thee approach this Lady.







Not speak to her, not look on her by Heaven not think
of her.



How Frank, art in earnest?



Try, if thou dar'st?



Not think of her 



No not so much as in a Dream, could I Divine it.



Is he in earnest Mr Friendlove?



I doubt so Sir Timothy.



What does he then pretend to your Sister?



Yes, and no Man else, shall dare do so.



Take notice I am aff•onted in your Lodgings for you
Bellmour You take me for an Ass therefore meet me to morrow
morning about 5, with your Sword in your hand, behind Southamp•on
House.



'Tis well there we'll dispute our Title to Celinda.


Dull Animal! Ye Gods cou'd ne're Decree
So bright a Maid shou'd be possest by thee.











WEll, 'tis an endless trouble, to have the Tuition of a Maid in
Love, here is such Wishing and Longing And yet one
must force them to what they most desire, before they will admit of it 
Here am I sent out a Scout of the Forlorn Hope, to discover the approach
of the Enemy Well Mr. Bellmour, you are not to know, 'tis with
the consent of Celinda, that you come I must bear all the blame, what
mischief soever comes of these Night-works.
Enter Bellmour.

Oh are you come Your hour was Twelve, and •ow 'tis almost Two.



I could not get from Friendlove Thou hast not told Celinda of
my coming.



No, no, ee'n make peace for me, and your self too.



I warrant thee Nurse Oh how I hope and fear this nights suc∣cess!





Celinda in her Night A•tire, leaning on a Table.
Enter to her Bellmour and Nurse.



Oh Heavens! Mr. Bellmour at this late hour in my Cham∣ber!



Yes, Madam; but will approach no nearer till you permit me;
And sure you know my Soul too well to fear.



I do Sir, and you may approach yet nearer,
And let me know your business.



Love is my bus'ness, that of all the world
Only my flame as much surmounts the rest
As is the Objects beauty, I adore.



If this be all, to tell me of your Love,
To morrow might have done as well.



Oh no, to morrow would have been too late,
Too late to make returns to all my pain.
 What disagreeing thing offends your Eyes?
I've no deformity about my Person,
I'm Young, and have a Fortune great as any
That do pretend to serve you;
And yet I find my interest in your heart,
Below those happy ones that are my Rivals.
Nay, every Fool that can but plead his Title,
And the poor interest that a Parent gives him,
Can merit more than I.
 What else my lovely Maid can give a freedom
To that same talking, idle Knighted Fopp.



Oh if I am so wretched to be his,
Surely I cannot live,
For, Sir, I must confess I cannot love him.



But thou may'st do as bad, and marry him,
And that's a sin, I cannot over live
 No, hear my Vows 



But are you •ir in earnest?



In earnest? Yes, by all that's good I am;
I Love you more than I do Life, or Heav'n•




Oh what a pleasure 'tis to hear him say so!

 But pray, how long Sir, have you Lov'd me so?



From the first moment that I saw your Eyes,

  13Your charming killing Eyes, I did adore 'em,
And ever since have languisht day and night.



Come, come, ne're stand asking of questions,
But follow your inclinations, and take him at his word.




Celinda, take her counsel,
Perhaps this is the last opportunity;
Nay, and by Heaven the last of all my Life,
If you refuse me now 
Say, will you never marry Man but me?



Pray give me till to morrow, Sir, to answer you;
For I have yet some fears about my Soul
That take away my rest.



To morrow! You must then marry oh fatal word!
Another! a Beast, a Fool, tha• knows not how to value you.



Is't possible my Fate shou'd be so near?



Nay then dispose of your self, I say, and leave dissembling, 'tis
high time.



This night the Letter came, the dreadful News
Of thy being married, and to morrow too.
Oh answer me, or I shall die with fear.



I must confess it, Sir, without a blush,
(For 'tis no sin to Love) that I cou'd wish 
Heaven and my Father, were inclin'd my way.
But I am all obedience to their wills.



That Sigh was kind,
But ere to morrow this time,
You'll want this pitying sense, and fee• no pantings,
But those which joyes and pleasures do create.



Alas Sir! what is't you'd have me do?



Why I wou'd have you Love, and after that
You need not be instructed what to do.
Give me your Faith▪ give me your Solemn Vow
To be my Wife, and I shall be at peace.



Have you consider'd, Sir, your own condition,
'Tis in your Uncles power to take your Fortune,
If in your choice you disobey his will.
 And Sir, you know that mine is much below you.



Oh I shall calm his Rage,
By urging so much Reason as thy Beauty,
And my own flame, on which my Life depends.
 He now has kindly sent for me to London,

I fear his bus'ness 
Yet if you'll yield to marry me,
We'll keep it secret, till our kinder Stars
Have made provision for the blest discovery▪

  14Come give me your Vows, or we must part for ever.



Part! oh 'tis a fatal word!
I will do any thing to save that Life,
To which my own so nearly is alli'd.














Was it so kindly done to gain my Sister
Without my knowledge?



Ah Friend! 'Twas from her self alone
That I wou'd take the blessing which I ask.



And I•ll assist her, Sir, to give it you.
Here take him as an Honour, and be thankful.



I as a blessing sent from Heaven receive her,
And e're I sleep will justifie my Claim,
And make her mine.



Be not so hasty Friend:
Endeavor first to reconcile your Uncle to't.



By such delayes we're lost: Hast thou forgot?
To morrow she's design'd anothers Bride!



For that let me alone t' evade.



If you must yet delay me,
Give me leave not to interest such wealth without security.
And I Celinda will instruct you how to satisfie my fears.

Bears witness to my Vows 
May every Plague that Heaven inflicts on Sin,
Fall down in thunder on my head,
If e're I marry any but Celinda,

Or if I do not marry thee fair Maid.



Heartily sworn as I vow.



And here I wish as solemnly the same.
 May all arrive to me,
If e're I marry any Man but Bellmour!




We are Witnesses as good as a thousand.



But now my Friend, I'de have you take your leave, the day
comes on apace, and you•ve not seen your Uncle, since your arrival.



'Tis death to part with thee my fair Celinda,

But our hard Fates, imposes this separation;
 Farewell Remember thou'rt all mine.



What have I else of joy to think upon 
 Go go depart.



I will but 'tis as Misers part with Gold,
Or people full of Health depart from Life.



Go, Sister, to your Bed, and dream of him.





Whilst I prepare to meet this Fopp to fight him.



Hang him, he'll ne're meet thee; to beat a Watch, or kick a
Drawer, or batter Windows, is the highest pitch of Valor he e're ar∣riv'd
to.



However I'll expect him, lest he be Fool-hardy enough to keep
his word.



Shall I wait on thee?



No, no, there•s no need of that Good morrow my best
Friend.



But e're you go, my dearest Friend and Brother,
Now you are sure of all the joyes you wish
From Heav'n, do not forgetful grow, of that great trust
I gave you of all mine, but like a Friend
Assist me in my great concern of Love
With fair Diana, your lovely Cozen;
You know how long, I have ador'd that Maid,
But still her haughty Pride repell'd my flame,
And all it• fierce efforts



She has a spirit equal to her Beauty
As mighty and tyrannick, yet she has goodness,
And I believe enough inclin'd to Love,
When once her Pride's orecome; I have the honour
To be the Confident of all her thoughts:
And to •ugment thy hopes, 'tis not long since,
She did with sighs confess to me, she Lov'd
A Man she said scarce equal to her Fortune;
But all my interest could not learn the Object:
But it must needs be you, by what she said
This I'll improve, and so to your advantage 



I neither doubt thy Industry, nor Love,
Go and be careful of my Int'rest there,
Whilst I preserve thine as intirely here.









Good morrow Sir Timothy, what not yet ready, and to mee•
Mr. Bellmour at five, the time's past.



 Ay Pox on't I han't slep to night for thinking
on't.



Well Sir Timothy, I have most excellent News for you, that will
do as well, I have found out 



A new Wench, I warrant but prethee Sham, I have ••ther
matters in hand; 'Sheart I am so mortifi'd with this same though•
of Fighting, that I shall hardly think of Woman kind again.



You were so forward Sir Timothy 



Ay Sharp, I am alwayes so when I'm angry; had I been but
a little more provok'd then, that we might have gone to't when the heat
was brisk, I had done well but a Pox on't this fighting in cool blood
I hate.



'Shaw, Sir, 'tis nothing, a Man wou'd do't for Exercise in a
morning.



Ay, if there were no more in't than Exercise; if a Man
co•'d take a Breathing without breathing a Vein but Sham, this
Wounds, and Blood, sounds terribly in my ears; but since thou say'st 'tis
nothing, prethee do thou meet Bellmour in my stead; thou art a poor
Dog, and 'tis no matter if the world were well rid of thee.



I wou'd do't with all my Soul but your Honour Sir 



 My Honour! 'tis but Custom that makes it Honourable
to fight Duels I warrant you the wise Italian, thinks himself a Man
of Honour; and yet when did you hear of an Italian, that ever fought a
Duel? Is't not enough, I am affronted, have my Mistriss taken away be∣fore
my face, hear my self call'd, Dull, Common Man, Dull Animal, and
the rest But I must after all give him leave to kill me too, if he can 
And this is your damn'd Honourable English way of shewing a Mans
Courage.



I must confess I am of your mind, and therefore have been
studying a Revenge, sutable to the Affront: and if I can judge any thing,
I have hit it.



Hast thou? dear Sham, out with it.



Why Sir what think you of debauching his Sister?



Why is there such a thing in Nature?



You know he has a Sister, Sir.



Yes, Rich, and Fair.



Both, or she were not worthy of your Revenge.



Oh how I love Revenge, that has a double pleasure in it 
and where and where is this fine piece of temptation?



In being Sir but Sharp here, and I, have been at some cost in
finding her out.



Ye shall be overpaid there's Gold, my little Maquero
but she's very handsom?



As a Goddess, Sir.



And art thou sure she will be Lewd?



Are we sure she's a Woman, Sir? Sure she's in her Teens?
has Pride and Vanity and two or three Sins more, that I cou'd •ame,
all which never fails to assist a Woman in Debauchery But Sir, there
are certain people that b•long to her, that must be consider'd too.



Stay Sir, e're I part with more money, I'll be certain what
returns 'twill make me that is I'll see the Wench, not to inform my
self, how well I like her, for that I shall do, because she is new, and Bell∣mours
Sister but to find what possibility there is in gaining her I am
us'd to these things, and can •uess from a look, or a kiss, or a touch of the
hand but then I warrant, 'twill come to the knowledge of Betty
Flau•tit.



What Sir then it seems you doubt us?



How do you mean, your honesty or judgment?
I can assure you, I doubt both.



How Sir? doubt our honesty?



Yes why I hope neither of you pretend to either, do
you?



Why, Sir, what do you take us for Cheats?



As errant, as any's in Christendom.







Why how now what flie in my face? are you• stomachs
so queasie, that Cheat won't down with you?



Why Sir we are Gentlemen and tho' our ill Fortunes
have thrown us on your Bounty we are not to be term'd 



Why you pair of Hectors whence this impudence?
 De'e you know me ye Raggamuffins?



Yes, but we knew not that you were a Coward before. You
talkt big, and huft where e•re you came, like an errant Bully, and so long
we Reverenc'd you but now we find, you have need of our Courage 
we'll stand on our Reputations.



C•urage and Reputation! h•, ha, ha why ye lowsie Tatter∣demallions
 dare ye talk of Courage and Reputation?



Why, Sir, who dares question either?



He that dares try it.








Enough, enough, we are satisfi'd.



So am not I, ye mangy Mungrels, till I have kickt Courage
and Reputation out of ye.



Hold there Sir, •tis enough we are satisfi'd, that you have
Courage.



Oh are you so? then it seems I was not to be believ'd 
I told you I had Courage when I was angry.



Ay Sir, we have prov'd it, and will now swear it.
 But we had an inclination to try Sir.



And all you did, was but to try my Courage hah!



On our Honours nothing else Sir Timothy.




Tho• I know ye to be cursed cowardly lying Rogues,
Y•t because I have use of ye, I must forgive ye.
 Here kiss my hand, and be forgiven.



'Tis an Honour we are proud of Sir.



Oh is it so Rascallians! then I hope I am to see the Lady
without I•dentures.



Oh Lord Sir! any thing we can serve you in.



And I have brib'd her Maid to bring her this morning into the
M•ll.



Well, let's about it then; for I am for no Fighting to day 
De'e hear Boy Let the Coach be got ready, whilst I get my self
drest



The Coach Sir! Why you know Mr Shatter has pawn'd the
Horses.



I had forgot it A Pox on't, this 'tis to have a Partner in a
Coach; By Fortune I must Marry, and set up a whole one.









Mr Charles, your Brother, my young Master Bellmour is come.



I•m glad on't; my Unkle, began to be impatient that he came
not, you saying you left him but a dayes journey behind you yesterday.
My Unkle has something of importance to say to him, I fansie it may be
about a Marriage between him and my Lady Diana such a whisper I
heard 



I Marry Sir, that were a Match indeed, she being your Unkles
onely Heir.



Ay but they are Sisters Children, and too near akin to be
happy.



'Twere pity my young Master shou'd be unhappy in a Wife;
for he is the sweetest natur'd Gentleman But one comfort is Mr Charles,
you, and your Sister Mrs •hillis, will have your Portions assign'd you •f
he Marry.



Yes, that he can't deny us the very day after his Marriage.



I shall be glad to see you all dispos'd of well; but I was half
afraid, your Brother wou'd have Married Mrs Celinda Friendlove, to whom
he made notable Love in Yorkshire, I thought; not but she's a fine Lady;
but her Fortune is below that of my young Master•, as much as my Lady
Diana's is above his But see, they come let us retire, to give 'em
leave to talk alone.






And well Frank, how dost thou find thy self inclin'd, tho•••o•'dst begin to think of something more than Books? Dost thou not
  19
wish to know the joyes that are to be found in a woman Frank? I well
remember at thy age I fancy'd a thousand fine things of that kind.



Ay my Lord, a thousand more perhaps than are to be found.



Not so; but I confess Frank unless the Lady be fair, and there
be some Love too, 'tis not altogether so well; therefore I, who am still
busie for thy good, have fixt upon a Lady 







What dost start? Nay, I'll warrant thee she'll please,
A Lady rich, and fair, and Nobly born, and thou shalt Marry her
Frank.



Marry her my Lord 



Why yes Marry her I hope you are none of the fashionable
Fopps, that are alwayes in mutiny against Marriage, who never think
themselves very witty, but when they rail against Heav'n and a Wife 
But Frank, I have found better Principles in thee, and thou hast the Re∣putation
of a sober young Gentleman, thou art besides a Man of great
Fortune Frank.



And therefore Sir, ought the less to be a Slave.



But Frank, we are made for one another, and ought by the
Laws of God, to communicate our blessings▪



Sir, there are Men enough, fitter much than I, to obey those Laws,
nor do I think them made for every one.



But Frank, you do not know what a Wife I have provided fo•
you.



'Tis enough I know she's a Woman, Sir.



A Woman, why what should she be else?



An Angel, Sir, e're she can be my Wife.



In good time, but this is a Mortal Sir and must serve your
turn but Frank, she is the finest Mortal 



I humbly beg your pardon, if I tell you,
That had she Beauty such as Heav'n ne're made,
Nor meant again t' inrich a Woman with,
It cou'd not take my heart.



But Sir, perhaps you do not guess the Lady.



Or cou'd I Sir, it cou'd not change my nature.



But Sir, suppose it be my Neece Diana.




How Sir? the fair Diana.




I thought thou'dst come about again;
What think you now of Woman-kind, and Wedlock?



As I did before, my Lord.



What, thou canst not think I am in earnest, I confess Frank, she
is above thee in point of Fortune, she being my onely Heir but sup∣pose
'tis she.



Oh I'm undone Sir I dare not suppose so greatly in favour of
my self.



But Frank, you must needs suppose 



Oh I am ruin'd, lost, for ever lost.



What do you mean Sir?



I mean I cannot Marry fair Diana.



Death how's this? 



She is a thing, above my humble wishes 



Is that all? take you no care for that, for she loves you already,
and I have resolv'd it which is better yet.



Love me Sir? I know she cannot,
And Heav'n forbid that I should injure her.



Sir, this is a put-off: resolve quickly, or I'll compel you.



You wou•d not use extremity,
What is the forfeit of my disobedience?



The loss of all your Fortune,
If you refuse the Wife I have provided 
Especially a handsom Lady, •s she is Frank.





What cursed Laws provided this severity?



Even those of your Fathers disposal, who seeing so many exam∣ples,
in this lewd Age, of the ruine of whole Families, by imprudent
Marriages, provided otherwise for you.



But Sir, admit Diana be inclin'd,
And I (by my unhappy Stars so curst)
Should be unable to accept the Honour.



How Sir? admit? I can no more admit,
Than you can suppose therefore give me your final answer.



Sir, can you think a blessing e're can fall
Upon that Pair, whom Interest joins, not Love.



Why what's in Diana that you shou'd not love her?



I must confess she has a thousand Virtues,
The least of which wou'd bless another Man;
But Sir, I hope if I am so unhappy
As not to love that Lady, you will pardon me.



Indeed Sir but I will not, love me this Lady, and marry me this
Lady, or I will teach you what it is to refuse such a Lady.



Sir, tis not in my power to obey you.



How? not in your pow'r?



No, Sir, I see my fatal r•ine in your eyes,
And know too well your force, and my own misery.
 But Sir when I shall tell you who I've married 



Who you've married! By all that's Sacred if that be true,
thou art undone for ever.



Oh hear me Sir!
I came with hopes to have found you merciful.



Expect none from me; no, thou shalt not have so much of thy

  21Estate, as will afford thee Bread.
By Heaven thou shalt not.



Oh pity me, my Lord, pity my Youth;
It is no Beggar, nor none basely born
That I have given my heart •o, but a Maid,
Whose Birth, whose Beauty, and whose Education,
Merits the best of Men.



Very fine! where is the Priest that durst dispose of you, with∣out
my order? Sirrah you are my slave at least your whole Estate is
at my mercy and besides, I'll charge you with an Action of 5000 l.
for your ten Years maintenance: Do you know that this is in my pow'r
too?



Yes, Sir, and dread your Anger worse than death.



Oh Villain! thus to dash my expectation.



Sir, on my bended knees, thus low I fall
To beg your mercy.



Yes, Sir, I will have mercy,
I•ll give you Lodging but in a Dungeon Sir,
Where you shall ask your food of Passers by.



All this, I know you have the power to do,
But, Sir, were I thus cruel, this hard usage
Would give me cause to execute it.
I wear a Sword, and I dare right my self;
And Heav'n wou'd pardon it, if I should kill you:
But Heav'n forbid, I shou'd correct that Law,
Which gives you power, and orders me obedience.



Very well, Sir, I shall •ame that Courage, and punish that Har∣lot,
who e're she be, that has seduc'd ye.



How Harlot, Sir! Death such another word,
And through all Laws and Reason I will rush,
And reach thy Soul, if mortal like thy Body.
 No Sir, she's Chaste, as are the new-made Vows,
I breath'd upon her Lips, when last we parted.






 Shall I be murder'd in my own House?
'Tis time you were remov'd 
Go get an Action of 5000 l. enter'd against him;
With Officers to Arrest him.



My Lord, 'tis my young Master Bellmour.




Ye all dote upon him▪ but he's not the Man you take him for.



How my Lord? not this Mr Bellmour?









Stay Sir oh stay what will become of me?
'Twere better that my Life were lost than Fortune 
For that being gone, Celinda must not love me.
 But to die wretchedly 
 Poorly in Prison whilst I can manage this 
 Is below him, that does adore Celinda.


 I'll kill my self but then I kill Celinda.

 Shou'd I obey this Tyrant then too she dies.
 Yes Sir You may be cruel take the Law,
 And kill me quickly, 'twill become your justice.




Was I call'd back for this? Yes, I shall take it Sir, do not
fear.




Yet, stay Sir Have you lost all Humanity?
Have you no Se•se of Honour, nor of Horrors!



Away with him go, be gone.



Stay Sir! oh God! what is't you'd have me do?
 Here I resign my self unto your will 
But oh Celinda! what will become of thee!

 Yes, I will Marry and Diana too.



'Tis well you will, had I been good natur'd now,
You had been undone, and mist Diana too.



But must I Marry? Needs Marry Sir? 
Or lose my Fortune, and my Liberty,
Whil'st all my Vows are given to another?



By all means, Sir 



If I must Marry any but Celinda,

I shall not, Sir, enjoy one moments bliss!
I shall be quite unman'd, Cruel and Brutal!
A Beast, unsafe for Woman to converse with;
Besides, Sir, I have given my Heart and Faith,
And any second Marriage is Adultery.



Heart and Faith, I am glad 'tis no worse; if the Ceremony of
the Church has not past, 'tis well enough.



All Sir, that Heaven, and Love requires, is past.



Thou art a Fool Frank, come dry thy Eyes,
And receive Diana. Trusty  Call in my Neece.



Yet Sir relent, be kind, and save my soul.




No more by Heaven, if you resist my Will, I'll make a strange
example of thee, and of that Woman, who e're she be, that drew thee to
this folly. Faith and Vows quoth ye.









Look ye here Frank, is this a Lady to be dislik'd?
  23
Come hither Frank Trusty  Haste for Dr. Tickletext, my Chaplain's
not in Town; I'll have them instantly Married Come hither Diana 
Diana, will you Marry your Cozen Frank Bellmour?



Yes, if it be your pleasure; Heaven cou'd not let fall a greater
blessing.




And you Frank, will you Marry my Neece Diana?



Since you will have it so.



Come follow me then, and you shall be both pleas'd.



Oh my Celinda 

To preserve thee, what is't I wou'd not do,
Forfeit my Heaven, nay more I forfeit you.









Now Sham, art not thou a damn'd lying Rogue, to make me
•aunter up and down the Mall all this morning, after a Woman that thou
knowst in thy Conscience was not likely to be there?



Why Sir if her Maid will be a jilting Whore, how can I
help it Sharp  Thou knowst we presented her handsomly, and she
protested she'd do't.



Ay, Ay Sir  but the Devil a Maid we saw.



Sir, it may be Things have so fallen out, that she could not pos∣sibly
come.



Things! a Pox of your Tricks Well, I see there's no
trusting a poor Devil Well, what device will your Rogueship find out
to Cheat me next?



Prethee help me out at a dead Lift Sharp.




Cheat you Sir! If I been't reveng'd on this She-Counsellor
of the Patching and Painting, this Letter-in of Midnight Lovers, this
Receiver of Bribes for stol'n Pleasures; may I be condemn'd never to
make Love to any thing of higher quality.



Nay, nay, no Threatning Sharp, it may be she's Innocent
yet Give her t'other Bribe, and try what that will do.




No, Sir, I'll have no more to do with frail Woman, in this case, I
have a surer way to do your business.




Is not that Bellmour's Page?







By Fortune the Rogue's looking for me; he has a Challenge
in his hand too.



No matter, Sir, Huff it out.



Prethee do thee Huff him, thou knowst the way on't.



What's your bus'ness with Sir Timothy Sir?



Mine Sir, I don't know the Gentleman, pray which is he?



I, I,'t is so Pox on him.



Well, Boy, I am he what Your Master 



My Master Sir 



Are not you Bellmour's Page?











News Sir? I know of none, but of my Masters being this
morning 



Ay, there it is behind Southampton House.







How? Marry'd! 'Slife, has he serv'd me so?



The Boy is drunk Bellmour Married!



Yes indeed, to the Lady Diana.



Diana! Mad by Fortune; what Diana?



Neece to the Lord Plotwell.



Come hither Boy Art thou sure of this?



Sir, I am sure of it; and I am going to bespeak Musick for the
Ball anon.



What hast thou there a Letter to the Divine Celinda;
A dainty Boy there's money for thee to buy Nickers.



I humbly thank you.




Well, Sir, if this be true, Celinda will be glad of you again.



Ay, but I will have none of her For, look you Sham, there
is but two sorts of Love in this World Now I am sure the Rogue did
love her; and since it was not to Marry her, it was for the thing you wot
on, as appears by his writing to her now But yet I will not believe what
this Boy said till I see it,



Faith Sir, I have thought of a thing, that may both clear your
doubt, and give us a little mirth.







I know y'are quick of apprehension, Sir Timothy.



O your servant dear Sham But to let thee see I am none
of the dullest, we are to Jigg it in Masquerade this evening, hah.



Faith, Sir, you have it, and there you may have an opportunity
to Court Bellmour's sister.



'Tis a good motion, and we will follow it; send to the Dukes
House, and borrow some Habits presently.



I'll about it, Sir.



Make haste to my Lodging But heark ye not a word of
  25
this to Betty •launtit,•he'll be up in Arms these two dayes, if she go not
with us; and tho• I think the fond Devil is true to me, yet •twere worse
than Wedlock, if I should be so to her to.
Tho' Whores in all things else the Mast'ry get,
In this alone, like Wives, they must submit.









Phillis, and other Ladies and Gentlemen.

they are all seated.


HEre Nephew, I resign that Trust which was repos'd in me by
your dead Father, which was that on your Wedding day, I
should thus make you Master of your whole Fortune, you being Mar∣ried
to my liking And now Charles, and you my Neece Phillis, you may
demand your Portions to morrow, if you please, for he is oblig'd to pay
you the day after that of his Marriage.



There's time enough my Lord.



Come, come Ladies, in tro•h you must take but little rest to night,
in complasance to the Bride, and Bridegroom, who I believe, will take
but little Frank why Frank what hast thou chang'd thy humor with
thy condition? thou wert not wont to hear the Musick play in vain.



My Lord, I cannot dance.



Indeed you're wondrous sad.
And I methinks too▪ bear thee company.
I know not why, and yet excess of joy,
Have had the same effects with equal grief.



'Tis true, and I have now felt the extremes of both.



Why Nephew Charles has your breeding at the Academy in∣structed
your heels in no motion?



My Lord, I'll make one.



And I another, for joy that my Brother's made happy in so fair
a Bride.



Hell take your ignorance, for thinking I am happy,
 Wou'd Heav•n wou'd strike me dead.
That by the loss of a poor wretched life,

  26I might preserve my soul but oh my erro!
That has already damn'd it self, when it consented
To break a Sacred Vow, and Marry here.



Come, come begin, begin, Musick to your office.




Why does not this hard heart, this stubborn Fugitive
Break with this Load of Griefs; but like ill Spirits
It promis'd fair, till it had drawn me in,
And then betray'd me to Damnation.



There's something in disorder in his Soul,
Which I'm on fire, to know the meaning of.






The Rogue is Married, and I am so pleas'd, I can forgive him
our last Nights quarrel; prithee Sharp, if thou canst learn that young
things name, 'tis a pretty airy Rogue, whil•st I go talk to her.



I will, Sir, I will.




Nay, Madam, you must dance.




I hope you will not call it Rudeness, Madam, if I refuse you here.

Dance▪ she takes out Sir Timothy, they walk a C•rrant.
Am I still tame and patient with my ills?
Gods! What is Man? That he can live and bare
Yet know his pow'r to rid himself of grief
I will not live, or if my destiny
Compel me to't, it shall be worse than dying.








The answer of a Letter, Sir, you sent to the Divine Celinda; for
so it was directed.



 Hah Celinda in my crowd of thoughts
I had forgot I sent come nearer Boy 
 What did she say to thee? Did she not smile?
And use thee with contempt and scorn tell me.







 Or she was angry call'd me perjur'd Villain 
False, and forsworn nay, tell me truth.







Thou dost delay me say she did, and please me.







Again tell me, what answer Rascal did she send me?



You have it, Sir, there in the Table Book.



Oh I am mad, and know not what I do.
 Prithee forgive me Boy take breath my Soul
Before thou dost begin; for this perhaps may be
So cruel kind.
To leave thee none when thou hast ended it.



I Have took in the Poyson which you sent, in these few
Fatal words Forgive me my Celinda, I am Married 
'Twas thus you said And I have only Life left to return 
 Forgive me my sweet Bellmour I am dead.
CELINDA.

 Can I hear this, and live? I am a Villain!
In my Creation destin'd for all mischief.
 To commit Rapes, and Murders, to break Vows,
As fast as Fools do Jests.
Come hither Boy 
And said the Lady nothing to thee?



Yes e're she read the Letter, ask'd your health,
And joy disperst it self, in blushes through her cheeks.



Her b•auty makes the very Boy adore it.



And having read it,
She drew her Tablets from her Pocket,
And trembling writ what I have brought you Sir.



Tho' I before had loaded up my Soul
With sins, that wou'd have weigh'd down any other,
Yet this one more it bears, this sin of Murder.
And holds out still What have I more to do,
But being plung'd in, in blood, to wade it through.





There stands the Traytor with a guilty look,
That Traytor, who the easier to deceive me,
Betray'd my Sister; yet till I came and saw
The Perjury, I could not give a Faith to't.
 By Heaven, Diana, loves him, nay dotes on him,
I find it in her Eyes, all languishing
They feed the fire in his, arm'd with a double Rage,
I know I shall go through with my Revenge.







How do you know that Sir?



I see y'are fair, and I guess you're a Maid.



Your guess, is better than your eye-sight, Sir.



What e're you are, by Fortune, I wish you would permit me
to love you with all faults.



You? Pray who are you?



A Man, a Gentleman and more, a Knight too, by For∣tune.



Then 'twas not by merit Sir But how shall I know you are
either of these?



That I'm a Man, the effects of my vigorous• f•ame shall prove 
a Gentleman my Coat of Arms shall testifie, and I have the Kings Patent
for my Title.



For the first you may thank your Youth, for the next your Fa∣ther,
and the last your Money.



By Fortune, I love thee for thy pertness.



Is it possible you can love at all?



As much as I dare.



How de ye mean?



Not to be laught a•; 'tis not the Mode to love much: A
Platonick Fopp, I have heard of, but this is an Age of sheere enjoyment,
and little Love goes to that; we have found it incommode, and loss of
time, to make long Addresses.




I find, Sir, you and I shall never agree upon this matter.
But, see Sir, here•s more company.



Oh Heav'n! 'tis true, these Eyes confirm my Fate.
Yonder he is and that fair splendid thing
That gazes on him with such kind desire,
Is my blest Rival oh he is Married.
 Gods! and yet you let him live!
Live too with all his Charms, as fine and gay,
As if you meant he shou'd undo▪ all easie Maids.
And kill 'em for their sin of loving him.
Wretched Celinda!

But I must turn my Eyes from looking on;
The fatal triumphs of my death Which of all these
Is my Brother? Oh this is he; I know him
By the Habit he sent for to the Play-house.

And hither he's come in Masquerade,
I know with some design against my Bellmour▪

Whom tho' he kill me, I must still preserve.
Whil'st I, lost in despair, thus as a Boy

  29Will seek a Death from any welcome hand,
Since I want Courage, to perform the Sacrifice.




Enough, enough at this time, let's see the Bride to Bed, the
Bridegroom thinks it long.



Hell! Can I endure to hear all this with patience?
Shall he depart with Life to enjoy my Right,
And to deprive my Sister of her due?
 Stay Stay and resign
That Virgin.



Who art thou, that dar'st lay a claim to ought that's here?



This Sword shall answer ye.




Tho' I cou'd spare my Life, I'll not be rob'd on't.




Oh my dear Bellmour!


All draw on Bellmour's side Diana
holds Bellmour, Celinda runs between
their Swords, and defends Bellmour;
Sir Tim. Sham and Sharp draw, and
run into several corners, with signs of
fear.


Who art thou that thus fondly guard'st his heart?

 Be gone and let me meet it.



That thou may'st do through mine, but no way else.



Here are too many to encounter, and I'll defer my ven∣geance.



Stay Sir, we must not part so.

•hat Sir• Tim. is sneaking out at.
Come back I say.

Slave! dost thou tremble?



Sir, I'm not the Man you look for 
By Fortune, Sham, we're all undone!
He has mistook me for the fighting Fellow.



Villain! defend thy Life!



Who I Sir? I have no quarrel to you, nor no Man breath∣ing,
not I, by Fortune.



This Coward cannot be my Brother!




What made thee draw upon my Brother?



Who? I Sir? by Fortune I love him I draw upon
him!



I do not wonder thou canst lye, for thou'•• a Coward!
Did• not thou draw upon him? Is not thy Sword yet out?
Did I not see thee fierce, and active too, as if thou hadst dar'd?



Why he's gone Sir; a Pox of all Mistakes, and Masquera∣dings
I say this was your Plot Sham.



Coward! shew then thy face.



I'll be hang•d first, by Fortune; for then 'twill be plain 'twas
I, because I challeng'd Bellmour last night, and broke my assignation this
morning.




Shew thy face without delay, or 



My face, Sir, I protest, by Fortune, 'tis not worth see∣ing.



Then Sirra, you are worth a kicking take that and that 













Have a care Sir by Fortune, I shall fight with a little
more.



Take that to raise you.




Nay then I am angry, and I dare fight.




Go, Ladies, see the Bride to her Chamber.




The Knight, Sir Timothy Tawdrey,

 The Rascal mist me at the appointed place,
And comes to attack me here. 


 Brave Youth! I know not how
I came to merit this Relief from thee.
Sure thou'rt a stranger to me, thou'rt so kind.



Sir, I believe those happy ones that know you
Had been far kinder, but I'm indeed a stranger.



May'st thou be ever so, to one so wretched;
I will not ask thy name, lest knowing it,
(I am such a Monster) I should ruine thee.



Oh how he melts my Soul! I cannot stay,
Lest Grief, my Sex, and Bus'ness shou'd betray.

 Farewell Sir 
 May you be happy in the Maid you love.




Oh dost thou mock my griefs by Heaven he did.
 Stay Sir he's gone.





The Rogue took courage, when he saw there was not remedy;
but there's no hurt done on either side.



'Tis fit such as he shou'd be chastis'd, that do abuse Hospitali∣ty.
Come, come, to Bed, the Lady, Sir, expects you.










I long to know the cause of Bellmour's disorder to night,
And here he comes.




Shan't we see you laid Brother?



Yes in my Grave, dear Charles,

But I'll excuse that Ceremony here.



Good night, and no rest to you Brother.






Till now my Bellmour, I wanted opportunity
To ask the cause, why on a joyful day,
When Heaven has join'd us, by a sacred tye,
Thou droopst like early Flowers, with Winter storms.



Thou art that Winter storm, that nips my Bud,
All my young springing hopes, my gay desires,
The prospect of approaching joyes of Love,
Thou in a hapless minute hast took from me,
And in its room,
Hast given me an eternal desperation.



Have you then given me Vows ye can repent of?



I given ye Vows! be witness ye just Powers!
How far I was from giving any Vows:
No, no, Diana, I had none to give!



No Vows to give!
What were they which to the holy Man
Thou didst repeat, when I was made all thine?



The effects of low submission! such as Slaves
Condemn'd to dye, yield to the angry Judge.



Dost thou not love me then?



Love thee! no by Heaven! yet wish I were so happy.
For thou art wondrous fair, and wondrous good!



Oh what a defeat is here!
The onely Man, who from all Natures store
I found most charming, fit for my desires,
And now after a thousand expectations,
Such as all Maids that Love like me do hope,
Just ready for the highest joyes of Love!
Then to be met thus cold nay worse with scorn.

 Why since you could not love me, did you marry me?



Because I was a Beast! a very Villain▪
That stak'd, a wretched Fortune, to all my joyes of Life.

  32And like a prodigal Gamester lost that all.



How durst you, Sir, knowing my Quality,
Return me this false Pay, for Love so true?
 Was this a Beauty, Sir, to be neglected?



Fair angry Maid, frown on, frown till you kill,
And I shall dying bless those Eyes that did so.
For shou'd I live, I shou'd deprive the happier World
Of treasures, I am too wretched to possess.
And wer't not pity that vast store of Beauty,
Shou'd like rich Fruit, dye on the yielding Boughs.



And are you then resolv'd to be a stranger to me?



For ever! for a long Eternity.



Oh thou'st undone me then; hast thou found out
A Maid more fair, more worthy of thy Love?
Look on me well.



I have consider'd thee,
And find no blemish in thy •oul, or Form,
Thou art all o're Divine, yet I must hate thee,
Since thou hast drawn me to a mortal sin,
That cannot be forgiven, by Men, or Heaven:
 Oh thou hast made me break a Vow Diana,

A Sacred Solemn Vow,
And m•de me wrong the sweetest Innocence,
That ever blest the Earth.



Instead of cooling, this augments my fire,
No pain is like defeated, new desire.

'Tis false, or but to try my Constancy.
Your Mistriss is not so Divine as I,
And shou'd I, 'gainst himself believe the Man
Who first inspir'd my heart with Loves soft flame!



What bliss on me insensible you throw,
I'de rather hear thee swear, thou art my Foe,
And like some Noble and Romantick Maid
With Poniards, wou'd my stubborn heart invade,
And whil'st thou dost the faithful Relique tear,
In every Vein thoud'st find Celinda there.



Come, Sir, you must forget Celinda's Charms,
And reap delights within my circling Arms,
Delights that may your Errors undeceive
When you find joyes, as great as she can give.



What do I hear? Is this the kind relief
Thou dost allow to my despair and grief?
Is this the comfort that thou dost impart
To my all wounded, bleeding, dying heart?

  33Were I so Brutal cou'd thy Love comply
To serve it self with base Adultery?
For cou'd I love thee, cou'd I love agen,
Our Lives wou'd be but one continued Sin;
A Sin of that black die▪ a Sin so foul,
'Twould leave no hopes of Heav'n for eithers Soul.



Dull Man▪ Dost think a feeble vain Excu••

Shall satisfie me for this Nights abuse?
No, since my Passion, thou'st defeated thus,
And rob'd me of my long wish'd happiness▪
I'll make thee know what a wrong'd Maid can do,
Divided 'twixt her Love, and Injuries too.



I dare thy worst
Shou'd Hell assist thy aims, thou cou'dst not find
New Plagues, unless thou shou'dst continue kind,
Hard Fate Diana, when thy Love must be
The greatest Curse that can arrive to me.
 That friendship which our Infant years begun,
And till this day has still continued on,
I will preserve, and my Respects shall be
Profound, as what was ever paid by me.
But for my Love 'tis to Celinda due,
And I can pay you •one that's just and true.



The rest, I•de have thee know I do despise,
I better understand my conquering Eyes:
Those Eyes that shall revenge my Love and Shame,
I'll kill thy Reputation, and thy Name.




My Honour! And my Reputation, now!
They both were forfeit, when I broke my Vow.
Nor cou'd my Honour with thy Fame decline,
Whoe're prophanes thee, injures nought of mine.
This night upon the Couch my self I'll lay,
And▪ like Franciscans, let th' ensuing day
Take care for all the toils it brings with it,
Whatever Fate arrives, I can submit.








Not one kind Wound to send me to my Grave,
And yet between their angry Swords I •an,
Expecting it from Bellmour, or my Brothers.
Oh my hard Fate! that gave me so much Misery,

  34And dealt no Courage, to prevent the shock.
 Why came • off alive, that fatal place
Where I beheld my Bellmour, in th' embrace
Of my extremely fair, and lovely Rival;
 With what kind care she did prevent my Arm
(Who greedy of the last sad pa•ting twine)
I wou'd have thrown about him, as if she knew
To what intent I made the passionate offer.
 What have I next to do, but seek a death
Where ever I can meet it Who comes here?





I believe this is the Bed-chamber Window where the Bride
and the Bridegroom lies.



Well, and what do you intend to do, if it be Sir?



Why first sing a Bawdy Song, and then break the Windows,
in Revenge for the Affront was put upon me to night.



Faith, Sir, that's but a poor Revenge, and which every Foot∣man
may take of his Lady, who has turn'd him away for filching 
You know, Sir, Windows are frail, and will yield to the lusty Brick-bats;
'tis an Act below a Gentleman.



That's all one, 'tis my Recreation; I serv'd a Woman so the
other night, to whom my Mistriss had a Pique.



Ay, Sir, 'tis a Revenge fit only for a Whore to take 
And the Affront you receiv'd •o night, was by mistake.



Mistake! how can that be?



Why, Sir, did you not mind, that he that drew upon Bellmour,
was in the same dress with you?



How shou'd his be like mine?



Why by the same chance, that yours was like his I suppose
sending to the Play-house for them, as we did, they hapned to send him
such another •abit, for they have many such for dancing Shepherds.



Well I grant it a mistake, and that shall repri•ve the Win∣dows.



Then, Sir, you shew'd so much courage, that you may bless the
minute that forc'd you to fight.



Ay, but between you and I, 'twas well he kick'd me first,
and made me angry, or I had been •ustily swing'd, by Fortune but
thanks to my spleen that sav'd my bones that •bou• but then I did well
 hah! came briskly off, and the rest.



With honour▪ Sir, I protest.



Come then, we'll Serenade him. Come, Sirra, •une your
Pipes, and sing.



What shall I sing, Sir?



Any thing sutable to the time and place.




1.The happy Minute's come, the Nymph is laid,
Who means no more to rise a Maid
Blushing, and panting, she expects the approch
Of Ioyes that kill with every touch;
Nor can her Native modesty and shame
Conceal the Ardour of her Virgin flame.

2.And now the Amorous Youth is all undrest,
Iust ready for Loves mighty Feast,
With vigorous haste the Vail aside he throws,
That does all Heaven at once disclose;
Swift as desire, into her naked Arms
Himself he throws, and rifles all her Charms.




God morrow Mr. Bellmour, and to your lovely Bride, long may you
live, and love.




Who is't, has sent that Curse?



What a pox is that Bellmour? The Rogue's in choler, the
Bride has not pleas'd him.



Dogs! De you upbraid me? ••ll be with you presently.



Will you so but I'll not stay your coming.



But you shall, Sir.








Bellmour•igh•• 'em out, and leaves Celinda breathless, lea•ing
on her Sword.


I'll ne'r demand the cause of this disorder,
But take this opportunity to flie
To the next hands will take me up who's here!



Not yet, my sullen heart!



Who's here? one wounded alas 



'Tis not so lucky but who art thou
That dost with so much pity, ask?



He seems a Gentleman handsom, and young 

Pray ask no questions, Sir, but if you're what you seem,
Give a Protection to an unhappy Maid.
 Do not reply, but let us haste away.



Hah What do I hear! sure 'tis Diana.

 Madam, with haste, and joy, I'll serve you.
 I'll carry her to my own Lodgings.
Fortune, in this, 〈◊〉 done my Suff'rings right,
My Rival's in my Power, upon her Wedding night.







Lord, Lord, that you should not know, your friend and hum∣ble
servant, Tim. Tawdrey But thou lookst as if thou hadst not been a
Bed yet.



No more I have.



Nay then thou losest precious time, I'll not detain thee.




Tho• art mistaken, I hate all Woman-kind 







Above an hour heark ye Knight I am as lewd, and as
debaucht as thou art.



What do you mean Franck?



To tell a truth, which yet I never did.
 I Whore, Drink, Game, Swear, Lye, Cheat, Rob, Pimp, Hector, All,
All I do that's vicious.







From such a Villain, hah!



No, but that thou shouldst hide it all this while.



Till I was married only, and now I can dissemble it no longer 
come let's to a Bawdy-house.



A Bawdy-house! What already!
This is the very qui•tessence of L•wdness.
 Why I thought that I was wicked, but by Fortune,
This dashes mine quite out of countenance.



Oh thou'rt a puny sinner! I'll teach thee Arts▪ (so rare)
of sin, the least of them shall damn thee.



By Fortune, Franck, I do not like these Arts.



Then thou'rt a Fool I'll teach thee to be rich too.



Ay, that I like.



Look here my Boyes!

he takes out of his Pockets.
The Writings of 3000 l. a year.
 All this I got by Perjury.



By Fortune a thriving Sin.



And we will live in Sin while this holds out.
 And then to my cold Home Come let's •e gone.
 O• that I •e'r might see the Rising Sun.









Discovers Celinda as before sitting in a Chair,
Diana by her in another, who sings.



Celinda, who did Love disdain,
For whom had languish'd many a Swain,
Leading her bleating Flocks to drink,
She spy'd upon the Rivers brink
A Youth, whose Eyes did well declare
How much he lov'd, but lov'd not her.

2.At first she laugh'd, but gaz'd the while,
And soon it lessen'd to a smile;

  38Thence to surprize▪ and wonder came
Her Breast to heave, her Heart to flame;
Then cry'd she out, Ah now I prove
Thou art a God! Almighty Love.

3.She wou'd have spoke, but Shame deny'd,
And bad her first consult her Pride;
But soon she found that Aid was gone,
For Love, alas! had left her none.
Oh how she burns, but 'tis too late,
For in his Eyes, she reads her Fate.





Oh how numerous are her Charms 
 How shall I pay this generous condescension,
F•ir lovely Maid 



Why do you flatter Sir?



To say you're lovely, by your self I do not,
I'm young, and have not mu•h converst with Beauty,
Yet I'll esteem my judgment, since it knows,
Where my devotions, shou'd be justly paid.
 But Madam, may I•not yet expect
To hear the Story, you so lately promis'd me.



I owe much to your goodness, Sir but 



I am too young, you think, to hear a Secret;
Can I want Sence to pity your Misfortunes,
Or Passion to incite me to revenge 'em?



Oh would he were in earnest!



She's fond of me, and I must blow that flame,

Do any thing to make her hate my Bellmour.

 But Madam, I'm impatient for your Story,
That after that, you may expect my service.



The Treatment you this Night have given a distressed Maid,
enough obliges me; nor need I tell you, I m Nobly born, something
about my dress, my looks and meen, will doubtless do me reason.







But in the Family where I was Educated, a Youth of my own
Age, a Kinsman too, I ch•nc'd to fall in Love with; but with a Passion
my Pride still got the better of, and he, I thought, repaid my young de∣sires:
  39
but Bashfulness on his part, did what Pride had done on mine, and
kept his too conceal'd. At last my Uncle, who had the absolute domi∣nion
of us both, thought good to Marry us together.



Punish him Heav'n, for a Sin so great.
 And are you Married then?



Why is there Terror in that word?



By all that's Sacred, 'tis a word that kills me,
Oh say thou art not;
And I, thus low wil• fall, and pay thee Thanks.




You'll wish indeed I were not, when you know
How very, very wretched it has made me.



Should you be telling me a Tale all day,
Such as would melt a heart that ne'r could love,
'Twould not increase my Reason for the wish
That I had dy'd e're known you had been Married.



So many soft words from my Bellmour's mouth
Had made me mad with joy, and next to that,
I wish to hear 'em from this Youth;
If they be real, how I shall be reveng'd!

 But why at my being Married should you sigh?



Because I love, is that a Wonder, Madam?
Have you not Charms sufficient at first sight
To wound a heart tender and young as mine?
Are you not heavenly fair? oh there's my grief 
 Since you must be anothers.



Pray hear me out, and if you love me after,
Perhaps you may not think your self unhappy.
When Night was come, she long'd for Night, and all
Retir'd to give us silent room for joy. 



Oh I can hear no more! by Heav'n I cannot.
 Here stab me to the heart let out my life,
I cannot live, and hear what follow'd next.



Pray hear me Sir 



Oh you will tell me he was kind 
Yes, yes oh God were not his balmy Kisses,
Sweeter than Incence offer'd up to Heaven?
Did not his Arms softer and whiter far,
Than those of Ioves, transform'd to Wings of Swans,
Greedily clasp thee round oh quickly speak,
Whil'st thy fair rising Bosome met with his;
And then oh then 



Alas Sir! What's the matter sit down awhile.



Now I am well pardon me lovely Creature,
If I betray a Passion, I'm too young
To've learnt the Art of hiding:

  40 I cannot hear you say that he was kind.



Kind, yes, as Blasts to Flow'rs, or early Fruit;
All gay I met him full of youthful heat,
But like a damp, he dasht my kindled flame,
And all his Reason was he lov'd another,
A Maid he call'd Celinda.












To leave thee free, to leave thee yet a Virgin.



Yes, I have vow'd he never shall possess me.



Oh how you bless me but you still are Married,
And whil'st you are so I must languish 




Oh how his softness moves me!
 But can all this disorder spring from Love?



Or may I still prove wretched.



And can you think there are no wayes
For me to gratifie that Love?
What wayes am I constrain'd to use to work out my Revenge.




How mean you Madam?



Without a Miracle, look on my Eyes 
 And Beauty which you say can kindle Fires,
 She that can give may too retain desires.



She'll Ravish me let me not understand you.



Look on my Wrongs 
Wrongs that would melt a frozen Chastity,
That a Religious Vow had made to Heaven.
 And next survey thy own perfections.







Art thou so young, thou canst not apprehend me?
Fair bashful Boy, hast thou the pow'r to move,
And yet not know the bus'ness of thy Love?



How in an instant, thou hast chill d my blood,
And made me know no Woman can be good?
'Tis Sin enough to yield but thus to sue
Heaven 'tis my bus'ness and not meant for you.



How little Love is understood by thee,
'Tis Custom, and not Passion, you pursue;
Because enjoyment first was nam'd by me,
It does destroy, what shou'd your flame renew;
My easie yielding does your fire abate,
And mine, as much your tedious Courtship hate.
Tell Heaven you will hereafter sacrifice,
 And see how that will please the Deities:
The ready Victim, is the Noblest way,
Your Zeal and Obligations too, to pay.



I think the Gods wou'd hardly be ador'd,
If they their blessings shou'd unaskt afford,
And I that Beauty can no more admire
Who e're I sue, can yield to my desire.




For since 'tis my Revenge that I pursue
Less Beauty, and more Man, as well may do.





Madam you must not go with this mistake.





Celinda, has inform'd me true 'tis she 
Good morrow Brother, what so early at your devotions?



O my Brother's come, and luckily relieves me.




Your Orizons are made to a fair Saint.
 Pray Sir what Lady's that?
Or is it blasphemy to repeat her name?
 By my bright Arms, she's fair With what a charming
Fierceness, she charges through my body to my heart.
 Death how her glitt'ring Eyes give fire, and wound!
And have already pierc'd my very Soul!
 May I approach her Brother?



Yes, if you dare, there's danger in it tho',
She has Charms that will bewitch you.
 I dare not stand their mischief.




 Lady I am a Soldier yet in my gentlest terms
I humbly beg to kiss your lovely hands 
 Death! there's Magick in the touch.
By Heaven you carry an Artillery in every part.



This is a Man indeed fit for my purpose.




Nay do not view me, I am no lovely object.
I am a Man bred up to Noise and War,
And know not how to dress my looks in smiles;
Yet trust me, fair one, I can love and serve
As well as an Endymion, or Adonis.

Wou'd you were willing to permit that service.



Why Sir? What cou'd you do?



Why I cou'd die for you.



I need the service of the living, Sir.
But do you love me, Sir?



Or let me perish, flying from a single Enemy.
I am a Gentleman, and may pretend to love you,
And what you can command, I can perform.



Take heed Sir, what you say, for I'm in earnest.



Command me any thing that's just and brave,
And by my Eyes 'tis done.



I know not what you call just, or brave,
But those whom I do the honour to command,
Must not capitulate.



Let him be blasted with the name of Coward,
That dares dispute your orders.



Dare you fight for me?



With a whole Army; 'tis my Trade to fight.



Nay, 'tis but a single Man.











Of Yorkshire? Companion to young Friendlove, that
came lately from Italy?




Yes, do you know him?



I do, who has oft spoke of Bellmour;

We Travel'd into Italy together But since, I hear,
He fell in Love with a fair cruel Maid,
For whom he languishes,



Heard you her name?




Diana, rich in Beauty, as in Fortune.
Wou'd she had less of both, and more of pity.
And that I knew not how to wish, till now
That I became a Lover, perhaps as unsuccessful.



I knew my Beauty had a thousand Darts,
But knew not they cou'd strike so quick and home.

Let your good wishes for your Friend alone,
Lest he being happy, you shou'd be undone,
For he and you, cannot be blest at once.







I am that Maid he loves, and who hates him.
















He sighs, and turns away am I again defeated?
Surely I am not fair, or Man's insensible.



She knows me not 
And 'twas discreetly done to change my shape;
For Woman, is a strange Fantastick Creature,
And where before, I cou'd not gain a smile,
Thus I may win her heart.

 Say Madam, can you love a Man that dies for you?



The way to gain me, is to fight with Bellmour.

Tell him from me you come, the wrong'd Diana,

Tell him, y'ave an interest in my heart
Equal to that which I have made in yours.



I'll do't; I will not ask your Reason, but obey.

  43Swear e're I go, that when I have perform'd it,
You'll render me possession of your heart.



By all the Vows that Heaven tyes hearts together with,
I'll be entirely yours.



And I'll not be that conscientious Fool
To stop at blessings 'cause they are not lawful,
But take 'em up, when Heaven has thrown 'em down,
Without the leave of a Religious Ceremony.

Madam, this House, which I am Master of,
You shall command, whil'st I go seek this Bellmour.




But e're you go, I must inform you why
I do pursue him with my just Revenge.



I will attend, and hear impatiently.









Driver, prethee call for a Glass, that I may set my self in or∣der,
before I go up, for really my Knight has not been at home all this
night, and I am so confus'd 
Enter one with a Glass, and two Wenches.
Lord Mrs. Driver, I wonder you shou'd send for me when other Wome•
are in company; you know, of all things in the World, I hate Whores,
they are the pratingst lewdest poor Creatures in nature; and I wou'd not
for any thing, Sir Timothy shou'd know that I keep company, 'twere
enough to lose him.



Truly Mrs. Flauntit, this young Squire that you were sent
to for, has two or three persons more with him that must be accommo∣dated
too.



Driver, tho' I do recreate my self a little sometimes, yet you
know I value my Reputation and Honour.



Mrs. Driver, why shou'd you send for us where Flauntit is?
stinking proud Flirt, who, because she has a tawdrey Petticoat, I warrant
you, will think her self so much above us, when if she were set out in
her own natural colours, and her original garments, wou'd be much be∣low
us in beauty.



Look ye Mrs. Ienny, I know you, and I know Mrs. Flaun∣tit,
but 'tis not Beauty or Wit that takes now adayes; the Age is alter'd
since I took upon me this Gentile Occupation, but 'tis a fine Petticoat,
right Points, and clean Ga•nitures, that does me credit, and takes the
Gallant, tho' on a stale Woman: And again, Mrs. Ienney, she's kept, and
  44
Men love as much for Malice, as for Lechery, as they call it. Oh 'tis a
great mover to joy, as they say, to have a Woman that's kept.



Well! be it so, we may arrive to that excellent degree of Crack∣ing,
to be kept too one day.



Well, well, get your selves in order to go up to the Gentle∣men.



Driver, what art thou talking to those poor creatures, Lord
how they stink of Paint and Pox, faugh 



They were only complaining that you that were kept,
shou'd intrude upon the priviledges of the Commoners.



Lord, they think there are such joyes in keeping, when I vow
Driver, after awhile, a Miss has as painful a life, as a Wife, our Me••rink, stay out late, and Whore, like any Husbands.



But I hope in the Lord, Mrs. Flauntit, yours is no such Man, I
never saw him, but I have heard he is under decent correction.



Thou art mistaken Driver, I can keep him within no moderat•
bounds without blows; but for his filthy custom of Wenching, I have
almost broke him of that but prethee Driver, who are these Gentle∣men?



Truly, I know not, but they are young, and fine as Princes;
two of 'em were disguis'd in Masquing Habits last night, but they have
sent 'em away this morning, and they're free as Emperors one of 'em
has lost a thousand pounds at Play, and never repin'd at it: one's a
Knight, and I believe his courage is cool'd, for he has ferretted my Maids
over and over to night But 'tis the fine, young handsom Squire th•t I
design you for.



No matter for his handsomness, let me have him that has most
money.









Damn it, give us more Wine.

Where stands the Box and Dice? Why Sham.




Faith, Sir, your luck's so bad, I han't the conscience to play
longer Sir Timothy and you play off a hundred Guinneys, and see if
luck will turn.



Do you take me for a Countrey Squire, whose Reputation will
be crackt at the loss of a petty thousand? you have my Note for't to my
Goldsmith.



'Tis sufficient if it were for ten thousand▪



Why Sir Timothy Pox on't thou'rt dull, we are not half d•∣baucht
and lewd enough, give us more Wine.



Faith Franck, I'm a little maukish with sitting up all night,
and want a small refreshment this morning Did we not send for
Whores?



No, I am not in humor for a Wench 
By Heaven I hate the Sex.
All but divine Celinda▪

Appear strange Monsters to my eyes and thoughts.



What art Italianiz'd, and lovest thy own Sex?



I'm for any thing that's out of the common Road of Sin, I love a
Man that will be damn'd for something! To creep by slow degrees to
Hell, as if he were afraid the World shou'd see which way he went, I
scorn it, 'tis like a Conventickler No, give me a Man, who, to be
certain of's damnation, will break a Solemn Vow to a Contracted Maid.



Ha, ha, ha, I thought thou wou'dst have said at least had
murder'd his Father, or ravish•d his Mother break a Vow quoth ye by
Fortune I have broke a thousand.



Well said my Boy! a Man of Honour! and will be ready when
e're the Devil calls for thee So ho more Wine, more Wine, and
Dice.
Enter a Servant with Dice and Wine.
Come, Sir, let me 




What will you set me, Sir?



Cater Tray a hundred Guinneys oh damn the Dice 
'tis mine come a full Glass Damnation to my Uncle.



By Fortune, I'll do thee reason give me the Glass and
Sham, to thee Confusion to the musty Lord.



So now I'm like my self, profanely wicked.
A little room for life but such a life
As Hell it self shall wonder at I'll have a care
To do no one good deed in the whole course on't,
Lest that shou'd save my Soul in spite of Vow-breach.
 I will not dye that peace my sins deserve not.
I'll live, and let my Tyrant Uncle, see
The sad effects of Perjury, and forc'd Marriage.
 Surely the Powers above envy'd my bliss,
Marrying Celinda, I had been an Angel!
So truly blest, and good.




Why how now Franck by Fortune the Rogue is Maud∣lin
 So, ho, ho, so-ho.







Oh art awake What a Devil ayl'st thou Franck?




A Wench, or any thing come, let•s drink a roun•,



They're come as wisht for.






Oh Damn 'em! What shall I do?
Yet it wou'd look like Virtue to avoid 'em.
No, I must venture on Ladies y'are welcom.



How the Women? Hold, hold, Bellmour, let me choose
too Come, come, unmask, and shew your pretty Faces.



How? Sir Timothy! What Devil ow'd me a spite.




Come, unmask, I say, a willing Wench wou'd have shew'd
all in half this time.



Wou•d she so Imp•dence!









This is the Trade you drive, you eternal Fopp, when I sit at
home expecting you night after night.



Nay dear Betty! 



'Tis here you spend that which should buy me Points, and Pet∣ticoats,
whil'st I go like no bodies Mistriss, I'd as live be your Wife at this
rate, so I had; and I'm in no small danger of getting the Foul Disease
by your Lewdness.



Victorious Betty, be merciful, and do not ruine my Reputa∣tion
amongst my Friends.



Your Whores, you mean, you Sott you.



Nay triumphant Betty, hear thy poor Timy.




My poor Ninny, I'm us'd barbarously, and won't endure
it.



I've won Money to night, Betty, to buy thee Cloaths hum
 hum Well said Franck, towse the little Jilts, they came for the
purpose.



The Devil confound him, what a Prize have I lost by his be∣ing
here my comfort is, he has not found me out tho', but thinks I
came to look for him, and accordingly I must dissemble.



What's here? a Lady all in tears!



An old acquaintance of mine, that takes it unkindly that I
am for change Betty, say so too, you know I can settle nothing till I'm
Married, and he can do it swingingly, if we can but draw him in.



This mollifies something, do this, and you'll make your peace;
if not, you Rascal your Ears shall pay for this nights transgression.



Come hither Franck, is not this a fine Creature!



By Heaven a very Devil! 



Come, come, approach her, for if you'll have a Miss, this has
all the good qualities of one go, go Court her, thou art so bash∣ful 



I cannot frame my tongue to so much blasphemy, as 'tis to say
kind things to her I'll try my heart tho' Fair Lady Damn her, she
  47
is not fair nor sweet nor good nor something I must say for a
beginning. Come Lady dry your eyes.
This Man deserves not all the tears you shed.
 So at last the Devil has got the better of me,
And I am enter'd.



You see, Sir, how miserable we Women are that love you
Men.



How did you love him! love him against his will.



So it seems, Sir 



Oh thou art wretched then indeed; no wonder if he hate thee 
Does he not Curse thee? Curse thee till thou'rt damn'd, as I do lost Dia∣na?





Curse me! he were not best in my hearing,
Let him do what he will behind my back.
What ails the Gentleman? 



Gods! What an odious thing meer Coupling is!
A thing which every sensual Animal
Can do as well as we but prethee tell me,
Is there nought else between the Nobler Creatures?



Not that I know of, Sir Lord he's very silly, or very inno∣cent,
I hope he has his Maidenhead; if so, and rich too, oh what a booty
were this for me!





Why was not I, created like the rest;
Wild, and insensible, to fancy all.



Come, Sir, you must learn to be gay, to sing, to dance, and
talk of any thing, and fancy any thing that's in your way too.



Oh I can towse, and ruffle, like any Leviathan when I begin 
Come prove my vigor.




Oh Lord Sir! you tumble all my garniture.



There's Gold to buy thee more 



Oh sweet Sir wou'd my Knight were hang'd, so I were
well rid of him now Well Sir, I swear you are the most agreeable per∣son
 



Am I? let us be more familiar then I'll kiss thy hand; thy
breast, thy lips and 



All you please Sir 





Faugh how she smells had I approach'd so near divine Celinda, what
a natural Fragrancy had sent it self through all my ravisht senses!



The Man's extasi'd, sure I shall take him.

Come, Sir, you'are sad.



As Angels fall'n from the Divine abode,
And now am lighted on a very Hell!
 But this is not the way to thrive in wickedness▪

  48I must rush on to ruine Come fair Mistress,
Will you not shew me some of your Arts of Love,
For I am very apt to learn of Beauty Gods 
What is it I negotiate for a Woman!
Making a bargain to possess a Woman!
Oh never, never!



The Man is in Love, that's certain as I was saying,
Sir 



Be gone Repentance! thou needless goodness,
Which if I follow, canst lead me to no joyes.
Come tell me the price of all your pleasures.



Look you Mistriss, I am but a Countrey Knight,
Yet I shou'd be glad of your farther acquaintance.
 Pray who may that Lady be 



Who Mrs. Flauntit Sir?



I she? she's tearing fine by Fortune.



I'll assure you, Sir, she's kept and is a great Rarity, but to a
Friend or so 



Hum kept pray by whom?



Why a silly Knight Sir, that 



I, I, silly indeed a Pox upon her a silly Knight you
say 



Ay, Sir, one she makes a very Ass of.



Ay so methinks but she's kind, and will do reason for
all him.



To a Friend, a Man of Quality or so.



Ay s•e blinds the Knight.



Alas, Sir, easily he, poor Cully, thinks her a very Saint 
but when he's out of the way, she comes to me to pleasure a Friend.



But what if the Fool miss her?



She cryes Whore first, brings him upon his Knees for her fault,
and a piece of Plate, or a new Petticoat, makes his Peace again.



Why look you Mistriss, I am that Fopp, that very silly
Knight, and the rest that you speak of.



How Sir? then I m•undone, she's the upholder of my Calling,
the very grace of my Function.



Is she so? ee'n keep her to your self then, I•ll have no more
of her, by Fortune I humbly thank you for your intelligence, and
the rest. Well I see there's not one honest Whore i'th' Nation, by For∣tune.


Heark ye Mistriss, what was your bus'ness here?



To meet a R•gue! 



And I to meet a Whore, and now wee're well met.







Nay never be surpriz'd, for your Intrigues are discover'd, the
good Matron of the House (against her Will) has done me that kind∣ness
 you know how to live without your Keeper, and so I'll leave
you.



You're too serviceable a Fool to be lost so.




Who knows this bold Intruder?



How, Sir, am I a stranger to you! but I shou'd not wonder at
it, since all your last Nights actions betray'd a strange depravity of Sense.
 Sir, I have sought you long, and wish I had not found you yet, since
both the place and company declare, how grosly you've dissembled Vir∣tue
all this while.



Take hence that prating Boy.



How Sir? You are my elder Brother, yet I may be allow'd
to do the bus'ness that I came for, and from my Uncle to demand your
Wife.



You may return, and tell him that she's dead.



Dead! sure, Sir, you Rave.




Indeed I do but yet she's dead they say.



How came she dead?



I kill'd her ask no more but leave me.





Sir, this is Madmans language, and not to be believ'd.



Go to y'are a sawcy Boy.



Sir, I'm an angry Boy 
But yet can bear much from a Brothers mouth,
Y'ave lost your sleep, pray Sir, go home and seek it.



Home! I have no home, unless thou meanst my Grave,
And thither I cou'd wish, thou wou'dst conduct me.




Pray Heaven this young virtuous Fellow don't spoil all.
 Sir, shall I send for a Scrivener to draw the Settlement you promis'd
me.



Do so, and I'll order him to get it ready.



A Settlement! on whom? this Woman Sir?



Yes, on this Woman Sir.



Are you stark mad? Know you where you are?



Yes, in a Bawdy-house.



And this Woman, Sir 



A very Whore! a tawdrey mercenary Whore!
And what of this?



And can you love her, Sir?



No, if I did, I wou'd not gratifie her.



What is't in Charity to keep her honest?







Is your Lust grown so high 





For naming but so base a thing to me.



I wear a Sword, but not to draw on mad Men.
But since y'are so free Sir, I demand that Fortune, which by my Fathers
Will, y'are bound to pay the day after your Wedding day; my Sister's
too is due.



Ha, ha, ha Sir Timothy, come hither who dost think this is?



A Fidler perhaps let him play in the next Room.



No, my Brother come to demand his Portion of me he says
I am in lewd company, and, like a Boy, he wou'd correct me.



Why this comes of idleness, thou shouldst have bound him
Prentice in time, the Boy wou'd have made a good sawcy Taylor.



Sirra, y'are a Rascal, whom I must thus chastise.



Charles, the Women run squeaking out, Sir Tim. Sham and
Sharp sneak behind, Trusty interposes.


Hold, hold, I beseech you my dear Masters! oh what a sight is
this! two Brothers fighting with each other! oh, were my old Master
alive, this wou'd break his heart: oh, Sir, you've kill'd your Brother.



Why then his Portion's paid.





How kill•d? nay 'tis time we departed then, and shifted for
our selves.





Oh Sir, shall I send for a Chyrurgion.



No for a Coach rather, I am not wounded much.




How dar'st thou trust thy self alone with me?



Why shou'd I fear thee?




Mad as a Tygress rob'd of her dear young.



What is't that makes you so?



My Uncles Politicks, Hell take him for't,
Has ruin'd me, thou and my sister too.
By Marrying me to a fair hated Maid,
When I had plighted all my Faith before.





Sir, here's a Coach.



Come, Brother, will you go home with me?



Home! no, never to that place thou call'st so,
If when I'm dead, thou would'st behold thy Brother,
And take the last adieu from his cold lips:
(If those so Perjur'd can deserve that kindness;)
Inquire for lost Celinda, at who•e feet
Thou shalt behold me fall'n a Sacrifice.
Till then, I'll let mistaken Parents know
The mischiefs that ensue a broken Vow.










SUre I rose the wrong way to day, I have had such damn'd ill luck eve∣ry
way: First to be •ent for to such a Man as this Bellmour, and, as the
Devil wou'd have it, to find my Knight there: Then to be just upon the
point of making my Fortune, and to be interrupted by that virtuous
Brother of his: Then to have a quarrel happen, that (before I could
whisper him in the ear, to say so much as meet me here again anon)
forc'd me to quit the house, lest the Constable had done it for me: Then
that that silly Bawd shou'd discover all to my Cully; if this be not ill
luck, the Devil•s in't But Driver must bring matters about, that I may
see this liberal Squire again But here comes my Noddy, I must pretend
to be angry.




Lord, Lord, how you look now, as if you had committed
no misdemeanor; alas, good Innocent, what canst thou say for thy self,
thou Renegado thou, for being false to my bosom, say?



False to your bosom! You silly impudent Sott you who
dares accuse me?



E'en your trusty and well-beloved Friend Mrs. Driver the
Bawd.



She! she's an impudent confounded Lyar and because she
wou'd have your Worshipful Custom scandaliz'd me, to breed a dif∣ference
between us.



I, if you cou'd make me believe that indeed, when she knew
me not, nor ever saw me all dayes of her life before.



I know that Simpleton, but when I went to inquire for you by
your name, and told her my bus'ness, our Amours are not kept so secret,
nor was she so dull, as not to understand how matters went between
us.



Now, tho• I know this to be a damn'd Lye, yet the Devil
has assisted her to make it look so like Truth, that I cannot in Honour
but forgive her.



Forgive me! Who shall forgive you your debauch'd Who∣ring
and Drinking marry y'had need so you are such a Ruffler, at
  52
least if y'are everywhere as you are at home with me No, Sirra, I'll
never Bed with you more; here I live sneaking without a Coach, or any
thing to appear withall; when even those that were scandalous two
Ages ago, can be seen in Hide-Park in their fine Chariots, as if they had
purchas'd it with a Maidenhead; whil'st I, who k••p my self entirely
for you, can get nothing but the Fragments of your Debauches I'll be
damn'd before I'll endure it.



Just as the Bawd said, yet I am mollifi'd nay, dear Betty
forgive me, and I'll be very good for the future.



Will you swear to be so?



I, by Fortune I will.



Come, what will you give me then to be Friends? for you
won Money last Night.



Ay, that•s it that appeases her highest storms here my
Jewel, here's a hundred Guineys to buy thee fine things.



Yes, great store of fine things, indeed, with this pitifu• Sum,
let me feel in your Pockets, and see if you have no more.





So, 'twas well I laid by the rest, my Peace had not been
made under every Rag on't else; and what I was painfully cheating for
all this Night, would have been laid out at the Mercers and Lacemans in
half an hour Well, are you satisfi'd I have no more?



Have you sunk none indeed, and indeed, my Timmy?



No, I need not, you sink mine fast enough, I thank ye.




Well, get your self ready to go abroad with me.




I have other matters in hand now have I Four hun∣dred
Guineys in Bank, which I won last Night of Bellmour, which I'll
make use of to debauch his sister, with whom I'm damnably in love, and
long for the return of my two Setting Dogs, to bring me News of the
Game.



Oh are you come.


Ay, Sir, with News worth the hearing; I have been diligent,
Sir, and got my self acquainted with the old Steward of the Family, an
avaricious Iudas, that will betray for Gold.



And that we'll furnish him with his Masters Gold, like
all other mortal things, must return from whence it came.



Not all, Sir, for Sham and I have dispos'd of part.



Indeed you are a little shabby.



Ay, Sir, Fools were made to repair the breaches of us that
have Wit enough to manage 'em.



What the Goldsmith paid the Money at sight, without
demanding why?



Readily Sir he's a brave Fellow, and must not be lost
so.



By no means, we must make use of him whil'st he's hot, for I
doubt the humor is not natural, and I fear he may cool.



But to our bus'ness.



Ay, Sir, this same Sister of his you must have.
If it be but to put that insolent Whore Flauntit out of favour, who ma∣nages
this Fopp too intirely.




Ay, but art thou sure there is no danger in this Enterprize?
shall I not have my throat cut? and the rest.



We have none of that Italian humor now adayes, I can assure
ye; they will sooner with a Brotherly kindness, assist the yielding Sister,
to the willing Gallant.



A good thriving inclination, by Fortune.



And, Sir, you have all encouragement; her Brother, you
heard, refus'd to pay her Portion, and you know the Fate of a young
handsom Wench in this Town, that relies on weak Virtue then be∣cause
she's in the house with her Uncle, this same Steward has contriv'd
matters so, to bring you in at the Back-door, her Lodgings being in the
Garden.



This is something oh I'm impatient to be with her 
Well, I must in, and make some Lye to Betty for my absence, and be with
you presently.





What design hast thou in hand? for I suppose there is no
such real thing, as the debauching of this Lady.



Look ye Sharp, take to thee an implicit Faith, and believe im∣possibilities;
for thou and I must cozen this Knight.







I Sharp, we are bound to labour in our Callings, but mum 
here he comes.





Come, let's away, my Lyoness begins to roar.
 You Sharp go seek after Bellmour, watch his motions, and give us no∣tice.




He is gone, and I believe


For no goodness; I'll after him, and watch him.





In a Bawdy-house, with Whores, Hectors, and Dice! oh that
I shou'd be so deceiv'd in Mankind, he whom I thought all Virtue and
  54
Sobriety! but go some of you immediately, and take Officers along with
you, and remove his Quarters, from a Bawdy-house to a Prison, charge
him with the murder of his Wife.



My Lord, when I demanded her, he said indeed that she was
dead, and kill'd by him; but this, I guess, was the effects of madness,
which debauchery, and want of sleep, has brought him to.



That shall be try'd; go to the place where Charles has directed
you, and do as I command you.

 Oh sweet Diana. in whom I had plac'd my absolute delight,
And gave thee to this Villain, because I wisht thee happy.
And are my expectations fall'n to this?
Upon his Wedding Night to abandon thee!
And shew his long dissembled Natural Lewdness.



My Lord, I hope, 'tis not his Natural Temper,
For e're we parted, from a Brutal Rudness,
He grew to all the softness Grief cou'd dictate.
He talkt of breach of Vows, of Death, and Ruine,
And dying at the feet of a wrong'd Maid,
I know not what he meant.



Ay, there's his grief; there is some Jilting Hussy has drawn him
in, but I'll revenge my self on both.




A Letter for your Lordship.





AS your goodness has been ever great towards me, so I humbly beseech •ou
to continue it; and the greatest proofs you can give me of it, is to use all
your int'rest to undo that tye between Bellmour and my self, which with such
joy you knit. I will say no more, but as you love my Life, and my dearer
Honour, get a Divorce, or you will see both Ruin'd in
Your Diana.


A Divorce; yes, if all my Interest or Estate can purchase it some joy
yet that thou art well.



Doubtless her Reasons must be great for this Request.



Yes, for she lov'd him passionately, when I first told her of my
desi•ns to Marry 'em together, she could not hide her joy; which was
one Motive, I urg'd it to him with such violence.



Persons so near of Kin, do seldom prosper in the Marriage
Bed.



However 'tis, I now think fit to unmarry 'em;
And as for him, I'll use him with what Rigor,
The utmost limits of the Law allows me.



Sir, I beseech you.



You beseech me! you, the Brother of the Villain! That has
abus'd the best of all my hopes? no I think I shall grow (for
his sake) to hate all that belong to him.



Sir, how have I offended?



Yes Sir, you have offended me, and Nature has offended me;
you are his Brother, and that's an offence to me.



Is that a fault, my Lord?



Yes, Sir, a great one, and I'll have it so; and let me tell you,
you nor your Sister (for that Reason) must expect no more friendship
at my hands, than from those that are absolute strangers to you: your
Brother has refus'd you your Portions, and I'll have as little mercy as he,
and so farewell to you But where's the Messenger that brought the
Letter?








Here's like to be a hopeful end of a Noble Family. My com∣fort
is, I shall dye with grief, and not see the last of ye.




No Trusty, I have not been so meanly educated, but I know how
to live, and like a Gentleman: all that afflicts me in this misfortune, is my
dear Sister Phillis; she's young, and to be left poor in this loose Town,
will ruine her for ever.



Sir I think we were best to Marry her out of the way.



Marry her! to whom? who is't regards poor Virtue?



For that let me alone; and if you dare trust her to my manage∣ment,
I'll undertake to Marry her to a Man of 2000 l. a year; and if I
fail, I'll be sure to keep her Honour safe.



Prethee how wilt thou do this?



Sir, I have serv'd your Family these thirty years, with faith and
love, and if I lose my credit now, I'll ne'r pretend to't more.



Do what thou wilt, for I am sure thou'rt honest,
And I'll resign my Sister to thy conduct,
Whil'st I endeavor the conversion of my Brother.






No News yet of my Brother.



None: the next you'll hear is, that he's undone, and that you
must go without your Portions; and worse than that, I can tell you your
Uncle designs to turn you out of doors.



Alas! what shou'd I do, if he shou'd be so cruel? Wou'd I
  56
were in Flanders at my Monastry again, if this be true.



I have better bus'ness for you, than telling of Beads 
No, Mrs. Phillis you must be Married.



Alas! I am too young, and sad for Love.



The younger, and the less Love, the better.





Mr. Trusty, here's a Gentleman wou'd speak with you, he says
his name•s Mr. Sham.



Gud's me Mistriss, put on all your Holyday looks, for this is
the little Merchant of Love by Retail, that brings you the Husband I
promis'd you.





Well Mr. Trusty, I have brought Sir Timothy, as I promis'd, he
is at the Garden door.



The best time in the World, my Lord's out of the way.



But you know our conditions.



Yes, that if he Marry her, you are to have all the Money that
he offers to debauch her.







Bring him in then, and I'll civilly withdraw.






Well Sham, thou hast prepar'd all things, and there needs
no Ceremony.



None, none Sir, you may fall down-right to the bus'ness.






Come, my Phillis, let us improve
Both our joyes of equal Love,
Whil'st we in yonder shady Grove,
Count Minutes by our Kisses.



What sort of Courtship's this? 'tis very odd!



'Pox on Formal Fopps, we have high-born and generous
Souls, and scorn the common Road Come, let's enjoy, whil'st Youth
and Beauty lasts.



What means this Rudeness? I'll tell my Brother.



Your Brother, by Fortune he's so lewd, that should I be so
unconscionable to leave thee a Virgin but this Night, he would Ravish
thee himself, and that at cheaper Rates than I design to do it.



How dare you talk to me at this rate?



Talk to thee by Fortune I'll play the Tarquin with
thee, if thou yieldst not quickly for thou hast set me all on fire.



Defend me, Heav'n from such a Man.



Then it must defend you from all the Sex, for all Mankind are
like me, nay, and all Woman-kind are, or wou'd be, what I must make
thee



What's that, a Wench?



Fie, fie, that's a gross name, no, a Miss, that's the word 
a Lady of delight, a Person of pleasure, and the rest; I'll keep thee, not
a Woman of Quality shall be half so fine Come, dear Phillis, yield▪
Oh I am mad for the happy hour come, say the word, 'tis but incl••ning
thy head a little thus the pretty Eyes down, and thy Cheeks all
blushes, and fetching a long sigh thus with do what you
please at the end on't and I shall take it for granted.



That, Sir, you'll never hear me say to any thing but a Husband,
if I must say it then.



A Husband! it is enough to spoil a Mans appetite, the very
naming on't By Fortune thou hast been bred with thy great Grand∣mother,
some old Queen Elizabeth Lady, that us'd to preach warnings
to young Maidens; but had she liv'd in this Age, she wou'd have re∣pented
her Error, especially had she seen the Sum that I offer thee 
Come, let's in, by Fortune, I'm so vigorous, I shall ravish else.



Unhand me, or I'll call out. I assure you this is not the way to
gain me.



I know there is a way to gain all mortal Woman-kind, but
how to hit the Critical Minute of the Berjere 



Is past your Politicks at this time Sir.



I'll try all wayes, and the Devil's in't if I don't hit upon the
right at last.

All the soft things I've said 



That a •night of your Parts ought to say.



Then I have kneel'd and cry d and swore and 



And damn'd your self five hundred times 



Yet still y'are impregnable I•ll make another Propo∣sition
to you, which is both reasonable and modish If it prove a Boy 
I'll Marry you the Devil's in't, if that be not fair.



You get no earnest of me, Sir, and so farewell to you.







Oh Sham, I am all over fire, mad to enjoy! I have done what
Man can do (without doing what I wou'd do) and still she's Flint; no∣thing
will down with her but Matrimony what shall I do? for thou
  58
knowst I cannot Marry a Wife without a Fortune.



Sir, you know the old Cheat, hire a Lay Rascal in a Canonical
Habit, and put a false Marriage upon her.



Lord, that this shou'd not enter into my Coxcomb before?
haste then and get one I'll have it done immediately, whilst I go af∣ter
her to keep up my flame.





And I'll fit you with a Parson presently.








I find Diana knows me not, and this years absence, since I fir••
made my Addresses to her, has alter'd me much, or she has lost the re∣membrance
of a Man, whom she ever disesteem'd till in this lucky dress,
the price of her Favour is Bellmour's life; I need not have been brib'd for
that, his breach of Faith both to my sister and my self, enough incites me
to Revenge He has not yet enjoy'd her, that blessing is reserv'd for me
alone; and tho' the Priest have join'd 'em, that Marriage may be disan∣null'd,
and she has a Fortune sufficient to excuse her other faults.
Enter Bellmour sad.
 Hah! the Man I seek so near my Lodgings too Sir!







Traytor! thou knowst me, and my bus'ness.
 Look on this face, if thou dar'st look on him, whom thou hast doubly
wrong'd and draw thy Sword.



Thou shou'dst be Friendlove, Brother to Celinda.




And Lover of Diana too oh quickly draw,
Or I shall leave thee like a Coward, dead.



No, rather like a Sacrifice,

And thou shou'dst be the Priest should offer it;
But that I have yet
For some few moments, bus'ness for my life.



I can allow no time for bus'ness now,
My injuries are in haste, and so am I.



Should'st thou stab here, a thousand gaping wounds,
Upon this false, this perjur'd heart of mine,
It wou'd not part with life, unless 'twere laid
Near to the Sacred Altar of my Vows.
Lo at the feet of my fair injur'd Wife.



Ha! means •e his Wife!

Canst thou repent thy injuries to her,

  59And leave the rest of all thy sins neglected?



Those I have done to thee, tho' soul and barb'rous
May plead the excuse of force but those to her,
Not thou, nor I, nor she, or Heav'n can pardon.




My sisters wrongs, and mine, may plead excuse,
But those to her alone can ne're be pardon'd.
 This place, Sir, is too open come with me,
For I've desir'd, and now resolve to kill thee.



And so thou shalt, defenceless, I will yield,
And leave my bosom, open to thy Sword.
 But first conduct me to my Wife.
For I will see her nor can I dye unpardon'd.



See his Wife! of whom do you demand her?



Of thee! dar'st thou detain me?




Death how shou'd he know she's here!

 Stay, Sir, this way our bus'ness lies.




I ask not thine, but mine lies only this way.





By Heav'n you shall not enter here!



I know thou lovest her,
And 'tis with reason thou deny'st an entrance
To one so much unworthy to approach her.



Yes, I do love her, and dare own it too;
And will defend her from one so base and treacherous.



Who dares •eny thy Reasons?



Sh'as made me take an Oath, to fight with thee.
And every wound, my lucky Sword shou'd make,
She bad me say, was sent thee from her hate.



Oh I believe thee! prethee tell on, young man,
That I may dye without the aid of wounds.



To break thy heart, know then, she loves another.
And has took back the Vows she made to thee,
And given 'em to a Man more worthy of 'em.



Alas! I credit thee yet then by Heav'n she's false!
And I will know, why 'tis she is thus perjur'd.

 Nay now nor Heav'n, nor Hell, shall hinder me.
 Stand off, or to the number I'll add one sin more,
And make my passage to her through thy heart.



And so you shall Sir.

Friend. and runs in.
 Disarm'd! by Heav'n you shall not so escape
A Rage that is too just here to give o're.






Oh Madam, here's Mr. Bellmour, he has wounded my young
Master, who deni'd him entrance, and is come into the house, and all in
Rage demands his Wife.



Oh Heav'n! demands his Wife! is that sad Curse
Added to all the rest does he then love her?




Whether do you press Sir? And what's your business?



To see my Wife, my Wife, impertinence.
And must I meet with nought but opposition?





Let him come in.



Marry he lets himself in, I thank him.



What Man art thou thus cover'd o're with horror!



One sent from Hell, to punish Perjury!
 Where's this perfidious Fair? this blushless Maid!
That has by my example broke her Vows!
A President that Fiends, wou'd shame to follow.



Who is't you mean Sir?



A thing that has no name, she is so bad!
One who so lately gave her self to me,
And now is flown into anothers Arms.
One that attacks my life, for the same sins,
Which she her self commits and thinks to live too.
 Yet still she is my Wife, whom I have injur'd:
Till when, she was a Saint come lead me to her.
Tho' she be false as I, yet I'll forgive it.




Heav'ns! he repents his Cruelty to her,
And never mentions me! Ah then 'tis time to die.
And that I may be sure of death 

Well, Sir, I will conduct this happy Lady to you.



Gods! happy! whil'st I am wretched.

 Oh what an Ague chills my shivering Limbs,
Turns my hot rage, to softest love, and shame,
Were I not here to dye here at her feet,
I wou'd not stand the shock of her Reproaches.
 But yet she need not speak, a look's sufficient
To call up all my sins to my undoing 
 She comes Oh Heav'n! she comes 


 Like penitent Criminals thus with my Eyes declin'd,
I bow my head down, for the last sad blow.




Sir, in obedience to your Commands,
I've brought the Lady.



How! the perfidious Bellmour!

The only object of my hate and scorn.



Say on, my angry Deity 

Whil'st I thus trembling hear my fatal doom
Like sinners conscious, ne're to be forgiven,
I dare not lift my guilty Eyes towards Heaven.



Can I hear this? and yet retain my life!



Had I but two days since beheld this Youth
Thus prostrate at my feet, I shou'd have thought
My self more blest,
Than to have been the Deity he calls me.





Defend me! the Traytor here! and at Diana's feet,
The fittest Altar for my Sacrifice!
 Turn, turn, from what thou lovest, and meet my justice!



Oh hold, my dearest Brother!





Nay, now I'm ready for the welcom Sword,
Since my Celinda's false, and cannot pardon.



Oh do not dye with that prophane opinion.

Celinda fal•e! or cannot pardon thee!



Stay, generous Sir, my pity has forgiven him.



Thou! why who art thou Diana!






Whom maugre all the Penitence thou shew'st,
Can scarce forgive the injuries thou'st done her.



I shew a Penitence for injuring thee!
By Heav'n I never cou'd do one, or other,
All that I am is the divine Celinda's.




He's stark mad Î




But since she cannot pardon, I can dye.





Canst thou not credit me! she pardons thee.
Live and enjoy Diana.





What art thou? who knowst her heart so well!
Art thou my Rival? the blessed Youth to whom
She has given her Vows? live and enjoy Diana!

 Yes yes thou art my Rival, and I'll kill thee.



Do, whilst I meet thy Sword.


he lets fall his Sword, and gazes.


Dull dull Adorer! not to know my Saint.
Oh how have I prophan'd? to what strange Idol
Was that I kneel'd?
Mistaking it for a Divinity!



To your fair Wife Diana!





Has Heav'n design'd me any but Celinda!




Maid! bless me! did I then love a Woman!
 I am pleas'd thou shou'dst renounce me, make it good,
And set me free from Fetters which I hate.



If all our Laws can do't I will for here
Ends all my claim.





Was this the Wife you did demand of me?



Yes, I had no other.



Fair Maid! forgive me all my shameful Passion!
And charge my fault upon your Beauty only.



Excellent Creature! I shou'd sue for that
Which my deceit will never make me hope.



And art thou true to Love, and all thy Vows?
Whilst I to save my Fortune,
(That only which cou'd make me merit thee)
Gave my unwilling hand to this fair Noble Maid.
 Ah Friendlove, when thou hearst my Story told,
Thou wilt forgive, and pity me.



What was't you said Sir? Friendlove.




Yes, Madam, I hope the name can make no diff'rence:
Or hate that still, so you love the Man.



Tho' I'm again defeated, yet this last
Proves least offensive, nor shall an empty word,
Alter my fix'd Resolves, to love you still.



Then I am blest!



But yet the office of the Priest has past.
What remedy for that?



My Uncle's pow'r; the nearness of our blood,
The contradiction of our circumstances.



And above all that, my Contract with Celinda.

 Methinks I feel a joy spread o're my heart,
The blessed omen of approaching happiness.



I do believe thee, for by sympathy,
Mine takes new fire and hope.



I have already writ to my Uncle, and the Messenger assur'd me,
he would gratifie my desires; that done, I will be yours.





But why thus drest? it might have led my Rage
Full of despair, and jealousie to have hurt thee,



Sir, when the Letter came of your being Married,
I will not tell you all the effects it had
Upon my desperate Soul;
But this I know, I had resolv'd to dye.
But first to see you, your  inform'd the Nurse,
All that had past, and of the last Nights Ball;
And much concern'd, she got this Habit for me,
And inform'd me how 'twas I was to Act.
And that my Brother (describing of his dress) was gone before;
This made me haste, lest e're I came,
His Rage had done the bus'ness which it went for.



And so it had, hadst thou not hinder'd me,
For I, Sir, was the Man, who drew on you.



And was it thou that didst defend my heart,
That I might live to pay thy goodness back.



It was to save your life, and to expose my own.



Come, let's in, and consult what's best for us to do.





Let us no longer doubt, the Pow'rs above
Will be propitious to United Love.





Sir, my Lord Plotwell is at the door in his Coach.



My Uncle come! Sir, we will not doubt our Fortune.
But how came he to know of my being here?



Madam, I fear he follow'd me, after I had given him the Let∣ter.


Lord. Bellmour and Diana kneeling!


 Rise, the joy I have to see you thus, makes me
Resolve to grant you any thing, and pardon all that's past.



Be not so hasty in your goodness, Sir,
Lest you repent as fast.



Sir, we have an humble Suit to you.



What is it ye can jointly ask, I will not grant?



By all th•t Love you ever had for me,
By all those Infant charms, which us'd to please you
When on your Lap, you taught my Tongue that Art
Which made those dear impress•ons on your Heart▪

  64Which ever since to my advantage grew,
I do conjure you hear me now I sue,
And grant the mighty grace I beg of you.



What is it you wou'd ask?



Oh dress your Face and Eyes in gentler Looks,
If you wou'd have us hope for any mercy.



Rise, and whate're you ask, I'll freely grant.



That you'll undo that knot, that ties us two.



How! this Request from thee! who lov'd him once,
And wish'd no good beyond possessing him.



Heaven has not, Sir, decreed us for each other,
Something of Fate or Chance
Has otherwise dispos'd those first Resolves.



Too virtuous Maid, I know thou dost but feign,
His wickedness has forc'd thee to this change.



No, Sir, were he the only Man
Of kind and good, I never wou'd be his.
 And if you shou'd compel me, I shou'd live
The infamous Reproach of my whole Sex.



Well, and you Sir, that are the cause of this,
What canst thou say to move me for thy Pardon?



I am so guilty in your opinion,
My Prayers wou'd but make yours merciless;
I only say Celinda is my Wife,
And I shou'd injure this too generous Maid,
Not to adore her equal to her merit.



I see, Sir, you have found your Wits again.
 Well, I see there's no opposing Destiny,
And I have still such tenderness for thee,


That hadst thou pleaded his Cause to me before,
I shou'd have been less cruel to him.
 Where is that Lady which you so admire,
Whose beauty does eclipse that of Diana.



Bellmour goes out, and brings in Celinda.



This, Sir, is she who merits more than I.



She's fair indeed; here Franck,

I give thee thy Celinda, whose beauty
Excuses all thy faults of disobedience.



Thus low, I thank you for this goodness Sir.




There only wants the ceremony of the Law to undo what's be∣tween
you and Diana, if she remain a Virgin.



For me by Heav'n she is,
And for the rest I do not doubt her virtue.



You may believe him, Sir▪ and this alone's the Man 〈…〉 I
will, or never will be happy.



Mr. Friendlove, I give consent to't, he has a Noble Character,
and what he wants in Fortune, has in Virtue take her young Man.



'Tis such an Honour, Sir, that (my Gratitude) without the
mighty Passion I have for her, would make me ever thankful.



This Term, we shall make the former Marriage void, till then
love on, and fear no frowns from Fortune but Nephew now I hope
your Brother shall have his Portion.



My dearest Charles, forgive me all that's past,
And share the Fortune, Heaven has given thy Brother.



The joy I have, Sir, to be undeceiv'd, is much the greatest bles∣sing
Heav'n can send me.






I am pursu'd by two impertinent Women, prethee Friendlove,
tell 'em I am gone out at the Back-door, and send 'em away.



What's the News here?



How Celinda here, and Bellmour too! nay, now wou'd I com∣pound
for my Life, at any rate, by Fortune.



Sir, this Villain here has abus'd me, and with a false Marriage
has rob'd me of my Honour.







My Lord, I say this young Jilt wou'd rob me of my self, and
courting her, and enjoying her only for a Miss, would persuade me I am
Married to her.



Sir, I say, I am doubly wrong'd; first by this false Knight,
who has belong'd to me these three years, which gives me a right to him,
as good as if I were Married to him; who has now unlawfully left my
Bed, for that of this Gillflurt, who on the other side takes away my
Knight, and consequently eats the bread out of my mouth.



What means all this?
Speak some of ye that know.



Oh Lord! who's here? the fine Squire.




Sir Timothy Tawdrey, Sir, is Married to Mrs. Phillis.



How can that be a Marriage, when he who join'd us, was but
a hired Fellow, drest like a Parson?



Sir, 'twas Parson Tickle-text, that Marry'd 'em.



Oh what a damn'd lying Pimp is this! Sham didst not
thou hire a Fellow, (because I was damnably in Love, and in haste) to
Marry us, that was no Parson?



Why truly Sir I did go to hire such an one 



Look ye there now.



But cou'd meet with none; and because you said you shou'd
dye if you enjoy'd her not presently, and that she wou'd not yield on
any other terms, but those of Marriage, I e'ne brought the Parson that
Trusty had provided for you.



Oh Villain to betray me! and for no Reward!



Yes indeed, Sir, the 400 Guineys you left behind my young
Mistresses Looking-glass fell to his share.



What's my Money gone! and am I Marry'd too!
This 'tis not to use to go to Church; for then I might have chanc'd to
know the Parson.



Death you Dog! you deserve to dye, for your base designs up∣on
a Maid of her quality how durst you, Sister, without my leave,
Marry that Rascal?



Sir, you deny'd me my Portion, and my Uncle design'd to turn
me out of doors▪ and in my despairs, I accepted of him.



Married! and to a Wife of no Fortune! that's the worst
part on't what shall I do?



Renounce this lewd Fool, and I'll make thee a Fortune sutable
to thy quality.



Say you so? Renounce me Sir! I'de have you to know
I merit her: and as for Lewdness, I name no body Bellmour but on∣ly
some have the Art of hiding it better than I but for Whoring,
Drinking, Dicing, and all the deadly sins that thereupon depend, I thank
my stars I come short of you: And since you say, I shall not have your
Sister, by Fortune, I will have your Sister, and love your Sister, and lie
with your Sister, in spite of you.



Well Sir Timothy, since my Neece has done amiss, 'tis too late to
mend it and that you may not repent, I'll take care her Fortune shall
be sutable to the Jointure you'll make her.



With this Proviso that you make no Settlements to Misses, Sir
Timothy I am not so unreasonable to tye you up from all of that Pro∣fession;
that were to spoil a fashionable Husband, and so put you quite
out of Fopp Road.



This day we'll set apart for mirth,
And all must make my house their happy home.



To thee, Celinda, all my good I owe,
My Life, my Fortune, and my Honour too,
Since all had perish'd by a broken Vow.



What am I like to lose my Timy? Canst thou have the heart
to leave me for ever? I who have been true and constrant to you.



Alas! now do I melt again, by Fortune thou art a Fool, dost
think I wou'd have had her, but for her Fortune; which shall only serve
to make thee out-flaunt all the Cracks in Town go go home and ex∣pect
me, thou'lt have me all to thy self within this day or two.
Since Marriage but a larger Licence is
For every Fopp of Mode to keep a Miss.



