
A Camp near the Sea Shore. A Fleet at a distance. The Curtain rises and disco•ers Agamemnon with a Letter in his Hand.




ARCAS, what hoa! Arcas, awake!

•e hears me not: Sweet Sleep sea•s fast his Eyes.
He is no King, he is no wretched Fath•r,
Who •atally has promis'd his own Child,
To be a bloody •ictim to Ambition.
Oh! Agamemnon• Thou hast banish'd Rest
For ever, ever banish'd Peace of Mind,
To grasp the shadow o• a mighty Name.

Arcas! I say, what hoa! Arcas.






Great Sir, I come  • But what concern
Has rouz'd you from your Bed before the Morn?
There's scarce a glimmering Light to guide our St•ps;
All Eyes but you•s and mine are clo•'d in Aulis

What! Has some welcome noise distu•b'd the Air?
And are the Wind• propitious to our Wi•hes?
But, no  All sleeps: The Camp, the Winds, and Nep•une.




Oh Ha•py! Who content•d with his State,

•ree •rom the G••d• Th•aldom of a C•own•

S•curely li•es in an obs•••• Ret••at




  3If you'd obtain the Winds the Heavens deny,









Amaz'd and Speechles• for a while I stood:
My t•embling Spi•its c•ill'd within my Veins:

••t when m••roken Voice bu•st out a Passage,
I c••st the Gods and •ow'd to disobey.
My •••st resolve was •o dismiss the Army,
W•i••〈◊〉U••ss•s seemi•gly approv'd,
To l•t my raging Pa••ion take it• course.
B•• soon em•loying his perswading Arts,
He 〈◊〉•••ore m• a•l the ties •f Honou•;
Thos• Troops and Princ•• under my Command,
T•••a•tern Empire •a•ed 〈◊〉•e ours,
A•l 〈◊〉••uld raise Ambition to a height.

〈…〉 Ti•le of the King o• Kings,

〈◊〉 the haughty weakness of my Soul.
Besides, the Gods a•soon as gloomy Night,
Began to lull my Cares in gentle Sl•mbers,
With angry Dreams reproach'd my impious Pity,
And th•eatn'd vengeance to my troubled Mind;
With Tears I yielded and pronounc'd the Doom
Of my unhappy Daughte• .
But now, what barbarous cunning did I use,
To d•aw her ••om her Mothers tender A•mes
I sent her Orders to repair to Aulis:
Pretending that Achilles prest to go,
Would wed my Daughter, e're we put to Sea.



But fear you not Achilles's boiling Rage?
Think you that unc•n•ern'd he'll calmly see,
His Name abus'd to Sac•ifice his Love?




Achilles then had left the Camp: To meet
His Father P•leu•'s insulting Foes;
And all expected this new kindled War,
Would •or a while employ hi• early Courage.
But what can stop this Heroes rapid course?

Achilles•ights and Triumphs a• he r•ns,
And vving with the swi•test Wings o••ame,
Return'd last Night to join our wond•ing Arm•.



And has he learn'd wh•t Fate a••ends hi• B••de.



He has not .
Bu•••ill a st•onger motive holds my Arm:

〈◊〉 Daughter who with eager jo• app•o•••••,

•o meet a longing Lover and a Father,
(The kindest Father as She may suppose)
My Da•g•ter meets inevitable Death.

  4My Daughter• at that sacred Name I shake;
Yet, •tis not Blood alone endears her to me,
Her Love, her Piety, her gentle Nature,
A thousand blooming Virtues I regret.
N•• no, I'll •e're perform the Sacrifice,

〈…〉 is too just to own so black a Dee•,

〈…〉 Pious I must disobey.




〈…〉 how can you recal your sol•mn Promise?




〈…〉 Th• Z••l and Prudence must pe•••rm •hat 〈◊〉


〈…〉 Q•••n at Sparta try'd t•y Fai•••


〈…〉 this Lett•• and convey it 〈◊〉 h••.

〈…〉 Da•gh••rs •••ing: For when onc•


〈…〉 in 〈◊〉, her Fate's past recal.

〈…〉 Go•••nd Ch•lc•as will dem•nd their •ictim,

〈…〉 m• Ten•e•nes• and slight 〈◊〉 Tea••;

〈◊〉Gre•ians, jealous of my Po•e••


〈◊〉 hol• Bold••s• will protect their cl•im•


〈◊〉 m• w•e; perhaps qua•h my Command.

〈…〉 her from the Gods, from my Ambiti••

But have a care not to reveal my secret;
Let •ot my Daughter know what ill I meant he•.

•pare m••he loud Reproaches of a Wi•e;
Spare me the soft Upbraidings of a Daughter;
And th•t thy Tongue may sute with what I write,
T•ll th•m A•h•ll•s•••ing chang'd his Mind,

〈…〉 Nu•tial Rites till we •eturn;
T•at young Eriphile, his Lesbian Captive,
W•o now at•ends my Daughter, is suppos'd

•o b• t•• cause o• his indi••erence.

〈◊〉 the• Divine the •est . Approaching Day

〈…〉 me• D•pa•t. But who comes he•e?







〈…〉 What! Ulysses with him?

A flourish o• Trumpets.






〈…〉, I 〈◊〉 with pleasing Admiration,



〈…〉 o• untaught Valour,

〈…〉 a•tend your riper Courage?

〈…〉 all Thes•aly reduc'd,

〈…〉 a •ero's tedious Toil,
Pro•••〈◊〉•n Am•sement to Achilles.





〈…〉, you over-rate a tri•ling Conquest:

〈…〉 Go•s open a nobler Field,

〈…〉 great Prize you have propos'd,

  5To animate my Courage. But, My Lord,
Must I believe the joyful News I hear?
That to anticipate my di•tant Bliss,
Fair Iphigenia comes to the Camp,
To Crown my Wishes?




Who told you she's to come?



You seem surpriz'd, my Lord, at this Report?



Heav'n! How I fear my secret is reveal'd



And •ll my cunning lost!



My Lord• the King's surprize



I• but •o 〈◊〉: Good Gods! Is this a time
To think on Nuptial Joy•, when angry Heaven
Strikes terro• through the Camp? Whilst a dead Sea
Af••ights all Greece, and wastes our ling•ing Army;
Whilst to appease the unrelenting Gods,
A Victim, a dear Victim must be Sacrific'd,

Achilles minds his Love• as if he meant
T'insuit the publick Woes; must Agamemnon

Exasperate our Fate with Festivals?
Is this, my Lord, the tender Love you shew,
To your af•licted Country?



In Phr•g•• Fields our Actions soon will prove
Whe•h•r U••ss•s〈◊〉 I love her most.
I• the mean •ime, you may display your Zeal;
Yo• may s••••ly •ire th• Gods with Prayers,
A•d load thei• Altars with tame Of•erings;
You may consult •he pa•ting Victims Breast,
And s•arch the cause o• the Winds tedious Silence,
But a••o• me, who leave that care to Calch•s,

I hope, my Lord, I may pursue a Marriage,
Which• no con•erns the Gods nor you .
Yet, think not I'll dissolve in womanish Pleasures,
No, if I love, 'tis like the God of War,
Only to fill the vacancies of Action;
And my couragious Soul could never brook,
That any one should touch the Phrygian Shore
Be•ore Achilles .



Oh! Heaven! Why must thy secret Envy stop
The way to Asia, to such noble Heroes?
Must I be wi•ness o• so bright a Valour,
Only to withdraw home, with Grief and Shame?



Ye Gods! What do I hear?



My Lord, What's that you utter'd?



Princes, we must retire: Too long the Winds
Have tir'd our credulous Hopes with Expectation•







You pry too far into the Gods Decree••

Besid••, •hink you, my Lord, those •rivolous Th•eats,
Will '•r• de•er Achilles••om pu•suing,

•onour and Glory under your Command?
What i• the •a••l Sisters did •or•ell.
Wh•n ••st my Mother yielded to th'•mb•ace
O• mo•t•l Pel••, that • might choose,

•ith•r to live •or many Y•ar•••s•u•e,
O•〈◊〉••e•nal I ame by co•••ing ea•ly 〈◊〉?

〈…〉 I m•st at las• submit to Fate,

〈◊〉 be niggard o• a Goddess's Blood.
Wh•n Honour calls, let Oracles be silent 

〈◊〉 t•'Almighty Gods controul our •iv•••


〈◊〉•onour, Sir, depends on our own Action•;
Then let us not re•••d what they Decre•,

••t •ather s••ive to •qual t•eir Con•ition
By our immo•tal D••ds. Now since at Troy


•oth •ame and Victo•y attend• I fly,
And on•y ask the Winds to wa•t me o're.

•et all th'a•f•ighted Greeks retire with Sha••,




  8Does animate the Camp: When Greece proclaims
Your Zeal and Wisdom: Nay, when twenty Kings
Will Sacri•ice their Lives in your Defen•e,
You, Sir, alone refuse the glorious purchase
Of Honour and Revenge; a little Blood
You think too dear to gain immortal Fame.
Must It be said, the General of Greece

Employ'd his skill in nothing but Commanding
A sa•e Retreat?



Alas! my Lord, how easily, whilst secure
From my impending Woes, you seem undaunted!
But was your Son Telemachus the Victim,

•ow soon the ghastly image of his Death,
Would turn to Tears your proud insulting Speech?
How deep you'd feel the Torments I endure
From struggling Nature! And how swi•t you'd •ly
To snatch him from the Priest! Yet since my promises past.
If my unhappy Daughter meets us here,
I'll not recall it, but if kinder Fate
Prevents her coming, you'll not think it strange,
If I accept the welcome Help of Heaven•

Too long your Counsels have prevail'd upon me•

I blush to think o•'• 





My Lord  •








The Queen •id me •aste
To tell you her Approach: And that she brings

•er Daughter, to resign her to your Arms.
She had arriv'd before, but that she lost

•er way, through those thick Woods that sh•owd the Camp








By young Eriphile, Achilles's Lesbian Captive,
Who being unacquainted with the Parents,
D•signs to learn her Fate from Renown'd Chalebas.

The News of their ar•ival is now s••e•d
Through all the Camp, and with loud Acclamations,
The joyful Soldiers crowd about the Queen,
And your •air Daughter; some enquire the Cause
That brings them hither: Others are contented,
To pray the Gods for their P•osperity.
But with a common Voice, all b••s• their General,
A• the most glo•ious King, and happy Father.



'Tis well , you may retire , I'll make them welcome.


Thus to secure its Vengeance, angry Heaven
Breaks all the Measures of my Policy!
Yet i• I was allow'd the Priviledge
Of soothing Tears, it were some Comfort! But
The ba•barous Fate of Kings sets us on high,
To lie expo•'d to all the Bolts of Fortune,
And be a gazing-stock to those below.
Thus still b•set by troublesom Spectators,
Tho' most unhappy, we must least complain.



My Lord, I am a Father, nay, a tender Father,
Who feelingly resents your cruel Woe:
I shudder at the stroke that makes you sigh,
And e'en would weep to countenance your Tears•

But your denial can have no Excuse,
The Gods have brought their Victim to the Camp,

Calchas expects it, and will soon demand it.
Yet, whilst we are alone, let flowing Tears
Express your Sorrow: Your concern allows them.
But, no , let rather your undaunted Soul
Consider the vast Glory you shall reap.
Behold the Hellespont yields to our Oars;
Behold our Flames devour persidious Troy;
Her Subjects made your Slaves; King Priamus

Grasping your Knees, and Helena resto•'d.
Behold our numerous Fleet returns to Aulis

Crown'd with success: Behold that pompous Triumph,
That will be the sam'd Tale of After-ages.



My Lord, I find how weak and impotent,
All my Efforts would be t'oppose the Gods.
And since it is decreed, that Innocence
Must be opprest, I , no , • I'll never yield:
Oh! Cruel Fate! Inexorable Gods!




Your solemn Vows, and dread th' Almighty Powers.
Consult your Safety ; Nay, consult your Honour•





Oh! Wretch•d Father! Yet engage the Priest
To Silence for a while: Let me, at least,
Be Guiltless for one Moment: Let me hide,
From Clytemnestra, my black, barbarous Arts;
And spare her tender Heart the cruel Sight,
Of a dear Daughter bleeding on an Altar.





I'•e done my Task: Nature and Love give way,
The Gods and Honour bear the Sovereign Sway.






•nter Eriphile, weeping, D•ris.




DOris, Let us retire: And whilst within
Th•y •eel the Raptures of their mutual Love,
Both in a Father, and a Husband's Arms,
Here let me vent my unrelenting Grief.



Why, Madam, will you thus provoke your Sorrows?
And waste those Beauties with incessant Tears?
'Tis true, nothing seems Charming to a Prisoner,
Captivity turns all to Bitterness;
Yet, shall I tell it? When we c•ost the Seas
With proud Achilles, when yet a trembling Captive,
You view'd your Conque•our, me thought your Eyes
We•e less employ'd about your Miseries.
Now Fortune seems to smile, since Iphigenia

Like a fond Sister sooths your Cares with Friendship,
And gives those Comforts you had found in Troy.

You long'd to come to Aulis, and your Wishes
A•e all accomplish'd, yet your Grief redoubles.



What! Dost thou think that sad Eriphile,

Can be a calm Spectator of their Joys?
Canst thou believe my Griefs will disappear,
When I behold a Heaven I cannot reach?
Blest Iphigenia hugs the dearest Father,
She is the Pride of a fond haughty Mother,
Whist from my Infancy expos'd to Dangers,
My unknown Parents never Smil'd on me.
I am a Stranger to my very sel•;
And to compleat my Woes, the Oracle
Bid me continue in my Ignorance;
For when I ask to whom I owe my Birth,
'Tis answer'd, in this Knowledge lies my Loss.



But why should this de•er you from your Search?
All Oracles lie hid in dubious Riddles,
Who knows but by the losing a false Name
You'll find your own: This, sure, must be the Loss
The Oracle foretells, for in your Cradle,
Your Name was chang'd 



Of all the Circumstances of my Fate,
This is the only one I e'er could learn,
From thy unhappy Father, who knew all.
Indeed he us'd to tell me, that in Troy,

I should retrieve my Glory, my true Name,
And find my Royal Parentage  But oh!
I had within my view the wish'd••or• City,
When fierce Achilles led his Conquering Host,
'Gainst Lesbos, and made all yield to his Sword;
Thy Father buried in a heap of Dead,
Left me a Captive to my self unknown:
And of all those great •onours I expected,
Vile Prisoner of Greece, I only keep
The Pride of a High Birth I cannot prove.



How great's the Loss of such a Faithful Witness!
How much you ought to hate the Barbarous Hand
That gave the fatal Blow! Yet renown'd Calchas,

Who holds a Correspondence with the Gods,
And know's what's past, what's present, what's to come,

Calchas may, sure, acquaint you with your Fate.
Besides, this Camp affords you safe Protection:
Kind Iphigenia will soon be joyn'd,
In happy Marriage to our Conquerour,
And make our Chains the lighter; doubt it not,
She has engag'd her Promise 



What! If of all my Woes•

This fatal Marriage were the cruellest?







Be not surpriz'd my Grie•s admit no Cure,
But rather wonder I have liv'd so long,
With such a load of Cares and Misery.
I am unknown, a Stranger, and a Captive:
All these were little But, oh! I'm a Lover.
That fierce Destroyer of the Lesbian State;
That fatal Author of our dir• Misfortunes,
Who with Hands drench'd in Blood made me his Captive,
And with thy Father robb'd me of my Birth,

Achilles is the dearest Man I view.



Heaven! What do I hear?




Eternal Silence should conceal my Weakness:
But I must speak to ease my Soul opprest,
And in thy friendly Bosom vent a Secret,
Which ought for ever, ever be forgotten.
Yet, Doris, ask me not with what fond Hopes,
I entertain'd this Passion in my Breast?
I will not charge it on that kind Concern,
With which Achilles seem'd to sooth my Woes.
No, no; 'tis unrelenting Heaven's Dec•ee,

•till to pursue me with immortal Hatred.
And •rush my tender Heart with Cares of Love.



Oh! cruel hopel•ss Love!



Shall I call back to my distracted Mind,
The sad Remembrance o• that dismal Day,
When fi•st we lost our Liberty?

•••echless and Trembling for a while I lay,
Buried in gloomy Night; at last my feeble Eyes,
Began to seek the Light, and as I saw
The pressing Hand of my •ierce Conquerour
R••king with Blood, I •ear'd to meet his Looks.
As I embark't with him, I still endeavour'd,
To shun the dreadful and detested Sight;
B••, oh! I saw him; saw him with a Blush;
Nay, which is more, I saw him with concern.
His Aspect was Serene, and my Reproaches
Could find no Tongue to Curse the pleasing •oe;
My Heart rebell'd against my Miseries,
And all my Anger melted into Tears.
I follow'd with Delight my Charming Guide,
And as I lov'd him then, I love him still.
Kind Iphigenia offers me Protection,
But all in vain, since my tormenting Furies
Bid me lay hold of my Protectress's Hand,
Only to crush a Rival, and unseen
Disturb those Joys which cause my Sufferings.



Alas! What can your feeble Hate pe•form
Had it not been much better t'have remain'd
S•ill Prisoner at Mycene; there to quench
Yo•r fatal Fires, and shun the cruel Woes
Of unregarded Love 



'Twas my Design; but tho' my Rivals Triumph
Threatned my new-born Love with endless Torments,
Yet driv'n by Fate I came: A secret Voice,
Bid me attend my Guardian 

  13Presaging that I might leave on this Shore,
All my Mis•ortunes, and like a Lib•tion,
Pour them upon the •eads of these bl•st Lovers.
This is the Reason I appear in Aulis,

And not a fond Desire to know my Bi•th.
Or rather I am come to let their Nupti•ls
Pronounce my final Doom; for if accomplish'd,
A speedy Death will end my Miseries;
And without wasting time in fruitless Search,
After my unknown Parentage, the Grave
Will hide my Love and Shame 



How much I do lament your cruel Fate•






My Lord, What makes you thus Fly ••om my Sight;
And •hun the Clasping of a Daughter's Arms?
My duti•ul Respect made me fo•bear,
Till the transported Queen had first exprest
Her joys in your Emb•ace, Must Iphigenia,

Retire without a Blessing, and a Kiss?
May'nt I? 



Yes  you may embrace a Father,
Embraces her.

Who loves you still  



How dear I value such a Father's Love•

What pleasing Raptures do I feel, to see
Th'Excess of Power and Honour that surrounds you?
Fame's busie Tongue had entertain'd my Ears,
With wond'rous Tales of your supreme Command;
But all comes short of what I now behold;
My Joys and my Surprize at once redouble:
You have the general Love of all the Grecians,

And am I then belov'd by such a Father?



Alas! A Father to so good a Daughter,
Deserv'd to be more Fo•tunate 



Is there a greater Fortune can attend a King?
I thought you reach'd the Top of humane Bliss,
And that the Bounteous Gods could give no more.



Just Heaven! Must I prepare her to her Fate?
Aside.




You Sigh my Lord, and seem to cast your Looks,
Unwillingly upon me; Pray, dear Sir,
Is it against your Orders we are come?



Daughter, I see you with a Father's Eye;
But at this Time and Place, perplexing Care
Disturb my Joys  



How sad are the effects of tedious Absence!
Alas• can't you forget your high Degree,
And le••n to be a Father for a moment?
Here is no Witness that can make you Blush;
You s•e before you, none but a young Princess,
To whom I often told how blest I was
With the most Tender and I•dulgent Father,
Who would at my Request end her Misfortunes.
What will she think o• your Indifference?
Must all her Hopes be vain? Pray, gentle Father,
Dispel those Clouds that hover on your Brow.



Alas! My Daughter  



My Lord, Go on.



Oh! I cannot 




•urst be th'adulterous Tro•an,

The •atal Author •f our di•e Al••ns!




•is Ru•n must b• bought with Flouds of Tears.



I hope propitious Heaven will Protect your Head.



The Gods of late seem d••l to all my Prayers.




Calchas, they say, prep••e• a Sac•ifice.



May Heaven be appeas'd before 'tis Offer'd!



Pray, when is that to be?







Shall I be suffer'd
To joyn my Vows with yours before the Altar?







My Lord; you're silent 



No  Yes  You will be there, My Daughter 








His cold Reception fills my Mind with Doubts.
A secret Horror seizes all my •i•bs:

•ear But know n•t w••t, May Heaven avert
Th'impending Wo•s  Yet, whom they seem to threaten.
The Go•• alone can tell 



Madam, I wonder that amidst those Cares,
Which now employ your Father, a small Coldness
Can discompose y••r Mind? Al••! How anxious
My Tho•ghts must be?
Where'er I s•t my Steps I am a Stranger;
Lost an•••an•on'd ••om my ••ry Cradle,
My unk•••n Parents n•v•r cast upon me
A fl•tt•••ng •mile; You, if a cro•s Father
R•j•ct y••• datio•s L•ve, may yet complain
To a 〈◊〉 Moth••; my, i• b•th should prove,
Un••nd, a Lover 〈◊〉 dry •p your Tears.



Yes, dear Eriphile, I own my Tears
Will soon be d•y'd at my Achilles's view:
His worth, my Father, my Heart bid me Love him.
Y•t, What must I believe of this •ond Lover?
Who se•m'd to •urn with longing expect•tion
To meet me here? What keeps him f•om my Sight?
I have, for these two Days, upon our Jou•ney,

•ought him with trembling Looks; b•t all in vai•.
At last I'm welcom'd by an unknown Crowd,
And s•ill he keeps away: Sad Agamemnon


••em• shy to name him to me. Where is he?
I•m full •f Doub•s and Fears , What! Have the Cares of War,
Chill'd both a Father and a Lover's Heart?
But, no  , I wrong him by unjust Alarm•:
For he alone did ne're engage his Promise
To H•ll•n's Father: 'Tis on my Account
He •lies to Troy; I am the only Prize
His gene•ous Love expects to Crown his Valour.




Daughter, we must be gone, and by a speedy Flight
Prevent our Shame; 'tis now no more a Riddle,
What made your Father troubled and uneasy
To see us here: This Letter clears all Doubts;
By faithful Areas he had sent it to me,
To spare u• the Affront of a Denial.
But wandring from our Way, that Messenger
Could not convey it sooner .
He w•ites, Achilles having chang'd his Mind,

Defers the Nuptial Rites till his Return.



What do I hear!



You blush, and seem concern'd at the Abuse ;
But let your Spirit arm you with Disdain.



Ungrateful Wretch! Deceiv'd by his Renown,
I did at Argos countenance his Love,
And thought a Goddess's Son would make you Happy.
But since his vile Inconstancy belies
His noble Offspring from th'unchanging Gods,
Let's now despise the basest of Mankind,
And fly this hated Shore; lest he should think,
We stay to court his dull Indifference.
Your Father is acquainted with my Purpose,
I only wait him here to take my leave.
In the mean time I'll see all Things prepar'd

  16For our departure . As for you, Madam,



You'd think it hard to follow; our Retreat
Leaves you in better Hands; too well we know,
That 'tis not Chalchas that you came to see.






In what amaze of Trouble has she left me,
By her perplexing Speech! Achilles having


D••e•s the Nuptial Rites till he Returns;
I must prevent my Shame by hasty Flight;
And 'tis not Calchas that you came to see.
To Eriphi•e.





The meaning of her Speech is a dark Riddle,
I cannot apprehend .



Nay, Madam, too, too well,
You know its meaning , yet, if barbarous Fate
In an Ironical Tone.

Ro•s me of a Hu•band, su•e, you'll be more kind
Than to abandon me in my Misfortunes.
'•had been a Torment for you to have staid
At Mycene without me , Shall the Queen
Now leave you •ere alone?




To consult Calchas .



Then what's the Reason you don't haste to see him?



You speak of being gone within a Moment.



Sometimes one Moment may clear many Doubts:
But, Madam, I'm too pressing: And now plainly see.
What I could ne're have thought  Yes, 'tis Achilles

Who makes you so uneasie till w'are gone.



Can you suspect me of such Treachery?
I! Madam, Love a furious Conqueror,
Whose bloody Image haunts my fearful Mind,
E're since with Fire and Sword he spread Destruction,
Through all the Lesbian State? 



Yes, Traytress, Yes, you love the fierce Destroyer:
And ••l those Horrors with which you describe him,
His ••nds embru'd with Blood, his ree•ing Sword,
And flaming Lesbos are the Characters,
Which left his pleasing Image printed in your Soul.
This, I remember, this made you so •ond,
Still to repeat to me the doleful Story
Of your Captivity  I might have seen
Your eager Passion through your feign'd Complaints.
But my fond Friendship banish'd all Distrust,
I hug'd and cherish'd a pe••idious Rival;
Credulous Fool• I lov•d her: Nay, I offer'd

  17The safe protection of her perjur'd Lover.
The Robbing me of him, I could forgive,
But to be brought to this detested Shore,
To meet th'ungrateful Man who now forsakes me,
And grace the Triumph of a treacherous Friend,
This, this is an Abuse I cannot bear.



Madam, you give me Words I ne're was us'd
To hear before  ; And tho' hard Fate pursues me
With cruel Hate, yet such harsh sounds till now,
Were Strangers to my Ears; But I excuse
Th'unjust Reproaches of an incens'd Lover.
Which way could I prevent your Journey hither•

Can you suspect Achilles will prefer
A forlorn Maid to Agamemnon's Daughter?
One, who all she can learn of her Condition,
Is, that she is the Offspring of that Blood
He longs to spill  .



The barbarous Wretch insults o're my Misfortunes!
And still compares her vileness to my Glory,
Only to heighten her perfidious Triumph.
Was this then wanting to my load of Woe?
But have a care your Raptures be'nt too rash:
That Agamemnon you have dar'd, commands
All Greece; He is my Father; nay, he loves me,
And feels my Sufferings deeply as my self.
My Tears did melt him: I perceiv'd those Sighs
He strove to hide from me; Fond Fool! I blam'd
That Coldness which his Tenderness had caus'd.





Is't possible then, Madam! Do I see you?
Or is it fond Delusion? No! For the whole Camp,
Assur'd me you was here  , But, Madam, What concern
Has brought you to this Shore, since Agamemnon,

Give out Mycene would enjoy you still?



My Lord, •ear not my hated Presence here,
For Iphigenia will soon be gone.





She shuns me! Do I wake? Or is't a Dream?
Gods! •ow I am distracted at this Flight!
What sh•ll I do?   Madam, can I presume



To meet your Looks, and not provoke your •atred?
Yet, if Achilles did e're pity you:
If you can now receive your Conquerours Prayer,
In•orm m• why they're come  , sure, you can tell.



My Lord, I wonder
You should be unacquainted with their Journey;

  18Since you have been a Month upon this Shore,
Still pres•ing their A•rival• and your Nuptials.



I Madam? I was Absent this whole Month,
And only came last Night .




•ow, When Agamemnon did write to Mycene,


••d not your Love Indite and Guide his Hand?
I tho•ght you was transported with the Charms
O••is bright Daughter .



Y•s: I still adore her.
N•y, i• I had cons•l•ed b•t my Love,

〈…〉 have 〈◊〉 to see her at Mycene.

Y•t, I 〈◊〉•••nn'd; but •or what ••ime I know not.

〈◊〉 I cast my Loo•s I meet a Foe:
An•〈◊〉 this M•ment Calchas and U••sses

Dis•l••'d their Eloquence t'oppose my Love,
And s••m'd to intimate it shock'd my Honour.
What can their Counsels mean? Am I abus'•?
And made a Tale to entertain the Army•


〈◊〉 in , And wrench the Secret from their Souls.





Ye Gods! Who see my Shame, Wher• shall I hide it?
Proud Rival, thou art lov'd, and yet thou murmur'st.
Must I at once behold thy haughty Triumph,
And bear with thy Insults? No , Let me rather :
But, Doris, I'm deceiv'd, or some great Storm,
Is gathering thick to break upon their Heads.
I've Eyes:   Their Happiness is not yet setl'd.
King Agamemnon Sighs, and is in Trouble:
He shuns his Daughter: Both avoid Achilles.

There's something in it; I'll not yet Despair:
And if Fate listens to my Hatred's Call,

••l die, but crush a Rival with my Fall.













My Indignation made me leave the Camp,
And •ly Achilles view: Scorn'd Iphigenia

Design'd Mycene should lament her Woe.
But ••at young Hero wondring at our Flight,

  19Call'd all the Gods to prove his Constancy,
And stopt our Journey. Nay, he pres•es now
That Marriage, which before, 'twas said, he shunn'd•


•e seeks you full of Passion and of Love:
Fu•ious to know who rais'd this false Report,
And punish his audacious Insolence.
Therefore let no Suspicions pall our Joys.



Madam, 'tis well: Achilles must be trusted:
I own we wrong'd him: And I share your Joys,
As much, as least, as my concern allows.
Now since you wish that Cal•has should perform
The Nuptial Sac•ifice, 'tis •it you send
Your Daughter to the Altar: I'll there wait her coming.
Yet first in private let me here advise you:
You see what place you're in, how every thing
Seems •itter for a Fight, than for a Marriage;
The Tumult of an Army, and a Fleet:
An Altar bri•tling with Pikes, Darts and Spears,
Such hor•id Pomp may sute with fierce Achilles,

But is not calm enough to court your Sight,
It were unseemly that the Greeks should see,
Their Que•n bereft of aw•ul Majesty,
And undistinguish'd in a Crowd of Soldie•s.
Believe me, let your Maids alone attend
Your Daughter to the Altar .



I, Sir, resign my Daughter to my Wom•n•

And not accomplish what I have begun?
Have I then brought her hither from Mycene,

And shall I now refuse to lend my Hand
To lead her to the Priest?   Is not this a Duty
Incumbent on a Mother?   Who shall order
The Marriage Festival?  •




Madam, That might have been your Care
In Atreus's Palace: Now you're in a Camp.



Yes, I am in a Camp,
Where the whole •ate of Troy depends on you;
Where all the Grecians bow to your Command;
Where Thetis's Son will this Day call me Mother;
Pray, in what Palace could I e're appear
With greater Splendor and Magnificence?




By all th'immortal Authors of our Race,
I do conjure you, grant me this Request:
I have my Reasons.




By all those Pow'rs you nam'd, let me intreat you

  20Not to deny my Eyes that bliss•ul shew.
Vouchsafe to see me there without a Blush.



I thought much better of a Wi•e's Compliance,

〈…〉 my Arg•ments, and my Intreaties
C•• ha•e no force to bend your s•ubborn Mind,
Madam  it is my Pleasure  I command you 
O•ey 





Ye Gods above! What makes my Husband use
Such •arbarous C•re to keep me from the A•tar.
I• he so •levated with his Power,
That he disdains to own me for his Wife?
O• is his new Command yet so unsettled
That he dares not appear with Hellens Sister?
B•t why that Nicety? Yet, since 'tis his Command
I willingly submit; my Daughter's Bliss
Makes me amends •or all; th'indulg•nt Gods
U•ite her to Achilles, and my Joys
A•e Infinite to think she shall be call'd 

•ut he•e he comes himsel• 





M•dam, all things succeed to Crown my Wishes:
The King desires no further Satisfaction,
But tru••s the Raptures o• my eager Love.

••carce began to clear my Innocence,
When with a kind Embrace he call'd me Son.

•is Words were •ew: But, Madam has he told you
What happy News was spread at your Arrival?



What's that, my Lord?



The Gods will be appeas'd: The Priest proclaims
That the next Hour by solemn Sacrifice,

Neptune will be propitious to our Vows,
And wake the drowsie VVinds; sure of his Promise
The joyful Mariners un•url their Sails,
And turn their Prows to Troy. As for me, Madam,
Tho' I were glad if to indulge my Love
The VVinds should still be silent for a whil•:
Tho' with regret I quit the happy Shore,
VVhere Iphigenia will soon be mine,
Yet with delight I grasp the blest Occasion,
To Seal this noble Match with Trojan Blood;

  21And in the Ruins o• persidious Troy,

Bury the Shame o• that respected Name,
To which mine will for ever be allied.


Fair Princess, all my Blis• depends on you:
Your Father waits our coming to the Altar;



Haste Madam, to receive the plighted •ai•h
O• your Adorer 



My Lord, be•ore we go,
I hope the Queen will suffer me to ask you
A Boon to prove your Love: Here's a young Princess
VVhose noble Aspect speaks her high D•scent:
Her Eyes continually dissolves in Tears,
You know her Troubles, for 'tis you have caus'd them.
And I just now transported with rash Passion,
Rudely insulted over her Affliction.
I would atone for my too-h•sty C•rriage,
And sooth her into Ease, but how I know not,
Unless it be by interceeding •or her.
My Lord, she is your Captive, and those Chains,
Whose weight I pity, will at your Command
Fall from her Hands: Let then your generous Deeds
Begin this happy and auspicious Day.
Let sad Eriphile be now discharg'd
From our Attendance  Let all the Grecians see,
That the great King to whom I plight my Faith,
Is not contented to spread dire Alarms,
And wild Destruction th•ough th'affrighted World,
But that he can relent at a Wifes Tears,
And like the Gods from whom he is Descended,
Will be disarm'd by the Unfortunate.



Yes, my Lord, you may alleviate
The quickest Pain a Woman ever felt.
'Tis true the Fate o• War made me your Captive;
But still you strain too high its rigid Laws,
Thus to o're-bear my Heart with all the Torments
I suffer here.







Yes, my Lord, and waving all the rest,
Could you impose a more severe Commnd,
Than here to make my Eyes the sad Spectators,
Of the Prosperity of all my Foes:
My Proud, my Haughty, Persecuting Foes.
Where'er I go, I hear th'insulting Threats
Of a •ierce Army, ready to destroy
My native Countrry: And to break my Heart,

  22I see, I see that fatal Hymens Brand,
Which will devour it, and consume my Hopes.
The•efore permit me to retire from hence:
And wand•ing f•om your Sight, and still unknown,

••wail the •ardships of that dismal Fate,
Weeps.

Which nothing but my Tears can well express.



Fair Princess, that's too much: Wipe of those Tears,
You have yo•r Wishes; •ollow to the Altar,
That all the Gre•ks may witness you a•e Free;
And may •h• Hour that gives you Liberty,
Make me f•r ever Blest.







M•dam, all things are ready for the Sacrifice;
The King w•its at the Altar for your Daughter,
And sends me to D•mand her  Or rather,
Sir, I come
To Achilles.


To beg your h•lp a•ai•st him.







Y• Go••• What ••ws is this?



You 〈◊〉, my •o•d,
To Achilles.


Can now ••o••ct he•.







My Lo•d 'tis wi•h regret I name him 
But I can keep no longer the black Secret,
And to be silent would be Treachery.
The Kni•e, the Fillet, the Pile, all is ready;
But were that fatal Pomp design'd to take
My Life for the Discovery  yet I must speak.



Heaven! How I tremble! Quickly; Arcas,

Explain your meaning 



Whoe'er it be, speak boldly, fear him not.



My Lord, you a•e her Lover; and you, Madam,
Her tender Mother; suffer not the Princess
To meet her Father 



What should we fear from him?



Why should we distrust him?



He waits her at the Altar, with intent
To Sacrifice her 
















Oh Heavens! What News!



Gods! What blind Fury
Can Arm his cruel Hand against his Daughter?
'Tis Impious but to think on't.



Alas! my Lord, there is no room for Doubt:
The Oracle and Calch•s have prono•nc'd

  23The •atal Doom, and stubbornly reject
All other Sacri•ice: The Gods themselves
Protect the Rav•sher, and bid the Winds
Lie husht till that be o•fer'd.



How can the Gods dec•ee so black a Deed?



Heaven! VVhat's my Crime, that m•rits such hard •ate?



Now 'tis too plain
VVhy he imp•s•d •n me such s••ict Command•,
To keep me •rom the Altar.



Is this the Mar•iage was design'd •or me?
so A•hilles.





The King •o blind you, did suppose •his M•rriage•

And •he whole Camp is still in the same Error.






Here let me grasp your Knees 










My Lord, l•t me forget my troublesome State:
This low Submi•sion suits my cruel Fortune;
I were too happy if my Tears could touch,
Weeps.

Your •eart with Pity Alass! 'Tis your Bride
They snatch away from you. I brought her up
To the fond •opes of this auspicious Match.
'Tis you we sought on this detested Shore;
And 'tis you• Name betrays her to her Fate.
Must she then go t'implore the Angry Gods,
And grasp that Altar dismally Adorn'd,
To Sacrifice her? You alone are here
Her Father, Husband and protecting God.
I read your Grief in your distracted Looks.
Daughter, I leave you in a Lovers Arms.
My Lord, I beg you, stay till I return.
I fly to meet my cruel, treacherous Husband,
And with just Rage oppose his wild Design.
I'll force the Priest to seek another Victim;
Or should my best Efforts prove vain, to ward
The fatal Blow, I'll die with my dear Daughter.





Madam, all this while
My wonder kept me Dumb and Motionless.
Was it to me she spoke? Am I Achilles?
And must your Mother and a Queen disgrace
My noble Passion, to descend thus low
VVith unbecoming Posture, Prayers and Tears
To move my Pity? VVho is more concern'd
Than Thetis's Son in your Prosperity?
Yes; you may trust my Love, th'affront is levell'd

  24At me alon•: What•v•r they attempt,
I answer ••r a Li•e on which my own depends.
B•t my ••st Anger do•s engage me fu•ther:
'Twe•e •i•tle to protect, I will revenge you,
An• pu•••h all at once th'ignoble Cheat,

〈…〉 my Name •or your undoing.




•ray, My Lord, slay   Hear me  



God•, must a Ba•barian
Af•ront me t•us• Whilst to •evenge his Sister,
I fly •o T•••; whilst by my leading Vote,

•e holds •ommand o're twenty Rival Kings;
Whilst for m• Se•vi••s, and Wa•like Toils:
Whilst fo• the P•ice of that great Victory,

〈◊〉 will 〈◊〉 him, Vindicate his Wrongs,
And Crown 〈◊〉 Name for ever with Renown;
I am content•d with the glo•ious Title
O• b••ng you•s; the bloody Perjur'd Man
Thinks little to despise the sacred Laws
Of Love and Natu••, and to rack my Soul
With the sad view, of your dear, Virgin Heart
Reekin• upon an Altar, his black Deed
Must still •e cove•'d by a Marriage Pomp;
'Tis I must lead you to the Sacri•ice;
My credulous Hand must guide the fatal Kni•e;
An• in the place of •usband, I must prove
Your E••cutioner  Gods• I grow Mad to think on't.



My Lord, l•t not your Passion thus transport you.



Just Heaven! What had be•ome of all my •opes,
Had not my coming forestall'd your Ar•ival?
The harmless Bride aban•on'• to their Fury,

•ad vainly sought her abs•nt Love, and met
A B••cher Priest: Still charging on my Name
Th••loody, •a•barous Cheat. Such Treac•ery
I wi•l expos• l•te be•ore al•Gree•e

M••am, your •onour is concern'd in mine.
And th••e•o•e you'll approve my just Revenge
T•• c•uel Man shall •now Achill•s•s W•ongs

•e•e went unpunish'd .




My Lord, if ever you did truly Love me,
L•• now my Pray•rs and Tea•s disa•m y•u• Ang••.
Co•si•e• that Ba•ba•i•n whom you da••.
That c•uel, 〈◊〉, t•ea•h••ous En•my,

〈◊〉 still my Fa••e• •




Your Father, Madam? No •i• bl••k Desi•n
Leaves him no other than a Mu••he•er's Name



My Lo•d, I s•ill •ep•at it, H•'s my 〈◊〉

A Father whom I lo•e, whom I •eve•e;
A Father who till now h•s cherish'd me,
With all Indulgen•e and Paternal Care.
My Heart brought up e•en ••om my Infancy,
To dutiful Re•pect, is sad when he's offended.
'Tis not our Nuptial tie can make me lose,
My Duty, and allow your furious, Passion.
Yet, see, my Lord, how very much I love you•

Since I could bear to hear th' outragious injury,
You offerr'd to his Name. But how can you
Think him so barbarous that unconcern'd
He'd see his Daughter bleed, if any way
He could prevent the cruel Sacrifice.
Believe me, Sir, I saw him sigh and weep.
Do not condemn him till you hear him speak•

Must his Heart, fill'd with Hor•ors, still encounte•

Your raging Hatred?  




Amidst your Danger is this all you •ear?
A wild Barbarian (for this Name befits him)
Betrays you to the Priest like a tame Victim,
And when my Tenderness would stop his Fury,
You seem concern'd to trouble h•s Repose;
I'm silenc'd he's excus'd, he is lamented;
For him you tremble, and 'tis me you fe•r.
Has then Achilles sued and sigh'd in vain?
Is this the Progress of my constant Love?



Oh! Cruel Man! How can you doubt that •ove,
Of which I gave you such convincing Proofs?
You saw how with dry Eyes, and undisturb•d,
I heard the bloody Messenger of Death;
But, all ye Powers of Love! How deep was my Despair,
When at our first Arrival the false News,
O• your inconstancy c•me to my Ears?
My just concern made me accuse the God's•

Reproa•h your Falshood, and cu•se all Ma••ind.
Then, t•en you might ••ve seen, how much 〈◊〉

Your Love be•ore my •i•e Ala•! I thought
My gene•ous Flames had rais'd m•〈◊〉 all Mo•••l•

Perhaps the envious G•d• have been prov••'d,
By the Exc••• o• my ••licity.










A SONG Set by Mr. PVRCEL, and Sung by Mrs. ERWIN.


MORPHEUS, thou gentle God of 〈◊〉 Repose,
Th' unruly Tumults of my Mind compose;
Allay the Fury of my anxious Care,
Drive hence black Thoughts, and chase away 〈◊〉

Here let indulgent Fancy sooth my Pain,
Here let me sleep, and never wake again,

II.What's this I feel? What this within my Breast,
Strikes such alarms, and will not let me rest?
'Tis Iealousy, tormenting Iealousy!
The Bane of Love, tormenting Iealousy

III.I rage, I rave, I burn, my Soul's o' ••re:
Tortur'd with wild dispair• and 〈…〉

My Strephon's〈◊〉, I cannot, 〈…〉


〈◊〉 be r•veng'd• and m•re than 〈…〉

D•ath, onl• D•••h can now my 〈…〉,
I mu•• my R••••, or 〈…〉.






An 〈◊〉 and 〈…〉  〈…〉








Yes, Doris, ye•: My Heart perplex'd with Cares,

〈…〉 with enviou• E•es my Rival•s Fate.

〈…〉 her Dange•s. And how curst my Hopes•

Did•t th•• not see her Triumph? How Achilles

Wa• t•o•b•ed and conce•n'd? I saw, I saw it;
And sh•nn••he •igns of her undoubted Blis•.
The v•li•nt, p•••d, insul•ing, •ie•ce Achilles,


〈…〉 to all humane kind;
Who 〈◊〉 kn•w a Tear, but what he draws

〈…〉 yes: Achilles, who •tis said,
Was ••ckled by a Lioness or a Tigress;

Achilles〈◊〉 her now begins to tremble,

•ighs and 〈◊〉 pale, and weeps, and yet thou pitiest
Here ble•••ondi•ion; Death it self were pleasing,
I• I could purch•se fierce Achilles's Tears.
Weep••




Dea• Madam, moderate your Sorrows•

Or if you weep, let Iphigenia

Bespeak your Tears; she was our kind Protectress,
And in an hour she dies. 



No, D••is, she'll not die 
Dost thou believe Achilles wept in vain?
Thinkest th•• his Love and Courage will ly buried
In shame•ul Uncon••rn? No, he'll prevent
All her impending Dangers: Thou shalt find
The angry God's pronounc'd this Oracle
To raise her Glory, aggravate my Woes,
And make her still the deare• to her Lover.



What Reasons, Madam, can breed this Suspicion?



Dost thou not see
How all endeavour to prevent the Blow?
The •atal Sentence is still kept a Secret;
And tho' all things be ready at the Altar,
The Camp is unacq•ainted with the Victim.
Does not •his silence speak a wavering Father?
What can he do? What Heart of •lint or steel
Could e•re resist th' Assa•lts he must encounter?
The R•ge and Fury of an incens'd Wife;
A 〈…〉 and Tears• the deep Despair
O• a wh•le Family; fond N•ture•• s••uggles;

•ebill••'s th•eatning 〈◊〉. No, 'tis in vain
The God's p•onounc'd her Doom, for she shall live
I, I alone m••t be 〈◊〉.
Oh•〈…〉  



Madam, what do you mean?



Why don•t I follow
The angry Dict•tes of my jealous Mind?
And publish to the Camp the fatal Senten•e,
The Oracle pronounc'd, and how by impious Silence
They strive to make it void, and save the Victim
The God's demand 



Oh! What a wild Design!



Oh! What excess of Joy!
What Altars would the Trojans raise to me,
If vindicating my Captivity,
I sow'd Dissension through the Grecian Camp,
And arm'd Achilles against Agamemnon!
If I could make them lay aside their Quarrel
'Gainst Troy, and turn their Arms 'against themselves!
If my malicious Whispers could destroy
The Gr•cian Army, and secure my Country!



Madam, I hear a noise 'Tis Clytemnestra:

Compose your s•lf, or else avoid her Presence.



Let's in: And to prevent this hated Marriage,
I'll use all means The Gods allow my Passion.







Thou seest, Aegina, I must •ly my Daughter•

So far she is from shedding any Tears,
Or trembling for her Life, that she excuses
Her cruel Father, and would have my Grief
Respect the Hand that strikes the cruel Blow.
Oh! Constancy! Oh! Reverence! Oh! Love•

Yet to reward all these, my Savage Husband
Complains of her Delay. I'll here expect him•

For, sure, he'll come t' expostulate with me
The reason of her stay. But he appears•

Be husht my Passion; let me try how far
He can dissemble his base Artifice.





Madam, what do you mean? How comes this 〈◊〉

Don't o••er •phig•nia to my sight?
I sent Arca• to demand her from you 
Where have y•• left he••  

  30What stays her? I• i• you? 〈◊〉 you n•t •rant
My j•st Request? And do y•• still 〈◊〉

To •ollow to the Alta•?



My L••d, if she must 〈◊〉,
My Daughter's ready: But does nothing stop you?







But have you taken c••e of all?




Calchas is ready; th' Altar is prepar'd.
I have done all my Duty bid me do.



My Lord, you tell me nothing of the Victim?




What means this jealous care?
Aside.






Come, Daughter, Come; they only wait for you:
Be thankful to a kind, a loving Father,
Who will himself conduct you to the Altar.
Weep•.




What do I see! What means my Wive's discourse?
Daughter, you weep, and look with downcast Eyes:
What's this Dis•rder?
But b•th the Daughter and the Mother weep.
Oh! Arcas! I'm betray'd. 



Father, be not alarm'd: You're not not betray'd•

Comm•nd and I'll obey; my Life is Yours,
You may •et•ke it without Artifice.
With that contented and submissive Heart,
With which I did accept a promis'd Husband,
If I must needs submit to Heaven's Decree,
I'll prove an innocent Victim, and respect
The Blow you order; with all due obedience
I'll spill that Blood, I have receiv'd from you.



Oh! dutiful Respect! Oh! wondrous Love!



Yet, i• this Reverence, this humble Love
Seem to deserve a better Recompense;
If you can pity a fond Mother's Grief,
My Lord• I dare to say, that as I am
S••••nded with bright Honour, I could wish
A mi•d•r Fate, and that the bounteous God's
Would not cut off my Life so near its Spring.
'Tis I 〈◊〉 c••l'd you by the Name of Father;
 •h••〈◊〉, endearing Name 

〈…〉 th•• N•me so o•• you than••d the God•


〈◊〉 I mad• you• Delight; with me y•u learnt

〈…〉 M•jesty, and not di•dain

  31 With fond C••esses to •ssume the Father.
Alas! With how mu•h e•gerness and Joy,
I lov'd to hear the Names of all those Countries
You went to Conquer? My p•esaging •opes
Began t' anti•ipate the wish•d-for News
O•Troy's Destruction, and p•epar'd a Feast
To g••ce your Triumph. Little did I think,
That to obtain your Victory, my Blood
Must •i•st •e spill'd by you. 



Oh! She'll un•man me with her tender Words?



Not that the horror of the threatning Blow
Makes me remind You of your form•r Kindness•

Fear not: My Heart still care•ul of your Fame,
Shall ne'•e expo•e my Father to a Blush.
And had my Life alone been my Concern,
My gra•eful Thoughts had been conceal'd for ever
Within my dutious Breast. But, Sir, you know
That on my wretched Fate a tender Mother,
And a •ond Lover fix'd their Happiness.
A King whose worth you own, look• on this Day
To light the Torch of our illustrious Hymen;
Sure of a Heart, you gave me leave to promise,
To his undoubted Love, he thought himself
The happiest of Mankind:   But since he knows
Your •atal p•rpose, judge of his Alarms
You see my Mother's woe, pardon, dea• Father,
My weak endeavours to p•event thei• Tears.
Weeps.




Daughter, •is but too true: The angry God's
Demand a Victim, for what Crime, I know not:
But you are nam'd. A cruel Oracle
Commands that you shall bleed• 
To save your precious Life from •he black Doom,
My Love prevented your endearing P•ayers.
I wave to tell you how long I withstood:
Believe that Love which you just no• attested.
This very Night I did recal the O•der.
Which they before had wre••ed f•om my Hand.
I sacrifi•'d to you the cause of Greece,

My Ambition, my Safe•y, nay, •y Honou•.

Arcas was sent to keep you from the C•mp.
But the Go•'s would not •uffe• he sh••ld •eer you;
They baf•led my E•for•s. Oh! W•e•ched Father,
Who vainly Strove to guard, what they •u••ue•

Tru•• not to my unsettled feeble Power:

  32What C•rb could hol• a 〈…〉


〈◊〉••om th' unea•y 〈…〉

By holy Zeal, and 〈…〉


•aughter, your hour 〈…〉 yield.
But, even in Death, rega••〈…〉••ee;
And mind a Counsel which I 〈…〉 follow:
Since the sad Blow that st•ikes 〈◊〉 Heart shall sink
Deeper in mine; yet, let your Constancy,
Approve your Birth, and make the God's asham'd
O• their black Sentence. Go Let all the Grecians

Know by your Courage, 'tis my Blood they spill.



No: Do you not bely your fatal Race:
'Tis plain you spring from Atreus and Thyestes.

Butcher to your own Daughter, to compleat
Your natural Cruelty, you only want
To entertain me with the gastly Feast
Of all her slaughter'd Limbs. Oh! Barbarian!
Is this th' auspicious Sacrifice your care
Prepar'd with so much Art and Secrecy?
How could your Hand subscribe the black Decree,
And not be stopt by th' horror of the Deed?









Force not before us a dissembling Woe;
Nor think your Tears can prove your Tenderness.
What Fights are those you fought in her Defence?
What Floods of Blood were spill'd to save her Life?
Where's the wild Havock that speaks your Resistance?
What Heaps of Slain can silence my Complaints?
These Savage Man, these are the Witnesses,
By which your Love should shew your just Concern,
For Iphigenia's Life.



Madam, the God's must be obey'd:
A fatal Oracle pronounc'd her Doom.



Have not all Oracles a dubious meaning?
Are the just God's so pleas'd with murderous Deeds
That innocence must bleed? If Hellen's Crime
Must be a•on'd for in her Family,

•et then H•rmione be fetch'd from Sparta,

She's her own Daughter: Let fond Menelaus

With his own Blood redeem his guilty Wi•e.
But what blind Fury leads you to the Altar,
To expiate her Crime, and be his Victim?
Why must ••end and tear a Mother's Breast,
And pay hi• Fondness with my dearest Blood?

  33Nay, is this Author of so many Jars,
This great Disturber of •he East and West,

A worthy Prize to crown your warlike Toils?
How often have we blush'd at her Disgrace?
Before your Brother by a fatal Tie
Made her his Consort, had not Theseus dared
To s•eal her from her Father? Does not Calchas

Assure us that from their clandestine Mat•h
A P•incess sprung, who still is left unknown?








But, no: A Brother's Love, his injur'd Honour,
Are the least Cares that trouble your Repose.
Your Thirst of Empire, nothing can allay;
Your haughty Pride of having twenty Kings
Attend and fear You: The supreme Command
Lodg'd in your Person, these, Oh! Wild Barbarian,
The•e are the Gods to whom you Sacrifice;
And careless of the Blow, your Unconcern
Courts the Applause of the affrighted Greeks.

Too jealous of your fatal envied Power,
You're glad to purchase it with your own Blood:
And by so dear a Price deterr the Boldness
Of your Competitors. Is this to be a Father?
Oh! I grow mad This cruel Treachery
Hurries my Senses into wild Distraction.
A Priest, surrounded by a barbarous Crowd,
Shall lay his Murde•ing hand upon my Daughter;
Shall Tear her Bosom, and with cruel Eyes
Consult her panting Breast 
Whilest I who brought her to the Camp in Triumph,
Must return home, disconsolate and attended
With black Despair: I must behold the Way
Still fragrant with the Flowers strew'd on her P•ssage
No, no: It shan't be said I brought her here,
To be thus butcher'd, if with the same Blow
You offer not a double Sacrifice.
No Tears, No Duty shall e're part me from her•

Unless you tear •er from my Slaughter'd hands.
Barbarous Husband, no less barbarous Father,
Come, if you dare, and wrest her from her Mo•he•

Daughter, go in: At least this time for all
I'll be obey•d 






These are the f•rious Clamou•s I expected:
These are the loud Complaints I fear'd to hear.
Yet, i• my wavering and distracted Mind,
Fear'd no•hing but their Cries, I'd not regard them.
Alas! Why did the Gods impose upon me

•o •igid a Command, yet, leave me still
A Fa•her's Heart?





My Lord, a strange Report has reach'd my E•rs

〈◊〉 bo•h our Sakes I wi•h it may be false,

〈◊〉 said, and with jus• horror I repeat it,
T•at •phig•nia by your Command
Expires this day; That having silenc'd Nature,
And all the Dicta••s of •um•nity,
With y•ur own hand you give her to the Priest;
That 'ti• my Name that b•ing• her to the Altar;
That you suppo•'d
These Nuptial• t• amuse us; and to make me
The shameful Inst•ument of this black Murder.
What say you to•t, My Lord? What must I think on't?




I never give account of what I do:
My Daughter's unacquainted with my Will;
But when I think it proper to inform her,
You then may learn her Fate: I'll give the Camp
My Sovereign Orders. 



Too well I know what cruel Fate attends her.



Then why d' ye ask?



Why I do ask? Ye Gods! Is't possible,
That he can dare t'avow so black a Deed?
Think you I will approve your wild Design?
Think you my plighted Faith, my Love, my Honour,
Will e're consent to let your Daughter bleed?



But you, who dare to speak with threatning Voice,
Have you forgot who 'tis you ask such Questions?



And have you, Sir,

•orgot who 'tis I Love? Whom you affront?



Who bids you be concern'd about my Family?
Mayn't I dispose of Iphigenia

Unless you be consenting? Am I not
Her Father s•ill? Is She your Wife? Mayn't she 



No she's yours no more 
I'm not to be amus'd with frivolous Hopes:
You swore she should be mine; and there•ore, Sir,
As long as I have blood within my Veins,
I will maintain those Rights your Promise gave.
But, Sir, was't not for me she came to Aulis?



Expostulate with the Gods, 'tis they demand her.
A•cuse the Priest, Ulysses, M•n•laus:

Accuse the Camp; nay, first accuse your Self.







Yes, you: Who greedy of the Eas•ern Conquest,
Quarrel each day with Neptune and the Winds.
You who offended at my just Alarms,
Have sp•ead your eager Fury through the Camp.
My tender Heart had •ound a way to save her:
But Troy is all you wish, all you demand.
I stopt the Race which you desi•'d to run,
Her Death will set it open; Go depart.



Hell-Furies! Can I hear and b•ar all thi•

Is't thus you aggravate your Perjury
With base Affronts? What! Did I e're desi•e
T' obtain a Wind with Iphigenia's Blood?
What great Concern makes me repair to Troy?
For whom do I neglect my Parent Goddess,
And my disconsolate Father's fond Advice?
Why do I court that Death the Oracle
Foretold their Son? What Wrongs are those I suff•r'd?
Was e're a Trojan Fle•t so bold to dare
Make a Desce•t on my Thessalian Sho•e?
Did e're a Ravisher come to Larissa,

To s•eal away my Sis•er or my Wise?
What loss have I sus•ain'd? I•'t not •or you,
Barbarian as you are, I •ly to Troy?

•or you, whom I inv•sted with Command
O're all the Grecian P•inces and my sel•.
For you, whom I reveng'd in •laming Le•b•s,

Be•ore your gather'd Forces met in Aulis.

But what prevailing Motive call'd us hither?
Was it not to resto•e a •avish'd Wise
To Men•la•s? Then who can think I will
Be wanting to my s•lf, and tamely yi•ld
The Bride I Love. Tis tru• you• Bro•he• su•fe•'d
A base A•front; but then has he alone
A Right •o 〈…〉 W•ongs? I too will vindicate

  36My injured honour I love your Daughter:
She only has my Vows: To her I promis'd
My Ships, my Soldiers, nothing to your Brother.
Let him pursue his Wife, and seek a Triumph
The God• have promis'd to my Blood alone.
What's Hellen, Paris, Priamus to me?



〈…〉 the Prize •or which I•ll quit this Shore,
And ••y to Troy.




Then, •ly f•om hence: Return to Th•ssaly.

I 〈◊〉 you from your solemn Vows.
Oth•rs wi•l come submissive to my Power,
To •e•p t••s• Laurels, which to you we•e promis'd•

And •••cing Destiny by glorious Deeds,
Will gladly meet •heir Dea•h before the Walls
Of •uin'd Troy. I s•• through your Contempt,
How dear I bought your haughty, proud Assistance•

By you• insulting Speech it seems you a•e
The Arbiter of Greece, and that I bear
An empty Tide. To your boast'd Valour
All must submit: All follow your Command.
A kindness when reproach'd becomes a Wrong:
I ask less Valour, but more Obedience.
Away I cancel all our former Ties,
Regardless of your Friendship, or your Hatred.



Thank that one Tie that holds my boiling Passion.
I still respect my Iphigenia's Father.
But wer•t not for that Name, perhaps the Chief
Of Twenty Kings had dar'd me once for all.
One Word and I have done: But mark me well.
Your Daughter and my Honour ly at stake:
I will defend them both; And if you'd reach
The Heart you aim to strike, This is the way
Points to his Breast.

Through which your Blow must pass.





And this shall make her Sentence past recal:
My Daughter was more dread•ul by her Self.
Thy haughty Love, that thinks to make me tremble,
Anticipates the Blow, thou meanst to ward.
No more Debates 
It is resolv'd I'll dare his Insolence:
My injur'd Honour summons all my Reason,
And his proud Threats d•termine the Contest,
'Twixt Nature and the Gods; for now my Pity
Would look like Fear Guards 









What am I doing!
How can I give the bloody, rash Command?
Barbarous Man!
What Fight doest thou Prepare? What hated Foe,
Art thou exposing to their Violence?
A Mother waits me: An undaunted Mother,
Who will defend her 'gainst a murdering Father.
I shall behold my Men less cruel than my self,
Respect my Daughter guarded by their Queen.
'Tis true Achilles threatens and contemns me:
But still my Daughter's constant to her Duty;
She neither flies the Altar, nor declines
With murmuring Discontent the Blow I give,
What means my horrid, sacrilegious Zeal?
What Vows can I address for such a Victim?
A glorious Harvest waits me: But what Laurels
Can please, when stain'd by Iphigenia's Blood?
I will appease the angry Gods: But, oh!
What Gods, can be more cruel to me, than I am to my Self?
No: 'twill not be. I yield to Love, to Nature:
I'll not blush at my Pity, she shall live.
But what! Am I
Regardless of my Fame? Must proud Achilles

Carry the Day, and think I fear'd his Threats?
What frivolous care disturbs my anxious Mind!
He loves my Daughter:
She'll make another blest. Eurybates

Call hither Clytemnestra and the Princess:
Tell them they need not fear. 




If your immortal Hatred perseveres
To wrest her from my Hands, what can weak Mortals do,
I know my Love destroys what I would save:
Yet such a Victim does at least deserve
A confirmation of your rigorous Laws,
And that you should demand it once again.

  38•nt•• Clytemnostra, I•hig•ni•, ••iphile, Aegina, Do•i•, Eury••••s

〈◊〉 you and your Daughter may depar•:

〈…〉 be your Care. Has•e from this Place
Wh•r•••••lty bears sway. My Guards, commanded
By 〈◊〉• shall attend you; I excuse

〈◊〉 happy Ra•hness. Secrecy and Speed
A•e now requir•d: Both Calchas and Ulysses

Hav• hi••e•to been silent; and therefore
Take 〈◊〉 they're not acquainted with your Fligh•,

〈…〉 Daughter, that the Camp may think

• keep her here, and send you back alone.
Go, Fly 
And may the Gods contented with my Tears,
W•ep.

Spare me the sight of Iphig•nia

For a long time. Guards, attend the Queen.













Once more, avoid th' impatient, ba•ba•ous P•iest:
Be gone, •ly •ence To favou• your Escape

•ll find some Reasons to make him suspend,
The fatal Sacrifice till the next day.










Madar•, don•t you follow:



Oh• I yield at last.

〈◊〉 the Power of Jealousy and Love:

Achill••'s Tenderness fills me with Rage.
I• is r•s•lved, I'll be reveng'd or fall,
Come, •o •he Priest I will discover all.



