

Pittem's Parlour. Pittem Solus.
_WHAT a Pleasure there is in getting Money; cou'd we but forget we were to die, it would be the Zenith of Felicity.




Sir, Mr. Blandford is below, and desires to speak with you.



Odds so; I am very busy too just now: Tell him to call again by-and-by; no, no, Pestle, Pestle, tell him to walk up, do you hear?









What the plague does he want here again so soon? It was but Yesterday that he was plaguing me to Death about Miss Danbury, and if I thought he had been come again on the same Errand, I would have sent him Word I was sick. But here he comes.





Good Morning to you, Doctor.



Mr. Blandford, your very humble Servant; how do you, this dull Morning? I'Gad I was threatening to go to Bed again.



To Bed, Doctor! What before you are well up? Of have your medical Studies kept you from sleeping all Night?



No but I have got a nasty something hanging on my Spirits.



You're safe enough, you know; a Dog and a Doctor, know how to choose their Physic.





As your Kind of Gentry know how to choose the best Wh res.



I beg your Pardon, Doctor, there is no best in the Case; the best of the bad, is not worth choosing; but if you have no more Skill in Medicines, than I have in Filles de Joye, I would not give a Fig for your Practice. Talking of the Fair, puts me in Mind of poor Miss Danbury; never was so good a Heart so much depress'd: With blooming Beauty, and a Soul angelic, she drags a Life of Woe, and keeps the Shield of Virtue on her Arm; while her Hand rejects with Scorn, the tempting Bribes of gay Debauchery.



What then, you young Rogue, you've try'd her, I suppose? But she knew you had nothing to give her but Promises, and so thought in that Case she might as well put on the Prude as not.



Let me tell you, Doctor, that's a damn'd ill-natured Surmise, and did I not think you spoke it more out of Raillery, than Sincerity, I should for ever hold the most contemptible Opinion of you as a Man.



Why you did not think I was in Earnest, did you, Ned?



No If I had!



You'd have been for running me through the Body, I suppose; but I assure you the World says strange Things of the Girl.



Aye, it is a strange World, Doctor.



Nay, but from the many pitiful Tricks, that I have detected her in myself, I am determined to have nothing to do with her.



You would have had (it is well known) if she would have let you.



There's for you now! that's like her, I did imagine, indeed, (when I ceas'd to support the ungrateful Hussy, in her flaunting Expectations) she would raise some scandalous Report or other, to hurt me in my Character and Business. Oh, the Jade! had it not been for the great Regard I had for the Father, she should have shifted for herself long ago.



Your Regard for her Father!



Aye, my Regard for her Father.



Why what great Regard could you have for him, when I have often heard you say he died five hundred Pounds in your Debt?



Why tho' he was an unfortunate Man, he was an honest one, as far as his Circumstances would go.



That's one of the most grateful Confessions I ever heard you make of any Man before.



I had ever the most favourable Opinion of every Man, and was always more inclined to hide, than expose their Misfortunes.



That's well again; so shall your own Words convict you.







Why, if you were inclined to think the most favourably of Man, you must in Reason think the same of Woman Kind.



And so I do.



Good again; and what has poor Miss Danbury done, that every Thought of her is bad, and your best Opinion but a fordid one?



Aye, but Facts, my dear Ned, are Facts, and the general and perpetual Complaints of the World are Circumstances too glaring to be overlook'd.



What the World says in those Cases, ought never to be regarded; for such Reports generally arise from the inventive Goffips of a Tea table; and there is a Species of Barbarity that reigns predominant in the Breasts of the low-minded Vulgar. Whenever they perceive an Object of Merit, that was once their Envy, under the least Misfortune, they are never so happy as when doing that Person
  4
some secret Injury, or till, by some malignant Conspiracy, they have reduced them to a State of Adversity.



And can you say that this is her Case?



Yes, truly, for it is well known that Miss Danbury was (scarce three Years ago) the Admiration and Envy of the Country for ten Miles round, and now, the veriest Drab that was wont to think herself honoured with a Court'sy from her, will, with a provoking Sneer, tell her to shorten her Furbelows; and since they have found her whole Dependence is on you, they have injured her, by imposing on you some malicious Falsehood, on the mere Supposition of which, I find you are determined to compleat her Misery.



Nay, Mr. Blandford, it is not for that entirely, but from the very great Expence she has been to me of late, and as I find that hurts my Circumstances considerably, it is a Duty I owe myself not to let her ruin me entirely. I have made her many good Offers; nay I made Interest for her to a Gentleman and Lady who were going to South Carolina, where they told her she would have the greatest Opportunity in the World of making her Fortune; all which she ungratefully rejected; and as I am under no Manner of Obligation to her, or hers, I think I have done for her already what hundreds would not have done; in Truth therefore she must now shift for herself as well as she can.



Poor Girl! I can't blame her; 'tis strange so great a Tenderness Mr. Danbury had for her when living, that he did not make some Provision for her at his Death.



That's the Astonishment of every one, but what could a Man do that had it not in his Power?



That is still more strange, for every Body thought him a Man of Property.



Ah, Ned, you see with what Art some People can support a false Reputatian, and when their Affairs come once to be laid open to Inspection, many a worthy Family that has trusted their All in their Hands, from too good an Opinion of their Circumstances, find too often a broken Back in the Consequence.



Well, I wish the dear Creature was better provided for, or that I had it in my Power to make her the happiest Woman in the Universe.



How wou'd you do that?



Why, I wou'd endeavour to do it, by marrying her, and setting her above the Frowns of the World.



And a promising Dame you wou'd get for your Pains. Ah, Ned. I pity you I must confess. But Plague on it, if you are so wonderfully smitten with the Wench, why don't you marry her.



Because I am not at present possess'd of those Requisites, that would be essential to our Happiness.



That is a little Money, I suppose.



You suppose right; wou'd the kind Powers be pleas'd to take that dear, pious, mercenary Uncle to themselves, I should be glad to fill up his Vacancy here below, without any further Consideration.



Aye, my dear Boy, but your Uncle takes a deal of Care of his Constitution, and is as likely to live thirty Years longer, as yourself; you shou'd have taken better Care of the last five Hundred, Ned.



Why I confess if I had been as penurious as you, I probably might have increas'd it to a Thousand by this Time; and neither have done myself nor any body else any Good with it.



If you had it now I don't think you wou'd do yourself much Good with it by marrying Miss Danbury.



You are determined, I find, to do her no Good either by Word or Deed; and therefore, Doctor, I beg you wou'd not give me any more of your cool Opinions; since you cannot give her a good Word, you shall not dare to give her a bad one in my Company without the warmest Resentment.



Well, well, mighty well then; there let it drop  there let it drop; in the Name of Goodness may not one talk of Matrimony without having one's brains beat out.  Zounds I wish I could meet with a good wife with all my Heart.



And a special good Husband you'd make, if you thought you cou'd kill her with kindness. If I thought you serious, now, I would help you to a good one; but what will you give me for my trouble?



Give you? What do you call a good one tho'?



The Lady is not very handsome to be sure, nor yet very young; but she is worth a confounded deal of
  6
Money I assure you, and such a Woman can have nothing had about her I am persuaded, at least in your Eyes.



She cannot be bad that is certain, if she is rich▪ (for Money was never bestow'd on any but those that were good, and knew how to keep it when they had got it.) But how rich do you think the Lady may be?



Why, I have heard my Uncle say, that she is worth Ten Thousand Pounds at least; but don't take the least notice of it to him; for he wants to get her himself; only she thinks him rather too old.   Now such a middleag'd Man as you, wou'd be the very Thing. Besides she was asking me who was our best Inoculator in this Neighbourhood. I told her I knew a very infallible one, meaning you; and she has been teazing me about you ever since.



Odds, so, but that is one of the most lucky Circumstances that cou'd have happen'd, in my Favour. Where does the Lady live, and I'll pay her a visit to-morrow?



Oh no, not for the World, she has boarded some Time in a private Family in this Neighbourhood; but as the major Part of them have not had the Smallpox, it is to be kept a profound Secret.





Sir, there is a Gentleman below, desires to speak with you.



Tell the Gentleman I'll wait on him immediately.

I faith Ned if you can bring this matter to bear, I'll make you a Present the greatest Gentleman in the Land wou'd not refuse.





And that is a Pill, or a Dose of Physic, to take when I am sick, to make me the more so; for I know he has neither the Spirit or Resolution to do any thing like a Man; the yellow Mammon has caught his Soul, and Avarice holds his Purse Strings. I don't know what the Hopes of getting this pretended Wife may do; but if he shou'd put me to the Proof, I don't know where I shou'd find one that would chuse to throw herself away upon him. I must do something to deceive him, hey? let me see, Egad I think I cou'd do very well for an Old Maid myself;   An excellent thought!   but what shall I do for a Dress?   a Plague on't I have Interest enough among the fair Sex to get such a Thing as that to be sure.   The Old Maid and her Money is the Thing yet; Bait for Gudgeons with
  7
Worms, and a Miser with Gold, and you are sure to catch 'em. I'll e'en go after the Doctor, and tell him I am going to the Lady directly.










So Ned is gone after the Lady. Ten Thousand Pounds! a charming Sum, nay, a Fortune; a very good Fortune of itself let me see; Ten Thousand Pounds; and Five Thousand of my own, makes just Fifteen Thousand Pounds; that will certainly enable me to keep a Chariot of my own, the Thing I have been striving for these fourteen Years: for what is a Doctor without a Chariot? the Appearance of a Chariot is the Sign of good Practice; and it is a common Remark, when the World thinks you have much, you shall have more; and when but little, you shall have less.




O is it you, Mr. Hierapicra? what News, what News, any more Patients?



We have just now lost one, Sir.



Lost one! how do you mean?











I assure you, Sir, it it true.



O he must certainly have had the Itch or the King's Evil. What Noise is that?




Pestle and Jerry I fancy Sir, I left them in a high Dispute.











I wish you wou'd send Jerry to me, I want to speak to him.









The Deuce take me but I have walk'd upon Thorns and laid upon Nettle-beds ever since I first heard of this Fortune, and I am terribly afraid that Old sly Uncle of Ned's will snap her up before me.





Did you want any Thing with me, Sir?



Yes, my little Jerry; your Master is not at home I suppose.



He was not when I came out.



Pray, Jerry, (I hope it is no secret) have not you a maiden Lady, of about forty, that often pays your old Master a Visit?







Know you where she lives?



A few Miles off.



You do not know the Name of the Place then, do you?



Why, yes I do.



Cou'd not you inform me then?



I should not choose to do such a Thing, without my Master's Authority.



No! pray what could be the Consequence?



A very bad one, Sir, for aught I know, as she is a kind of a Sweet-heart of my old Master's, and is worth a Deal of Money; I don't know, if you shou'd find out where the Lady lives, but you may endeavour to rival him; the Consequence wou'd then be very bad on my Side, I believe.



Why he should never know who told me.







'Twill be impossible man; he never shall from me.



But in the Course of his Examination it wou'd come to my Turn, and then I must confess, or tell him a Lie, which I will not do for you, or any Body else, and therefore, Sir, to avoid any Apprehensions of that Kind, it will be the best Way to say nothing at all about it.



A stubborn son of a Gun.

You seem to have a great Regard for your Word, Jerry, and I applaud you for it; though I should be glad to know one Thing however, which can't be of much Consequence to you, or Danger to any Body and that is, whether the Lady keeps much Company, or no?



Very little, I believe.



Hum ah she has a pretty good Stomach, I suppose 







A good Stomach I say.



A very moderate one, and as worthy a Lady as ever was born. What a miserable Wretch!




Is she indeed; she often gives you Money then I suppose?



Sometimes, Sir what a scurvy Scoundrel!










Sir, Mr. Blandford desires to speak with you.





Odds so, I'm glad of that well Jerry, your Servant, I am glad to see you.



Sir, your Servant   I am glad my young Master is come to release me, for I have been tir'd of my Company some Time. I hope he will play his Part well, and work the physical Jesuit out of a few Hundreds.






Oh! here comes Ned.





Welcome, welcome, my dear Boy, welcome, what News, what News?



What News Doctor? why such News I believe, as will make you compleatly happy.



Then you have seen the Lady.



Yes that I have, and to some Purpose; why she will call upon you Tomorrow herself, Man.



Happy News indeed! 



But the Merrythought take me, now I think on't, if I did not forget to tell her your Name, and where you liv'd.



O lack-a-day, lack-a-day now, was there ever any Thing so provoking in this World?



Nay, upon second Consideration, though, I'm glad on't.



How so, how so, pray? that is strange indeed!



Why, because I look upon it, that were she to visit you, the Business would be half done.



So much the better, so much the better, Man.



And pray what am I to have for my Trouble?



Plague on't, have not I told you I would make you a handsome Present?



Yes. But what Surety have I for that but your own bare Word, which I would not take for a Shilling, where Money is concern'd. I must have your Note, Doctor, I must have your Note.



And so you shall: I will give you a Note of five Pounds on Demand, from the very Moment she consents to marry me.



A Note of five Pounds; scandalous and pitiful!  Wretch, Devil! why thou art a very Skinflint; five Pounds for ten Thousand! Oh, horrible, horrible! the very Summit of Meanness! A Gentleman who knew what Influence I had over the Lady, but this very Day, offered me two hundred Pounds, only to be introduced to her Five Pounds for ten Thousand! Doctor, your Servant.





Nay, but Mr. Blandford, hear me, hear me,

Was there ever such a hot-headed Rascal; 'Sdeath if I should lose her now. He talks of an Offer of two hundred Pounds. A great Sum! A very great Sum! But ten Thousand! I must outbid the Gentleman I believe; for if I should read of Miss Such-a-one, a maiden Lady of ten thousand Pounds being married to  oh, I shall go distracted; the very Thought of losing such a Prize is worse than being the next to the 10,000l. Lottery Ticket But he is gone Where's PestlePestle! Pestle! From Fears and Apprehensions I cannot keep a Bone of me still. Pestle! I say; the Devil pound the Fellow, he can't hear Pes t le 













I, I, I'm a coming, Sir.



Come along, then, you deaf-headed Booby.







Yes, Sir what a Plague is come to the Fellow? Run after Mr. Blandford, and tell him that I beg he would come back run, run.



O, yes, Sir! it has been done some Time.



Done! what's done, you Puppy, you? what are you talking of?







I shall go distracted, go to Mr. Blandford, no, no, no, go to the Devil you hammer-headed Rascal, and I'll go myself.





Poor Master is in a Passion, I doubt, and talks of going to the Devil, but mortar me if I follow him.












I'M glad my fair one approves of my intended Stratagem, however; but her Father's Letter astonishes me; it is strange she never shew'd it me before; he informs her, (but three Hours before his Death) that he had provided for her very handsomely; instead of that we find her destitute and forlorn; and, by what I understand, Pittem was the only person that attended him in his latest Hours. 'Sdeath, there must have been foul Play. Pittem is either an errant Knave, or her Father must have deceived her; but when I compare the two Characters, the first Surmise carries with it many glaring Circumstances, and the latter seems improbable; I will not rest till I am satisfied.




Sir, my Master desired I would give this Letter into your own Hands.



Very well is he at home?







I Have considered of your Proposal, and shall be glad to see you on that Business directly; I shall object to nothing that may prove to your Advantage.
Your humble Servant, Tobias Pittem."
  12
Ho! ho! have I touch'd you my little Skin-flint? This is an excellent Stratagem I find; but there must be no Time lost in this Affair; 'tis the best Time to catch a Fox when he is hungry; and so I'll be with you, my litle Doctor, in a Crack.










So Pestle, you saw Mr. Blandford?







And what did he say to you?



Mortar me, Sir, if I heard him say any Thing at all; I saw him open his Mouth and nod his Head, as much as to say it was very well; 



But did not he seem pleas'd?



I did not stay to see, Sir, 'cause I thought it would be ill Manners.



Poh, Pox, you Blockhead you!



What do you say, Sir, has he got the Small Pox?  poor Soul he had better have been inoculated.

A Knock at the Door.


Go and see who is at the Door, make haste,

What a blunder-headed Puppy 'tis; his Deafness is of little Inconveniency to me, however; for as Secrets are generally whisper'd, there is but little Danger of his hearing any, and less of his telling 'em; and this Country is the very Mart for Scandal.





Sir, Mr. Blandford desires to speak with you.



Tell him to walk up.

Plague on it what a flutter I'm in, were I going to receive a Challenge I could not be worse. But here he comes.
Enter Blandford.
Mr. Blandford, I'm sorry I made  



Pray Doctor make no Ceremony, there is no Occasion for it.



I'm glad on't; I was afraid I should have found you as I left you, full of Gun-powder.



No, no, Doctor, your Letter stopt all Fear of Explosion.



To tell you the Truth, I was under great Apprehensions of your accepting of the Gentleman's Proposal that you told me of.



No, Doctor, though I received a letter from the Gentleman (since I saw you last) importuning me in the most pressing Manner, to introduce him; yet, from the Regard I bear you, I was determined to give you the Preference, and intended to have waited a Day or two till you had better consider'd the Matter.



That was acting the Friend indeed! but to the Purpose my dear Boy; you read my Letter I presume?







And have you any Objection to a couple of Hundreds?







Then I think I have nothing to fear; no Doubt of Success.



None in the World.



Flea me, but I shall think every Hour an Age till I see her.







Had I not better go give her an Invitation myself; as I am an utter Stranger to the Lady, she'll undoubtedly expect that Compliment?



I beg you would not think of such a Thing, but bless your Stars that she has consented to visit you; for as I have been acquainted with her from my Infancy, I think myself a tolerable Judge of her Disposition.



Well, I shall be advised by you.



If you hope to succeed, I beg you would; one material Thing I should advise you to, that is, not to make above twelve Hours Courtship on't, for I have often heard her say she could never bear to be courted above a Day. And this Resolution she has taken (I am informed) from being crost in her first Love.



That is an excellent Notion, I assure her; for I should hate one of your plaguy long Courtships myself; to have an hundred Fallings-out, and Fallings-in, in a Week; flying like Cats at one-another To-day, and breaking
  14
Heart to make it up again To-morrow. 'Sdeath I long to see her.



I'll cure you of your Longing To-morrow.











O brave? it will be necessary to know what Time To-morrow, that I may be the better prepar'd for her Reception?



About Six, I fancy.



What, in the Morning?



No hardly, Doctor; ha, ha, ha, surely you'll be able to survive your Impatience till the Afternoon.



You'll come with her then, won't you?



Not I, indeed; you'll court best by yourselves  Well, Doctor, your Servant, I've got a little Business to do for my Uncle, and must be gone; I shall hardly see you again, till you have seen the Lady.
Blandford going.



Bye, bye, well Success attend thee.




But Doctor, Doctor; there is one material Matter to settle before I go; the Note, Doctor, the Note.



O lack a day! right, very right as you say. I was in Hopes he had forgot that.
Aside.



And another Thing I have to hint to you, which will prove more to your Advantage than mine.







You must know I owe the Sum of 200£. to Mrs. Buzby  







That is the Lady's Name; now I shall give the Note to her, and pay off my Debt; and if she should desire you to make it into Money To-morrow, to shew her what a Principle you bear, you may pay it her, which will be only paying to receive again you know, Doctor.



With all my Heart; follow me into the next Room and I'll give you the Note directly.












I'll e'en rest me a little Mercy upon me, what a Parcel of Things have I got! a Gown from one, a Petticoat from another, Ruffles and Caps, and the Plague knows what from another. Odds my Life, but here comes Pestle.





Ah, Master Jerry; what is your Load too much for you; or are you (like the Man in the Story Book) praying to Jacob to carry it for you?



To Jacob? a pretty Story indeed to Jove, you Fool you.







To Jove, I say.



To Jove! ha, ha, ha; to Jove indeed, where will you find such a word in the Bible?



In the Bible? I'm wrong too I believe, I should have said Harclus.
Aside



Aye, in the Bible.



What do you make a Story Book of the Bible?  Pray let us have no more of your Nonsense; what do you think of your Master's being marry'd To-morrow; how do you like that Story?



Why very well if it should prove a true one, and I believe there is something in it too! if he should get him a Wife, I hope she will teach him to keep a better House than he does at present; our Bellies and Dishes are generally empty.



I hate such mean spirited Chaps; I'd sooner take a Voyage to the Indies than serve such a miserable Devil.



Why I have some Thought of leaving him to tell you the Truth, and set up for myself.



Set up for what?



Why a Noculator, a Doctor.



You! a Doctor? ha, ha, ha, you might spread the Infection, I believe, but you could never cure it, I am sure.



You are mistaken, Jerry, you are mistaken, I have got the Secret.



The Secret▪ what of poisoning People? that's a common Secret enough, any body knows that.



I wish I had the poisoning of you for your ill Opinion. Pray why may not I hope for Success as well as my Master? once upon a Time he knew no more than myself.



Nay, as for that Matter, I don't think he knows much more now.



Why, as you say, I know a great deal; I had as good Learning as ever he had; I learnt Multiplication, Extraction Mortar me, but here he comes.



Mortar me but here I go then, if that's the Case

and so Mr. Pestle, your Servant.







Where have you been, you Blockhead, all this Time? I have wanted you to go of a hundred Errands for me.



Sir, I was here.



You was here, pray what Business had you here?



I I I only Sir, you've got a Hole in your Stocking.



And what's that to you?



No, Sir, no, it's nothing new.



You impudent Scoundrel you, I'll break your Head  what do you mean by that?







Nothing, Sir? I believe you've more Meaning than you seem to have

but since you've put me in Mind on't, you may as well go and but me a new Pair;  Here's two Shillings, let 'em be good ones, do you hear,  Stay, here's Sixpence more. I may as well have the best Pair at once, now I am about it, especially as I shall have Company Tomorrow.





I suppose, thinks I'll be a mighty great Friend to him now, for this Recommendation No, no, the Devil a Bit, I've no Notion of hurting myself by too much Good Nature. But if my Wife should cuckold me, I shall get
  17
myself finely laugh'd at:   Never mind that, I shall have a Salve for that Sore,

My budding Horns shall never give me Pain,
Ten Thousand Pounds will hide the darkest Stain.











WAS there ever such a narrow-soul'd mean-spirited Creature as my Master! He has promised me an old Coat of his this Twelve-month, which has been thread-bare these two Years; and never had the Heart to part with it yet; he's got a Lady coming To-day too, and I'm as ragged as a Braintree Beggar, I shall be ashamed to be seen by any Body. It's my Opinion he's afraid I shall rival him, because he knows that when I am dress'd, I look more like a Gentleman than himself. But here he comes.





Run to the Door, Pestle, Some body knocks.









If it should be Mrs. Buzby, now let me see, let me see what Time is it? 

past six, by Jupiter! I think I look pretty well, she can't find Fault with my Dress.


Re-enter Pestle in a Hurry.


Sir there is a Lady would be glad to speak to you.



Hey, a Lady! Did you ask the Lady's Name?



Yes, Sir, its Mrs. Buzgig.



Buzgig, you Blockhead, Buzby.







Run, give my Compliments to the Lady, and desire her to walk up. Now for my own Honour, and the Honour of the Faculty, Zo•nds I've got the Palpitation of a Boy of sixteen, 'Sdeath but here she comes, and a fine Presence indeed. A Gentlewoman every Inch of her take my Word for it.






Sir your Servant, you'll excuse my troubling you with a Visit? 



Pray Madam, I beg Madam, you wou'd not begin to apologize, the Honour you do my poor House, is a Pleasure, unspeakable Pleasure, Madam.




O Sir, I beg you wou'd not make me asham'd of myself.



O confound it what have I said now.

so that I do not make you asham'd of me, I shall be happy,




I have made her asham'd of me now, and to some Purpose





I hope Sir you have not hurt yourself.



Not in the least Madam, not in the least, I hope you will excuse my putting you in a Fright.




O my dear Sir, accidents are unavoidable; Perhaps you are in Love Sir; if so it may be easily accounted for; that Rogue Cupid generally leads his People blindfold, for we often read of a Gentleman or a Lady's falling into a River, or, (from the meer Imagination they are loosing their Loves) tumbling out of a two Pair of Stairs Window.



I do assure you, Madam, if I am in love, 'tis with no one but yourself.




With me, Sir! in love with me? I am confident, Sir, there is nothing about me, so attracting, that can kindle the least Affection, at least from so short an Interview.



Ha! Diffidence, Diffidence, Madam, often makes Merit look too coolly on •tself.




Why true, Sir▪ true, 'tis very certain where there is real Ability, Diffidence is sure to oppress it, and Judgment is often referr'd to the vain and talkative Coxcomb, while it sets doubtful and timorous in the Breast of
  19
Modesty, But don't think, Sir, I meant to pay myself a Compliment by such an Observation.



I do not imagine you did, Madam, but give me Leave to say, it is a very sensible, a nay a very excellent Observation indeed, Madam. What a charming Tongue she has, if I should loose her now, I shall wish I'd never seen her.
Aside.




But Love, Sir, was not the Business I came here upon, it was of another Nature; my Business was of another Nature, quite.



No to be sure, Madam, I had not the Vanity to imagine it was Love. Pray, Madam, what might it be?




Inoculation, Sir; I have been under the greatest Apprehensions of catching the Small-pox, for this Month past, it being almost so generally spread about the Country; and as my Cousin Ned has persuaded me that you have discovered a most infallible Method of eradicating that malignant Disorder, I have made bold to visit you on that Business.



Madam I am infinitely oblig'd to Mr. Blandford for his kind and generous Recommendation, and more so to you, Madam, for imbibing so good an Opinion of me.  But I cou'd wish, pardon me, Madam, I cou'd wish you wou'd consent to evade the Subject of Inoculation a few Minutes, and dwell a little longer on that more excellent Topic, Love.




Sir if you can convince me that the Danger of the one is not more imminent to me, than the other is to you, I shall very readily comply with your Request.



Then, Madam, I fancy I shall prevail with you.




Pray explain youself, Sir.



Does your Apprehensions of the Small-pox give you at present any real Pain?




I can't say it does, Sir.



But mine of Love, Madam, really does.




How can that be, Sir, even supposing me the Object of your Affections, since both Passions proceed from Fear, yours of losing what you never had, and there it ends. Mine, of catching that I wou'd not wish to have; which may possibly end in Death? But however, Sir, since you are so very desirous of continuing the Theme of
  20
Love, I'll e'en set aside my Apprehensions a few Minutes, and listen to you. I fancy it will be best to get that Part over first, least I should be discovered before I nail him for the two hundred.
Aside.



Such a Condescension, Madam, bespeaks you every Thing that's amiable.




Sir, if I thought I was really so in your Eyes, I would endeavour to return the Compliment in the best Manner I cou'd.



If there was any other Way in the World more expressive than simple Words, I wish I knew it, that I might convin•e you, Madam, I really think you, nay, you really are, the most amiable Lady I ever met with in my Life, and the only Woman I ever yet wish'd my Wife.








Pardon me, Madam, if my Passion hath made my Tongue o'er-run the Bounds of Decency; if I have offended you, Madam, I beg your Pardon, but hope you will forgive me.




I believe the Doctor is in Love with me indeed.
(Aside.)
Sir, I forgive you with all my Heart, but can't help thinking it the strangest Thing in the World, that so slight an Acquaintance shou'd breed so strong an Affection.



O Madam, the very illustrious Character Mr. Blandford has often given you to me, made me almost in Love with you before you came; but since I have seen you, I am in Love indeed, to find you so far exceed the best of Characters.




Sir, I am infinitely obliged to my Cousin Ned; but must confess he has always been very liberal in his Commendations of you.



I am equally obliged to Mr. Blandford, Madam, but am afraid you have found that he has said more in my Behalf, than you find true.




Sir, I must confess I don't find that he hath deceived me in the least.



Madam, you make me very happy, indeed.




I'm glad on't Sir, and should be very glad if it were in my Power to make you always so.



That it is in your Power, Madam, there is nothing so sure.




Then, Sir, you may depend upon it, I will do my utmost.



But suppose, Madam, nothing would make me so but your own Person and Liberty.




Sir, I should have no Objectoin of resigning them both, were I sure they would make you happy.



I would venture my Happiness, nay my Life, Madam, on such a Resignation; if you would venture to give me your Hand on this fair Promise, I shall be compleatly happy.




Then here it is with all my Heart; for to tell you the Truth, Sir, I have long been tired of the Appellation of old Maid, and most terribly afraid of dying one.



(Takes her Hand and kisses it with great Eagerness.)
And I do assure you, Madam, the musty and fulsome Name of old Bachelor has been no less hateful to me, nor do I care how soon I get rid of it.




Though I can't help thinking but I have made too brief a Capitulation; Forwardness in Women generally gives Disgust. But to be plain, you must know, Sir, I hate to be courted; the Hey day of Youth is over in me; about sixteen or seventeen Years, I us'd to take a Pleasure in denying, on purpose to obtain a Number of new and useless Solicitations, 'till at last I teaz'd my Lovers out of Patience.



Well I declare to you, Madam, I have been served so twenty times, for I never payed my Addresses to a young Lady in my Life, but before I could settle my Affections, she tired my Patience with a feign'd Coyness, giving me the greatest Encouragement To-day, and Tomorrow wou'd hardly look at me, 'till I had dangled from Morning to Night after her, and all the Excuse she had for it was, I should not think her too forward, but I soon let her see I could be as capricious as herself, and so broke her Acquaintaintance with a cool billet-doux, and farewell.




I can't help thinking this Visit was an arch Design of my Cousin Ned's, and to get us acquainted with no other View, than what it has turn'd out; He's a strange Creature! he has great good Nature, but it is great Pity he
  22
has not a little more Oeconomy in regard to his Pocket; money's like chaff to him, it flies with every wind that blows.



O that's an unpardonable Sin, Madam, in my Opinion.




And in mine too, Sir; though his great Fau't is, I believe, being too charitable; he pretends that when he sees a Friend or a Neighbour in Distress, he can't sleep 'till he has reliev'd 'em.



Ah, that's an abominable Fault; for what is another's Poverty to me? let every one take Care of themselves I say. Besides, giving to the Poor is the most unprofitable Way of bestowing Charity in the World; you are sure of never having any Return.




True, Sir, very true; I've been obliged to lend him Money, at different Times, to the Amount of two hundred Pounds, though it went very much against me to do it, had he not been a pretty near Relation, I wou'd not have done it on any Account. But he has certainly a deal of good Nature; and I know too that he'll pay when he has it, for I lent him a hundred and twenty Pounds before, and I must say he pay'd me very honestly again, with good Interest into the Bargain. But if I could get him to pay the good two hundred Pounds he owes me now, I should hardly risk any more with him, I think.



I'm glad to find you are come to that Resolution, Madam, I assure you once or twice a Person may do a good natur'd Thing, but I'd have 'em beware of the third Time, least they be flung at last.




He has now given me a Note of two hundred Pounds on you, Sir; I'm amaz'd to think what he can have done for it.



Why it was a particular Kind of Business to be sure, Madam, the Purport of which I shall make bold to acquaint you with some other Opportunity.




I have no very great Relish for Secrets, Sir.



Then you are not a Native of this Country I am sure, Madam; for the People here make it as great a Merit to discover the Secrets of their Neighbours, as the Astronomers do to discover new Spots in the Sun, and take as great a Pride in declaring 'em to the World.




That's a very despicable Character. Pray what Time of the Day is it? I must begin to think of going,
  23
I promis'd to call on a Lady in my Way home, upon some very particular Business. I should be glad now to know your Terms of Inoculation. Perhaps it is not convenient just now, Sir, to pay the Note I mentioned.



Quite so, quite so, Madam, I have it at Hand, I am never so happy as when my Debts are pay'd..




Nay, as for that Matter, if it had not been convenient, you need not have been under any Uneasiness on my Account, Sir; it will save me the Trouble of sending to my Banker's To morrow, that's all.



Here it is, Madam.




And here is your Note, Sir, with a Receipt in full on the Back.



Madam, I am very much oblig'd to you.




O, Sir, it is I that am oblig'd.
Puts it in her Pocket.



Now, Ma'am, now for Inoculation; when shall you be ready to prepare.








Very well, Madam; you shall have your Medicines To-morrow Morning.




My Heart almost fails me already I declare.



My dear Madam you need not be under the least Apprehensions of Danger. It is the mildest undertaking in the World. I have had some hundred thousands under my Hands, but never had a Patient, while under the Operation, that had the least Apprehensions of Death, nor one that ever made the least Complaint since they left me.








It is amazing, indeed, Madam; but you must imagine I have taken no small Pains in the Studies of Physicks and Metaphysicks, to have made a Discovery of this Nature.




That is very apparent, Sir.



I do assure you, Madam, it has been a Work of thirty Years Study. I have spared no Pains in consulting the best Authors, and was at a vast Expence in travelling for Experience, to the most celebrated Capitals in Europe, and am happy to find at last that my Endeavours were not thrown away, but that my Discovery has proved of such general Utility.




What an excellent Knack the Doctor has at lying.
(Aside.)
There is nothing more conducive to Happiness, than the general Approbation of the Public, nor nothing so hard to obtain.



Very well observ'd indeed, Madam, but I can very well say, with a favourite Author of mine "Successo filicitatibusque." And in another Part, where he compares a great Genius to a Sky-rocket, "Skirockitum Skirocteribus.




So, so, the Doctor is going to purge me with Dog-Latin.
(Aside.)
Your Author's Excellence is thrown away upon me, Sir, I am quite a Stranger to Latin; French was always my favourite Language, I ever considered Latin as too masculine a Study for the Ladies.



Madam, there's such a Melody in the Sounds! but as you say, Madam, it may be too masculine for the Ladies, too sonorous.





Sir, Mrs. Bugg bid me tell you she was a-going, and desire you wou'd let her have the Lotion with her.



Tell her I'll wait on her directly.


You must know, Madam, the Lady is now and then troubled with a Pimple, and she is terribly afraid of spoiling her Face; I promis'd her something to prevent 'em, and I dare say she would not go without it for the World.




I am sometimes troubled with 'em myself; though I am not afraid that they'll spoil my Beauty, I assure you, Sir,   but have you really a Medicine of that Kind.



A most infallible one, Madam, which beautifies the Skin, amazingly, for which I have had the King's Patent long since.




You must have a wonderful Knowledge in your Profession, Sir, to have been able to make so many great and useful Discoveries.








And so you have obtain'd a Patent, Sir? I should like vastly to see the Nature of a Thing of that Kind.








I should, Sir, I must confess.



With your Leave, Madam, I'll just go and send Mrs. Bugg off, and bring it with me.




Sir I am asham'd of giving you the Trouble.



Not any Trouble, not the least I assure you, Madam.








What a ridiculous Lyar he is! he knows no more of Medicine, than a Rat-catcher; about four Years ago he was nothing but a Horse-doctor, or a Cow-leech; I think I have nail'd the Fox though, but the sooner I'm off the better I fancy. Here he comes again.





Here, Madam, is my Patent Odds, so, hey! I am mistaken, I fancy; Poh, Pox, what a Blockhead am I! I've brought the Lease of my House,

Excuse me, Madam, and I'll fetch the Patent in a Minute.
(Exit Doctor)Mrs. Buzby takes up the Lease(as she imagines)




Now, thank my Stars, I have secur'd my Prize  But I wish I was fairly out of the House and yet my Heart is wounded at the Deed, and tells me I'm to blame. The Doctor has forgot his Lease
(takes up the Lease, as she supposes, and opens it.)
Ah! what is here! by all my Hopes, Mr. Danbury's Will!   O thou pernicious Fiend!  Yes, thou curs'd Villain, it is a Lease which thou shalt hold no more. What shall I do? I'll secure me this, however; and if he asks me for it, I'll disown it; I shall hate to trifle longer in this Disguise. But here he comes.





I protest, Madam, I am quite asham'd of myself, I have mislaid my Patent by some Accident or other, and cannot find it; if it were not for the Fear of tiring your Patience, Madam, I would go and make farther Search.




O by no Means, Sir, another Opportunity will do quite as well; besides, Sir, I cannot possibly stay any longer, I shall be benighted, and I am one of the most fearful Creatures in Nature.



May Health and Happiness go with you, Madam, good Night, good Night.



A charming Lady! an excellent Lady! upon my Word; I have won her (as the Player says) all the World to Nothing; what a lucky Dog I am! But she has smit me, she thas smit me to the very Heart, and I love her from Top to Toe; now for my Chariot! and then I shall have nothing to take Care of but my Health, and pray for a long Life; let me see who shall I employ to make it? hum O my old Friend Mr. Skeleton, in Long-acre, he has got half a Score of Children, and I'll insist upon his having them all Inoculated in Return; a good Thought, a good Thought, there is nothing like making one's Thought turn out to Account, I'll take care Nobody shall get too much by me; I am never under the Necessity of laying out Money, but I can always find out some Way to get Part of it return'd again.




And so you have taken a House then, hey?



A ye and a good House too, I assure you.



A good House? how do you mean?



Why you must know I hired it of a Methodist Preacher of my Acquaintance, that has lost his Flock, poor Soul, it was formerly a preaching House, he was glad to part with it I believe, for you must know I have got the whole House and Pulpit into the Bargain for Twenty Shillings a Year.



How many rooms have you got in it tho'?



Why let me see, there is the Preaching Room, that's one; a Room over that, that's two; then three's the Wash house, that's three; and one of the most snuggest Rooms over that, that's four; a Stable and Hay-loft, which makes as you may say six Rooms.



And all for Twenty Shillings a Year!



What do you say it's dear?



No, I think it is very cheap. But if the World should expect you to write a Treatise by-and-by, what will you do then?



Why I can easily get Somebody to write it for me, when I have Money, and I shall get Laps full of that when I set up for myself.





Set up for yourself, ha, set up for yourself! what's the reason you can't keep within call? I must forever have you to seek when I want you; I do assure if you serve me so again, I'll send you about your Business. Pray get you in.

I shall be glad if you wou'd not keep my Man from his Business so often.

It wou'd better become you to stay at Home methinks and mind your Master's Business Sirrah.





Why you are a scurvy Fellow for your Pains now▪ If you had stay'd a little longer with your Sauce, in my Opinion I should have been provok'd to have given you both a hearty Trimming. Blessings on him, here comes my young Master, I long to hear what News.





O here's Jerry; you Rogue you I've been in great want of you.



I'm glad you have found me Master, I hope it is not too late to do you some Service  But I long to know how you have cook'd the Doctor




Stay you hereabout with Knabbem within call, and I'll make a Man of you yet Jerry. You shall know all presently.





Here, here, I got another Letter from that plagny Girl. I wish with all my Heart, I could get her transported, and then I should be easy.





Sir there's Mr. Blandford below, desires to speak with you.



I wish the Devil had him, I thought he would be here again, I've a good Mind to deny myself to him, he can be of no Service to me now. I'll see him this once and affront him, that he may not trouble me any more

tell him to walk up.


What can have become of my Lease, it gives me a deal of uneasiness to think I have lost it so strangely.





Doctor how do you, Egad I am devilish tired, but was determin'd to call and give you joy, I don't doubt but you have made a Conquest of the Lady.



Why yes Ned, I think I have settled that Business.



I give you joy, Doctor I give you joy, and now I think I may venture to intreat you to do some little Service for poor Miss Hetty.



I tell you Mr. Blandford again and again, I will have nothing to do with the Huzzy, and I am sorry to tell you that you are become very troublesome yourself, for soliciting in her behalf.



Then I am sorry that I am under the Necessity of telling you, that you are an ungrateful Scoundrel.



You are a very impertinent Fellow Sir, and I desire you wou'd leave my House this Minute, and never dare to set foot in it again.



I will, but not before I have convinc'd you that you are the greatest and most ungrateful Knave on Earth.



I'll make you suffer for this Language, how dare you call me a Knave, Sir?



How dare I? I'll tell you how I dare; because I have found you to be an arrant Knave and Villian,



This is not to be borne. Here Hierapicra, Pestle;

I desire you wou'd take this Scoundrel by the Neck and Heels and turn him out of my House?



What ho; Knabbem, Jerry, hollo'!

secure this Villain, this notorious Thief.




What do you intend to murder me! O Mrs. Buzby, Mrs Buzby!



I was Mrs. Buzby, that thou wouldst have deceiv'd with a Thousand scandalous Falshoods.



Thou Mrs. Buzby, what dost take me for a Fool?



Yes, but a knavish one, let me have been Mrs. Buzby, or no, you made me a Present of 200£. this Afternoon, and here it is.



O Thief! Thief! give me my Note, or I'll have thee hang'd.



Thou art the Thief; this thou gavest me, which I will bestow to them thou owest it to, Miss Danbury.







Yes owe it her.



I say it is false; O I shall go mad.



I say it is true.



Thou art a lying Knave; and I'll have thee hang'd for stealing my Note.



Thou art a most infamous Fiend and I'll have thee hang'd for robbing a Lady of her whole Fortune.



What Lady, thou Murderer, thou Cutpurse, what Lady?







She a Huzzy, she a Fortune.



Yes thou Wretch, and here it is, here is the Lease thou left behind.



My Lease, O thou Thief! hast stole that too?



Look at it, do you know it?




O horrible, horrible! what have I done? what a curst Mistake was this! I thought the Flames had received that, and I have certainly burnt my •ease in its stead.
he endeavours to snatch it out of Blandford's hands.



Hold Caitif, thou hast missed thy Aim, thou shalt never see it more






Doctor you are my Prisoner.




At whose Suit, pray?



Mr. Blandford's, for five thousand Pounds, and three Years Interest.



Mr. Blandford has no Business with her Fortune, or the Will, he only wants to cheat her.



Villain 'tis false, I have Business with 'em both, she is my Wife, my dear and lawful Wife, and you shall find I will use my Authority in her Behalf.



O dreadful, dreadful! O what a Turn is here! I shall die raving mad, my whole Frame is convuls'd already.



Now Doctor, you may see that Justice was better acquainted with you, than you was with her, and tho' you thought you could have flung her, you are deceiv'd, for she is always at an honest Man's Heart, and a Knave's Elbow.



O Mr. Blandford, I am convinc'd, I am convinc'd indeed, but pray on my Knees, I beg you will spare my Life.



And can you wish to live, beneath such a Load of Ignominy? remember what Cruelty thou hast been guilty of, to one of the dearest of Women, and then beg to die; but if the Law will shew thee Mercy, I shall be satisfied; in such a Case I wou'd have you to transport, yourself to South Carolina, or some distant Land, that your Name may never be heard of more; you will stand a greater Chance of making your Fortune there, than my poor innocent Girl, whom thou wanted to force thither, by starving her to it, whilst thou wouldst have basely enjoy'd her Fortune here. O savage Barbarity! the very Thought on't fills me with Vengeance, can such a Wretch as thou art, hope for Mercy, Justice would accuse me of Ingratitude, and forsake me, were I not to punish thee. Take him away, let her be obey'd.



O dear, dear Mr. Blandford.



Out hypocrite, once more I beg you to carry him away.



Now Pestle, you will make your Fortune, you have all the Business to yourself; come, come along, Doctor, I long to get rid of you.

Knaves self-secure, may for a Season thrive,
And like the Fox their roguish Tricks survive,
Till Justice hunts 'em from their latent Holds,
And to the World their Knavery unfolds;
In vain they seek for Peace, in vain they try,
To 'scape unseen, her penetrating Eye.


