
The Curtains fly up, and discover a Mask in Pizalto's House. Pi∣zalto, Lady Pizalta, Lucy; Ludovico talking to Lady Pizal∣ta; Bassino and Aurelia talking together; Florella and other Maskers.
A Spanish Entry.

Lady Pizalta and Lucy advance to the Front of the Stage.




OH! Lucy, I'm undone  
That Stranger there has charm'd my Heart: I feel
The Pow'r of conquering Love; quick, quickly tell
What shall I do to ease this racking Passion? (me,



Nay, Madam, I fancy your Passion has little occasion for Le∣nitives: it blazes so violently at first, 'tis like to be soon extinguish'd.




Dear Lucy, don't trifle with me; but contrive, imagine, do any thing, to bless thy Love-sick Mistress with the sight of that dear man. And as an earnest of further Rewards, here take this  
Gives her a Ring.



Madam, I receive your Commands with much joy,
But your Present with more  
Aside
I'll try what this projecting brain can do, and if you step into the next
Room, I'll soon give you an account of my proceedings.
Exit L. Pizalta.





What have I done, that you pursue me thus!


Why did you e're decree that I should wed
A Wife I now must hate? Why did I see
The bright Aurelia? Why am I thus torn
'Twixt Love and Duty! Oh! what Pangs. what Torments
My soul endures! Oh! my Aurelia!




Lucy pulling Ludovico by the Sleeve.



Sir, Sir, one word with you.



Your business  



May one ask you a civil question, and be resolv'd?



Hum   A civil question, sayst thou? What's it, prithee, a nights lodging? if so, pull off thy, Mask, and I'll resolve thee instantly   But I never strike Bargains in the dark.



I don't know, Sir, but it may tend to that, by way of Proxy, at the long run: But at present my Commission reaches no further than to know your Lodgings; if any Thing comes on't, I fancy 'twill not displease you




aside. Hum   This is but a Pettisogger in Intrigues I find;  
Egad, I'm like to be pretty well employ'd during the Carneval  
Well, considering I am a stranger here, this hit may be a lucky one, and the Lady handsome   Egad, I'll fancy her so at least, were't but for the pleasure of Expectation.



What are you studying, Sir? Are you so long resolving whe∣ther you shall accept a Lady's Favour, or no?



No, faith; Child: I am not over-scrupulous in those matters  
Let her be but Woman, and we shan't disagree   And so thou mayst tell her   There's a direction for thee.
Tears the Superscription of a Letter and gives it her.





Frank and easie, a la mode de Paris   Well, these indifferent
Sparks charm more than all your cringing Pops   Now for my business
  Let me see   I'll to my Lady, she'll write; I'll carry the Letrer, and the Devil will turn Saint, if I don't bring 'em together, and merit a further Recompence.
By Coupling many have their Fortunes made;
I only want Preferment, not my Trade.









All things lye husht in peaceful silence here:
All but Bassino's mind   Oh! happy he
Who lives secure and free from Love's Alarms.


But happier far, who, master of himself,
Ranges abroad without that Cleg, a Wife.
Oh! rigorous Laws impos'd on free-born Man!
On Man, by bounteous Nature first design'd
The Soveraign Lord of all the Universe!
Why must his generous Passion thus be starv'd,
And be confin'd to one alone?
The Woman, whom Heaven sent as a Relief;
To ease the burden of a Tedious Life,
And be enjoy'd when summon'd by desire,
Is now become the Tyrant of our Fates.
Takes up a Letter.
But hold, Bassino! whither does thy Passion
Hurry thy wandering Reason; Let this Letter
Recall the Fugitive, and fix thy Senses
On dutious Love   A Wife, so young, so fair,
So excellent; whose Charms not three months since
Did fire thy Soul; a Wife who, dotes on Thee;
A Wife to whom 'thou sworest eternal love  
By Heaven, I swear again I will be true.
This Thought again restores my peace of mind  
No, charming Wife; no, dear Placentia, no,
Thou shalt not beg in vain: I will return.
Kisses the Letter.
But who comes here   My Friend Armando?






Dear friend, I heard
The conflict of your Passion, and my joys
Are now compleat, since Vertue gains the day.



Yes, dear Armando, the conflict is o're,
And I'm resolv'd to fly to my Plaencta




Cherish that Thought: By Heaven your Resolution
Transports my Soul with joy!
A kind, a verruous Wife waits your Embraces;
A Wife, who like a Turtle mourns the absence
Of her dear Mate. Haste then, my Friend, to drive
That cloud of sorrow which o'recasts her mind,
And, like the Sun, dispeli her gloomy thoughts:



Thanks for your Counsel  
You like a God support my feeble Vertue.
This very morning I'll prepare for Turin,

Where time and absence will deface the image
Of that bewitching Beauty; which now haunts
My tortur'd mind   Yet, first I'll take my leave


Of this fair Charmer   And Heaven grant
That I may see her unconcern'd  



My Lord what d' you mean?
Have you well weigh'd the Danger of this Visit?



What Danger can there be?



Danger! my Lord   Consider well how feeble
Our Reason is against the pow'r of Beauty  



My Resolution's firm; no charm can shake it.



If not her Beauty, fear her Syren Tongue;
Fear her endearing Prayers, her fond Reproaches,
Her tender Sighs, her Vows, her trickling Tears.
Nay   if all these prove vain, fear her Despair,
A Woman, an abandon'd Womans Rage.



Were there more Dangers yet, I'll stand 'em all;
My Honour bids me pay this parting Visit:
My Heart shall have no share in what I'll speak.
Trust me this once, and be your self a witness

Bassino can controul unlawful love  



My Lord, 'tis with Regret I see you go.
May Heaven assist you in this dangerous strife.
Exeunt.





Aurelia's Chamber; She in an Undress with Florella.



No more of that   Cease thy ungrateful suit,

Alonzo is a man I cannot love;
I own he's witty, generous and brave;
Has all the Charms that Nature can bestow
To fire a womans heart   Yet I'm insensible.
His very sight chills all my trembling Spirits;
Therefore, name him no more   I charge thee do not.



Madam, I've done   Yet shall I be permitted
To ask a question? Are you then resolv'd
Ne're to admit a Passion in your breast?



Oh! Dear Florella, press not a Confession,
Which but too well my Eyes themselves disclose.
Alas! I love   I love to such excess,
That tho I know I'm lov'd again, my mind
Is still perplex'd with doubts and jealous Fears.



You love and are belov'd! Then sure you reach
The height of humane bliss, and bounteous Heaven


Can scarce give more   But who's the happy man,
Is it not, Count Bassino?




Oh! Charming Name; there's Musick in that sound!
Yes, Count Bassino is the man I love:
Canst thou now blame my coldness to Alonzo?




Forgive me, Madam, if I dare presume
To speak my sentiments: I must confess

Bassino is a man of excellent Vertue,
His Education at the Court of Savoy

Has still refin'd what he receiv'd from Nature;
His Person too is Charming  
And, what most women court, he has a Title.  
But then consider you are unacquainted
With his Estate, and tho his Equipage
Denotes an ample Fortune, yet we see
Many a stranger here during the Carnival,
Who makes a Figure by industrious Gaming.
As for Alonzo, he was born at Venice,

Of Noble Parents; his Estate, a large one  
Even from his youth you had his amorous wishes,
And as he grew in years his Love encreas'd:
You lov'd him too   Nay, which is more, your Father
Approv'd your mutual Loves, and at his Death
Bequeath'd you to Alonzo.




Oh! my Florella, thou hast rouz'd a thought,
Which will for ever break Aurelia's rest.
I know my Father's tenderness to me
Made him confirm Alonzo's Suit, for then
I lov'd Alonzo  
But were my gentle Father still alive,
I'm sure he would not cross my inclinations.
But, Oh! name not my Father; I cannot bear
The sad remembrance of so great a loss.
Weeps.



But fear you not t'offend his peaceful Ghost,
By breaking with the man he destin'd yours?



'Tis not my fault: and just Heaven must forgive
What Heaven decrees   Yes, 'tis my cruel Stars
That made my heart inconstant to Alonzo.

'Tis with regret I break my plighted Faith;
In vain I strive to check my new born Love,
I cannot, cannot live without Bassino.




Madam, I wish your Passion ne're prove fatal,
But much I fear this inauspicious match.







May Heaven avert th' unlucky Combination
Of our presaging Thoughts For, know I tremble too  
But here's the man that will dispell my fears.




To keep your Resolution.



Yes   I will keep it  



Madam, you will pardon
A morning Visit, when you know what Reasons
Prest me to fix it on this early hour.  
By Letters from the Court I was last night
Commanded to return with speed to Turin,

And thence set out for France, to represent
My Soveraign Leige in solemn Embassy.
This day I must prepare to take my Journey,
Tho 'tis with killing Grief I leave my dear,
My fair Aurelia  








My Lord, 'tis well: But still be on your Guard,
The dreadful shock comes on  



This day be gone! What means my Lord? Oh! Heaven,
My boding Fears are come to pass: I see
A cloud of woes just ready to o rewhelm me.
Is't possible! how can that form divine
Harbour such Treachery! Is then Bassino false?
Say, perjur'd man, how often did you swear
This happy day should make you mine for ever!
How can you now forget your solemn Vows?
Why have I met with this inhumane usage?



Madam, my Prince's orders
Are absolute: My Honour is concern'd.



Must a vain Title be preferr'd to Love?
But no   You never lov'd   'twas base deceit.
Curst, curst dissembling men! Their flattering tongues
Can feign a Passion that will look like Love,
Till by degrees they get us in their power;
Then with bold impudence they draw the Vizor,
And shew the Cheat that mockt our credulous hopes.
Faithless Bassino,

How oft you swore your Love cou'd ne're expire:
How oft you swore one smile of mine had charms,
Even above the Glories of a Crown.
Those were the Oaths I fondly did believe;
Those words convey'd a Poyson to my Heart,


And even now I feel its mighty force:
My Head turns giddy, and my trembling Knees
Betray their sinking Burden  
Alas! I faint, I die  
She faints, Bassino runs and embraces her.



Oh! stay, my Love, my Life, my Soul, my all:
The conflict's past, and I am thine again.
But she is breathless! Oh! ye rigorous Gods,
Give back her Soul, or let my own be plung'd
To dark Elysium   Oh! my dear Aurelia!





Is this your Resolution? By Heaven I blush
To call you Friend. Your Wife, my Lord, remember
Your Wife  



Curse on that name  
Urge me no more to follow your Chimaera's,

Lest you oblige me to break off that Friendship
You blush to own   Oh! my Aurelia!





aside. How sweet is treacherous Vice! how eagerly
Fond man pursues his Ruine!
All Arguments were vain   yet still one way remains,
Which cannot fail, to stop the progress of this impious love.
His Wife by my Direction comes to Venice:

Her sight will soon awake his slumbering virtue,
At least it will retrieve Aurelia's senses.






recovering. Where am I? where's my Lord, my falle Bassino?




Here, here my Soul, my chaming Dear.




thrusts him off. Hold off   Approach me not   urge not my Rage,
Or with this Dagger I'll revenge my wrongs
On thy perfidious Heart   But, Oh! his
Heart's too hard
Even for temper'd Steel   Therefore I'll sheath it here.
Offers at her breast: Bassino snatches the Dagger, and throws himself at her feet in a distracted manner



Oh! hold   forbid it, Gods!
I am the cursed Cause, and I must dye.
Oh! who could bear my Load of mortel Woe?
Ye heavenly Powers bestow the stroke of Grace
And rack Bassino: Let your vengeful Thunder
Now crush my guilty head   Or thou, Oh! Parent Earth
Open thy Bosom, and conceal my crime.
Tears the Ground.



Is he then mine again!
falls down.
Look up, my Lord, my Love, my life!


My dear Bassino! 'Tis Aurelia calls.
Let me for ever fold thee in my Arms,
And beg thou'lt never speak of parting more.
Embraces him.
Both rise, and embrace in an extasy.



Oh! never, never  
The Poles shall meet, the Sun and Moon invert
Their wonted motion e're I part from thee.
I fondly try'd how much I was belov'd,
And since you're true, my Bliss is now compleat.



Was't but a Tryal? Then my Griefs are vanish'd,
And I am lost in Joy   Bassino's mine!
They embrace again.



Thine, thine for ever: And this happy day,
Shall end Aurelia's Fears   Ha  
This day, said I, but where's Placentia then?
My Wife Placentia? Little does she think
What Baseness I intend   Oh! racking thought!
But, 'tis resolv'd, I'll change nor think no more:
I'll try to plunge, and reach the blissful Shore;
And if I sink, yet still this Hope's my Friend,
I'll snatch my Treasure e're my Course I end.
Aside.



My Lord, what makes you pause?



The ravishing thoughts of mighty Joys to come,
Kept me in Extasy and made me dumb;
When on thy snowy Breast dissolv'd I lye,
What Monarch can there be more blest than I?
Bassino leads her off with a languishing air.






Sure, if my Eyes deceive me not, I saw

Aurelia with the Count just parting hence.
Dissolv'd in Love, and languishing they seem'd.
Damnation  
I cannot bear the thought   I'll after 'em.
Alonzo going. Enter Florella.




aside. Ha   Alonzo here! I must prevent a discovery.



Florella here! she comes opportunely   she may inform me of what I yet but fear   Good morrow, Florella: How fares my Love, my dear Aurelia?



Signior, good morrow; you are an early Visitant.



Not for a man in Love; but answer me, How does Aurelia?




Well in health   Only she's now and then in a little fit of Me∣lancholy, such as usually proceeds from timerous doubts about that dreadful state of Matrimony: You know the time draws nigh that gives her to your arms.



By Heaven! 'Tis an Age, there's Six days yet to come.



An Age, indeed, if he knew all.
Aside.



But haste, Florella: lead me to my Dear,
She only can contract that tedious Age
Of lingring pain, and sooth it with her smiles.
Say, is she alone.



Yes   No  
Oh! Heaven! What shall I say?
Aside.
She's, She's a  



Ha   What means this faultering answer?
All's is not right, and my suspicion's true.



Signior, my Lady is not drest, and I shall displease her, in admitting even you without her leave.



Ha   not drest   Take heed you mock me not:
Nor think to blind me with your feign'd Excuse.
For in your guilty Face I read the Truth.
Come, tell me who's with her? is't not Bassino?









Nay, nay, no Study: Lying will not do:
I saw 'em part from hence, just now I saw 'em.
Harkee, sweet Mistress, how long have you practis'd
This Subtle Trade? I find you're much improv'd.
Hell and Damnation   quickly, tell me
What did Bassino give for his admittance?
I'll double the Reward   but she's not drest for me  
Oh! damn'd, damn'd Sex!



Signior, what do you mean?



To see Aurelia   see her instantly  
Nay, by Heaven! I will: All opposition's vain:
For by th'avenging power of Love I swear,
Tho' in Bassino's Arms I'll drag her thence,
Only to cast her from my sight for ever:
Nor shall he live to triumph in my shame.
What tho the Marriage Rites be not perform'd?
Yet I may call her Wife   Her Father gave her to me:
And her own Vows have fixt my heart in hers.
Must then Alonzo be deny'd Admittance,
Under that poor pretence that she's not drest?
Whilest base Bassino lies dissolv'd in pleasures
On her perfidious Breast   Oh! Killing Thought.
She makes my name of Husband infamous
Even before the Priest has joyn'd our Hands.


I'll in, and if th'affront I tamely bear,
May Heaven deny me at my latest Prayer.
Exeunt















Did you call, Sir?



Mountaine, run to Signiora Ronquilla, and tell her I have done with her for ever if she does not send this Evening the hundred Du∣cats she promised to lend me   And Harkee, as you come back acquaint Signiora Cornara I shall be busie to morrow, and desire she will put off her visit till another day.
Knocking at the Door



Sir, there's somebody at the Door.







Sir, a Gentlewoman desires to speak with you.



A Gentlewoman! admit her   Well,
'Tis a great Fatigue to oblige the whole Sex.


Oh! what news from your Lady?



This will inform you Sir.
Gives him a Letter.



Reads. Hum, hum, a Letter   Tho it may seem improper for one of my Sex to make the first steps in an Amour, yet you ought to consider that the rigorous consinement we are under all the Year round, may, in some measure, excuse the Liberties we take during the Carnival. If you have the Courage to meet me, I shall be at four in the afternoon in the Piazza d'Espagna, invi∣sible to all but yourself.   Well, I believe all Women in Venice are wild for Gallants.



Sir, What answer shall I return to my Lady?



Aside. Egad   I am in doubt whether I shall throw my time away on this intrigue or no   Harkee Child, step into the next Chamber, and I'll answer your Message instantly  
Exit Lucy.
Let me see    Monday, at two in the afternoon I am to meet Signiora Belleza at her Nurse's   She's a pretty Rogue, and so I'll go   At three of the Clock Signiora Do∣rinda the Senator's Wife at the Indian house   Pshaw, she's an old acquaintance,   I shan't go   •t half an hour past three the Countess Wrinkle, who presented me with a Gold-hilted Sword   Silly Fool! Does she think I'll bestow one of my Visits on an old shrivel∣led Piece of Antiquity, for a trifling Present, not worth above three∣score Pistoles   At a quarter past four, my Semstress Dorothy Steenkirk, who supplies me with Linnen,   Oh! this Visit may be put off for a new Intrigue   And so Ill acquaint the Messenger.








ACT II. SCENE I.

A Chamber in Signior Pizalta's House.
Enter Lady Pizalta, Lucy.





DId you deliver my Letter to Ludovica, Lucy?




Madam, I did; I found him in his study read∣ing the Lover's Watch, which he swears does not at all agree with his Constitution. He hates injunctions of Love, like those of Pen∣nance: For the one, says he, is no more pleasurable to the Body, than the other beneficial to the Soul.




What a fine Gallant I'm like to have with these Principles! Well,   what did he say to a Summons from a Woman of my Qua∣lity? Did it not make him wish the Time of Assignation were sooner than the appointment in the Letter?



He first hum'd over your Billet; and pausing a while, he de∣sir'd me to stay for an Answer in a next Room; Then coming to me, he ask'd me what Countrywoman you were? For, said he, if she should prove an old Acquaintance, I would use her damnably   But when I had assur'd him you never saw the outside of these Walls, he began to have that desire which all men have to a new Face.




Very well; and what then?



He strait enquir'd whether you were black, brown, fair, old, young, maid, wife or widow? I told him you was a wretched Wife to an old, impotent, rich, covetous, noble Venetian; beautiful, young, generous, and of a fair Complexion. He hugg'd me at these words, seem'd transported with the News, and swore that in intriguss a Wife was most suitable to his Temper; for, said he, there's neither Chil∣dren to Father, nor Honour to repair: and where his Pocket and Liberty are safe, he is contented to venture his Body and Soul.








In short, Madam, he says he has had several Bills of this Na∣ture drawn upon him of late, and how much his stock may be exhausted he knows not; but however he'll meet you, and if he cannot answer your Expectation, he'll give you earnest.




You talk merrily, Girl, I hope you did not tell my name. I should be loath to trust a man of his Character with my Reputation at first dash.



No, Madam, I only told your Quality.




That's well: Oh! Reputation, what several sorts of Slavery do we undergo to preserve Thee! For to be thought Virtuous, we are forced to be constantly railing against Vice, tho our Tongues and Maxims seldom agree.



Alas! Madam, that Pretence is grown too common: for the Men now take it for granted, that a Lady is very near surrendring, when once she holds out that Flag of Defiance.




Well   Men use us very barbarously: They will neither suffer us to be honest, nor allow us to be thought so   Here take this Key, and secure every thing that concerns my Reputation: and if my Husband wakes e're I come back, you may easily find some excuse to prevent his Enquiries; for the Carnival allows us more Li∣berty, than at other times we dare pretend to   I know thy honesty; and will rely upon't.



Yes, indeed, Madam; I am honest at the bottom.




Well, I ll be gone: 'tis about the hour.
Ex. La. Piz.






Goodluck attend you, Madam   Oh! Heavens! here's my Lord   Madam, Madam, Madam   Oh! Lord, what shall I say now she's gone?



Hist, hist, Lucy: Don't, don't, don't call your Lady, for I have a word or two to say to Thee in private, and have waited for this lucky opportunity a great while  



aside. Now Venus be prais'd, I hope he has found some Busi∣ness of his own that may give my Lady an opportunity to mind hers.



Well, Lucy, well,   canst thou guess my Business now?



No, indeed, Sir   But I'm certain, and old Man's Business can't be great.
Aside.




(Gives her a Looking-glass.) Here, Child, this will tell Thee  
Look in't, look in't, I say   Ah! ah! Thou hast a pretty pouting
Lip, a delicate roguish Eye; such an Ogle, such a Cast   Ah!
Rogue   Faith, Thou'rt very pretty: and in short, if any one rival thy Lady, it will be Thee, Lucy   Egad, I have fire in me yet.



aside. O'my Consclence, and little too, I believe: Yet I wish he has enough to serve my Ends, I'll make my Fortune   Lord Sir, what do you mean? I rival my Lady! Heaven forbid, I would not injure so good a Woman for the world  



Pshaw, pshaw   Where's the injury done to her, Child?
Adod, I'll give thee a hundred Crowns.



No injury, say you, my Lord? Why, I wonder you should be so jealous of my Lady, and preach such religious Maxims to her, when your own Principles are quite opposite.



Look ye, Child, a Man may do that, which would look abo∣minable in a Wife   A Woman's Reputation is a nice thing  



'Tis so   And therefore 'tis but reason I should take care of mine.



Prithee, no more of that: thy reputation shall be safe; I'll mar∣ry thee to my Gentleman.



Gentleman   Valet! Faugh   And what good will a hundred Crowns do me, when my Virginity is gone! indeed, if you lov'd me as much as you say, and would make my fortune, (for I should love extreamly to be a Lady) I cannot tell how far you might perswade me   I know my Reputation would be safe in your hands.



Make thy fortune! Why, I've known some of our Nobles marry a Wife with less than a hundred Crowns   But, adod, thou'rt a charm∣ing Girl, and therefore I'll make it a hundred Pistoles   What sayst thou now.



Ah! adod, I must buss thee;  ah, Rogue, methinks I'm a young, lusty, vigorous Fellow again   Thou shall find I am, Girl.



aside. I believe I shall fail you, old Gentleman: Well, my Lord, make it up a thousand Pistoles, and I am yours, else I'll dye' a Maid I'm resolv'd.



A thousand Pistoles! Why, thou'rt the most unconscionable
Wench in Italy: Why 'tis a Price for a Dutchess in some Countries:
Come, come, prithee, be reasonable Lucy.




Reasonable! Why you don't ask a reasonable thing   Look you, you know my mind, I'll not bate a Penny   I'll warrant my Lady will give me two hundred at least for my discovery.
going



aside. Udslife! she won't tell my Wife sure, I'm ruin'd if she does, I'd rather give her two thousand   Hold, hold, Lucy: sweet Lucy, prithee, come back   Faith, thou'rt so charming, I can deny thee nothing   Come, it shall be what thou wilt   Come now Rogue, let's retire to thy Chamber  



Nay, nay, no entring the Premisses, till you have paid the Pur∣chase.



Adod, Thou'rt a Wag   Come in then, and I'll discharge the Debt: Thou art a cunning Gipsy.
Exit Pizal.




You shall have reason to say so e're I have done with you, old Gentleman   For I am resolv'd to show you a Trick, and preserve my Verrue.
Aside.
For did base Men within my Power fall,
T' avenge my injur'd Sex, I'd jilt 'em all.
And would but Women follow my advice,
They should be glad at last to pay our Price.
Exit Lucy.








Not come yet! Ungrateful Man! must a
Woman of my Quality wait?
How have we lost our Pow'r since the Creation?
When the whole World had but one single Lord,
Whom every Creature readily obey'd?
Yet he, that mighty he, caught with a smile,
Flew to th' embraces of the tempting Fair.
But now each puny Sinner dares to cross
A Woman's inclinations  


Oh! are you come, Signior? I suppose you have
Some other Assignation, that made you miss
My hour   Pursue it pray   I'll not interrupt you   Your
Servant  
Going.
I hope he'll not take me at my word.
Aside.



Nay, nay, Signiora, Why this Passion?
Stops her.
You sent me a Challenge, and I like a man of Courage, am come to answer it   Pray don't let a quarter of an hour break squares  
I own 'twas a Fault to make a Lady wait; but Friends, Madam, Friends, and good Wine are the Devil   Come, I'll make you amends.




Friends and good Wine! I suppose those Friends were fe∣male ones  



No, faith: You shall judge of that   But suppose they were   Why should you be angry that I did not fly with the desir'd haste, as long as I am come time enough to give you satisfaction   Besides, I han't seen your face yet, and for ought I know, it mayn't reward my Compliment in coming now   Prithee, Child, unmask, and then I'll tell thee more of my mind.



The Devil take this fellow   and yet methinks I love him for his indifferency   aside] You talk as if you were unskill'd in the Art of Love: Don't you know that Expectation feeds more than twenty tasted Pleasures?



Hum   some sort of Fops it may: But I'm none of those   I never give my opinion of a Dish till I've tasted Neither do I care to dine often on one sort of Meat without changing the Sauce   But when that Cloud's withdrawn, how long I shall keep my Resolution I know not.



Say you so! Why then the only way to preserve your Appe∣tite is to feed you slenderly: or only let you see the food, but not to taste.



Faith, Madam, I'm no Cameleon, but Flesh and Blood  


Therefore these Prescriptions are of no use   One sight of that dear
Charming Face of yours, would be more obliging to your humble Ser∣vant.



unmasks. Well, Sir, what think you? is there any thing in this Face worth your regard?







Hold, hold! Been't so lavish   a sparing Gamester is the likeliest to keep in stock   whilst a profuse hand at one cast throws all he has away.



To fear, that were to doubt your Charms, in which a Lover is sure to find constant supplies •   But we lose time   Let's retire to my Lodgings, where I'll give thee the best proofs of my Love I can.




aside. Well! He's a charming Fellow   Oh! how happy are VVives in France and England, where such as he swarm!



Come, Madam, come   VVhy what do you mean by this delay? Consider I'm a man, a mortal, wishing, amorous man  




And consider I'm a Woman  



aside. Ay, ay: That I know: At least I hope to find you such   or I would not be in such haste  
Aside.




And have a Reputation to preserve.



Oh! Lord, what a damn'd Turn's here? Reputation, say you?
Egad, I find all Women make pretence to that mysterious Word
aside.
What! Are not you married, Madam?








Why then you have a Reputation to preserve   that's all.




All, Sir, Yes, and all in all to me   Do you consider what Country you're in, Sir?



Yes, Faith, Madam: and what constitution I am of too. I know Murder is as venial a Sin here, as Adultery is in some Countries; And I am too apprehensive of my mortal Part not to avoid Danger   Therefore, Madam, You have an infallible security   if I should be∣tray You, I bring my self into jeopardy, and of all Pleasures Self-Pre∣servation is the dearest,




A very open Speaker, I vow.



Ay, Madam, that's best   Hang your creeping, cringing, whining, sighing, dying, lying Lovers   Pough! Their Flames are not more durable than mine, tho they make more noise in the blaze



Hang the whining way of wooing.
Loving was design d a sport.




aside. The Duce take me if this fellow has not charm'd me strangely   Well, the Carn val is almost over, and then must I be shut up like a Nun again   Hey! Hoa! This time will be so short  



Let's make the better use on't then, my Dear. We will con∣sider when we have nothing else to do, but at present there's a matter of the greatest moment which I must impart to you   Therefore, come dear Rogue, come  




(Looking on her Watch.) Hold   I have out-staid my time, and must return home instantly to prevent discoveries.



Faith, Madam, this is not fair   To raise a man's Expectation, and then disappoint him! VVould you be serv'd so your self now?




I'll endeavour to disingage my self from my jealous Husband, and contrive another meeting.



But will you be sure to meet me again?




I give you may Hand as a Pledge  




kisses her. And I this kiss in return   Adieu, my Charmer.











Well, Sir, Your Business  



It is to tell you  
You are a Villain  







And that as such
Iought to have treated you before the Face
Of false Aurelia   But I scorn to follow
The barbarous custom of my Native Country.
I seek with Honour to revenge my wrongs;
Therefore, Sir, draw  



This Action speaks you Noble   be likewise Just,
And let me know the cause that moves your Anger.
By Heaven I'd rather call you still my Friend,
Than be your Enemy   Yet, if I wrong'd you,
I'll give you satisfaction  



Trifler away   Too well Thou knowst the cause;
And now wouldst sooth my wrongs with Flattery.
But my Resolve is fixt as Heaven's Decrees:
And one of us must fall   Let the Surviver
Dispose of that base, false, perjur'd Aurelia;

As both his Love and Honour shall direct.
If my propitious Stars desend my Life,
You shall not die alone   Th' adulterous Fair
Shall bear you company   Now, Draw.




One moment hold I must unfold this Riddle:
Adulterous Fair, say you?



Yes: She's my Wife.



Ha   your Wife!
Sure there's a curse intail'd upon that name.
Aside.
What! Your real Wife?



If the Command of an expiring Father
And her own Vows can make her mine, she's so:
Indeed the Marriage Rites are yet to come,
Which slily she delay'd these two Months past,
On slight Pretence of finishing the time
Of Mourning for her Father   But 'tis plain.
I was a Property to your base Love:
And only design'd to fill up your Place,
When surfeited you should return to Turin.

Hell   Furies! Draw, or in my just Revenge,
I'll pin you to the Earth  





Yes, I will draw   But e're the fatal stroke
Is'past recal, I swear Aurelia's Virtue,
Is clear and spotless like Diana's self:
Nor was I prompted on this early visit,
But with design to take my last Farewel:
Having last night received my Prince's Orders
To haste to Turin   Therefore if I fall,
I hope she'll meet with Mercy   Now come on.



Hold, hold, My Lord; Oh! could I credit this,
I would ask Pardon, and entreat your Friendship.



'Tis true, upon my Honour  
But if you doubt my words, I'm ready  
Tho' I have reason to decline this Combate,
At least at present   Oh! Placentia!


Oh! my Placentia! why should I abuse Thee?



My Lord you seem disturb'd  





Should I acquaint you with my wretched Fate,
You'd find that life it self is grown a Burden,
I cannot bear, since I can ne're be happy.
But 'tis a Story that must n'ere be told,
Let it suffice to settle your repose,
That Turin holds the cause of my misfortunes.



Then I am happy:
Aside.
My Lord, I wish 'twere in my Power to serve you,
I•d do it as a Friend   



Generous Sir, I thank you;
As far as I am capable, I am Alonzo's.


Oh! Force of treacherous Love! to gain my end,
I wrong a Wife, a Mistress, and a Friend.
Exit Bassino.













OH! how I tremble for my dear Bassino?

Haste, fly Florella, bring me news he lives,
Or else expect to see thy Mistress die.



Madam be patient  
Consult your Reputation, and consider
That the least noise you make on this occasion,
Reflects upon your Virtue  



Away, away   Talk not of Reputation.
When Lov's in t'other scale   But what can shock my Reputation.
Heaven's my Witness I ne're lodg'd a Thought,
For Count Bassino that could wrong my Virtue.
Perhaps the Gods pursue me with their Hatred,
Because I break my Promise to Alonzo.

But then, why did they not secure me his?
Why must weak mortals be expos'd to Passions,
Which are not in our Power to subdue,
And yet account for what they prompt us to?
But I will think no more   Almighty Love,
Now hear my last Resolve   if angry Heaven
Refus'd to guard my dear Bassino's Life,

Aurelia too shall fall, and leave his Murderer
Accurst for ever  





Oh! Heaven! where will this end?





The Gods have sent him to decide my Fate.
How now! how dare you meet my angry view?
Or think I'll e're forgive the base affront,
This very day you offer'd to my Fame?



Just Heaven refuses not a Penitent,
Therefore I cannot think that fair Aurelia



Whose Charms are all divine, should fail in Goodness.
Oh! Let my Love atone for my rash Deed:
The Count and I are Friends, why should Aurelia be more severe?



He lives! blest News!
Aside.
Do then rash Actions speak your Love to me?
Must I in publick bear with your insults
Before I'm yours? what must I then expect
When the strict Ties of Marriage shall confirm
Your jealous Passions?
No, you have taught me to avoid the shelf,
I was just running on   know base Alonzo,

That from this moment I resume my Freedom,
I disingage you from your former Vows,
And will henceforth be Mistress of my self.





This sudden Coldness has another Spring,
Than my rash Carriage   Oh! my jealous Fears,
But I'm resolv'd to trace her winding Thoughts,
And fetch the secret forth  
Madam, I hope you do but try my Love:
I cannot think Aurelia would be false.
Besides, you can't recal what's registred in Heaven.



Then stay till we come there   There you'll have witness.




Oh! Faithless, perjur'd Woman canst thou think,
Upon thy self and bid me call my Witness?
Yes, you are mine   By all the Gods, you are.
And shall there be a Power on this side Heaven,
To stop my Bliss? No   by my Love I swear.
I now can guess at your perfidious meaning,
And tho that cowardly Villain slily thought
To blind me with a Tale his guilt had fram'd,
'Tis plain he is your Minion   yet wants Courage
To own his Treachery.




How dare you treat me thus?
Oh! for the look of a fierce Basilisk,
To punish this audacious insolence!



Marry thee! No   by Heavens, I had rather
Be rackt to Death   And for thy vile injustice
None shall enjoy thee, while this sword is mine. Lays hold on his Sword.

Nor shall your Lover scape to serve your lust,
Till he has forc'd a Passage thro this Breast. Points to his Breast.







Oh! cruel Man! Are not you then contented


To wreak your Spite on poor Aurelia?

Why must your Rage involve the innocent?
Oh! Let me fall your Passion's Sacrifice;
Let my Blood wash the stain you fix on me,
But do not blast your Name with base Revenge.  



By Heaven! she dotes on him! Oh! Cunning Woman?
But this Pretence won't serve to save his Life;
I'll not be caught again   No, Syren No:

Bassino dies   Nor will I leave to Fortune
The vengeful stroke, but take a safer way.





What words shall I invent to sooth his Rage,
And save my dear Bassino? Oh! Alonzo

My once lov'd Dear, will you not hear me speak?
Oh! I conjure you by our plighted Love's,
Whose purity outshone the Stars above,
Hear me this Time, then use me as you please.









So much as in her thoughts did wrong Alonzo

May sudden Death pursue her purjur'd steps:
Heaven forgive
Aside.
The Perjury, since I've no other way
To Save Bassino's Life  




Aurelia. rise  
Raising her.
Oh! could I credit this, how happy were Alonzo!

But something tells me that thou art forsworn;
And yet thou seemst as fair as Truth itself:
How is it possible that Guilt can look
With so a divine a Face?



Oh kill me instantly: kill me, I beg you, kill me;
Let me not linger out an Age in pain;
For such is every Moment of your Anger;
I cannot bear to to live in your displeasure.



By Heaven she's true  
Hence frivolous fears be gone - she's only mine.
Come to my Breast, my bright Aurelia, come.
Embraces her.
To that soft shrine that holds that Sacred image,
Which triemphs o're my soul, and grasps it all.
I knew my boundless Treasure, and the Thought
Of losing thee had rais'd my love to Madness.
But now I'm calm   No more shall that fierce Passion,
Rude Jealousy disturb my peaceful mind.
Do but forgive the Faults my Rage committed,
And you will find our Loves will grow the purer;


Just as the Sky looks brighter when the storm
Is chas'd away, and Phaebus smiles again.



Since both have been to blame, let it suffice,
We both repent, and will offend no more.




I'll ne're suspect you more   Only resolve me this  









Admitted to your View, and I denied?



He came to take his leave, and 'thad been rude.
Not to admit a man of his high Birth
On this occasion: Nor was you denied,
But thro my Woman's Fears of your suspicions.
She thought you would misconstrue the Count's Visit,
As you have really done   I blam'd her for it
Indeed, this is the Truth   I hope Alonzo

Believes me now  



Believe Thee! Yes   As willingly as Martyrs
A State of endless Joy.
I will so love my Dear, that all Mankind
Shall look with envy on our mutual bliss.
I'm like a Merchant tost at Sea by storms,
Who his last Course with Pray'ts and Toil performs.
And the rich Cargo safely brought on shore,
He hugs it thus, and vows to part no more.
(embraces her)




aside. So in a flowry Mead a Serpent lurks,
And the unwary Traveller surprizes,
Where he suspects least danger! Cursed Cheat.
Aside.
Oh! that I could disclose the fatal story!
But it must never out   I beg Alonzo,

You'd leave me for a while, and rest secure,
You have my Love  



Then the bright Sun in all his circling Turn,
Cannot behold a man more truly happy:
What you command I readily obey.
Farewel, my dear.





Where art thou now, Aurelia?

How wilt thou scape that dreadful Precipice,
On which thou art hurried on by thy fatal Passion?
With conscious horror I deceiv'd Alonzo,

I hate this base Treachery, but 'twas unavoidable:
The truth had been more fatal  
More fatal?   No   For I must never Wed
My dear Bassino whilst Alonzo lives.


Oh! the distracting thought! what shall I do?
Why! dye Aurelia: That's the only way,
To keep thy vows to both   Ha   dye, said I,
But whither then? who knows what Punishment,
Just Heav'n prepares for guilty Souls like mine.
But I must think no more, lest I grow mad with thought.
If there's a Power that guards us here below,
Oh I look with pltying eyes on poor Aurelia:

Appease the Tumults of my anxious Fear,
And load me with no more than I can bear.









Well, Thou'rt an admitable Girl! What would half the La∣dies in Venice give for such a Servant?



aside. Truly, you have reason to say so, for 'tis not the first In∣trigue I have manag'd for you   Oh! dear Madam, your Ladyship does me too much honour   But how do you like your new Servant, Madam?




Oh! above all men living, Lucy: He has the most bewitch∣ing Conversation I ever met with   Say, is there no way to contrive a second meeting? For I'm impatient till I see the dear man again   The end of the Carnival draws near, which is indeed the end of Life to me: for then must I be coopt up with age: condemn'd to an eternal coughing, spitting, snoring and ill nature   Then let me make the best of life   since Hell cannot have a worse plague in store than I have felt already.



Indeed, Madam, I pity you: and wish 'twere in my Power to free you from this old, wither'd log, but tho that's impossible, yet I may do you some little services to make life's tedious journey pleasant   Let me see, I have it   What would you say now, Madam, if I should contrive a way to have your Lover in your own Chamber?




That were worth a King's Revenue   Speak, quickly, how, how, good Lucy?



Why, thus: He shall put on my Cloaths, and in my place at∣tend you.




Rare contrivance; but my Husband, Lucy?




Oh! let me alone, Madam, to manage him: He is defective in sight, you know; and not mistrusting any thing, will not be over curi∣ous: But if he should, I have a way to bring you off   My life on't   This Plot may be of use to my design, I'll manage it with care.
Aside




Oh! The Pleasure of hearing my Husband lie coughing, and calling me to Bed: and my answering him, I'm coming, Dear: and
  23
while he imagines me in the next Room undressing, I'm happy in the Arms of my Ludovico. Certainly there's as much satisfaction in deceiv∣ing a dull jealous Husband, as in getting a new Gallant: Were it not grown so common   Each Tradesman's Wife must have her Gallant too   and sometimes makes a Journey man of the Apprentic: e're his Indentures be half out   'Tis an unsufferable Fault that Quality can have no Pleasure above the Vulgar, except it be in paying their deb s. Well, dear Lucy, I admire thy contrivance   Ab ut it instantly  




aside. About it instantly! is that all? I must have my t'other Fee sir?
  I will, Madam; and you may expect your Lover instantly. But,
Madam, what's to be done with your Brocade Night Gown you tore last night? it can ne're be mended handsomely.




Nothing to be done without a Bribe I find, in Love as well as Law   Well Lucy, if you manage this intrigue with care and secresie the Gown is yours.
Enter Page.



Madam, my Lord desires to speak with you.



Madam, I'll go about your business: Your Ladyship's very hum∣ble servant.






Tell him I'm coming  
Exit. Page.
Now by way of Mortification must I go entertain my old, jealous Hus∣band.
Exit Lady Pizalta.








Give me but Wine, that Liquor of Life,
And a Girl that is wholesome and clean,
Two or three Friends, but the Devil a Wife,
And I'd not change state with a King.





What singing, Signior! Well, you're a pleasant Gentleman  



Ah! My little female Mercury, what message bringst Thou?
Ha   will thy Lady bless me with another sight   Ha   How  
When? where? I am all in a Flame.



Come along with me, Sir, I'll help you to an Extinguisher presently.



If Thou meanest thy Lady with all my heart   But I can tell Thee, she'll rather prove Oyl, than what you speak of   But, say, where am I to see my lovely Charmer?



In her Chamber  



Good! But how the Devil can that be done?



Nay, without the help of a Conjurer, I assure you: if you dare take me for your Pilot, I'll warrant you success in your Voyage   I'll set you safe in the Island of Love; 'tis your business to improve the Soil.



I warrant Thee, Girl; do you but bring me there once, and if I play not my part, may I never more know the pleasure of an intrigue



Which, if I mistake not, is the greatest curse can fall on you  
Well, you must suffer a small Metamorphosis: What think you of per∣sonating me a little? That is, dressing in my Cloaths, and waiting on your Mistress in her Bed-chamber   Ha  



Egad, I'm afraid I shall make but an awkward Chamber-maid.
I'm undisciplin'd in Dressing a Lady's head  



Oh! Sir, your Commission won't reach so high as the head: I believe my Lady will excuse little matters: You can undress, I suppose



Oh! The best and the quickest of any man in Venice. Buta Pox on't   Canst find no other way?   I, I, I   I like Petticoats in their proper Places, but I don't care to have my Legs in 'em.



And so you resolve against it! Ha  



No, not absolutely resolve, Child: But   a  







Nothing   I will follow thy Directions, what ever comes on't
Now lead the way: for nothing sutes better with my Humour than a Friend, a Bottle, a new Mistress, and a Convenient Place.










Well   My Wife's a fine Woman, a very fine Woman! But a Pox she's a Wife still, and this young Jade runs in my head plaguly: Well   here 'tis under my hand; a Thousand Pistoles   A great samm for a Maidenhead, as Maidenheads go now a-days   Ah had I been young now,
A Fiddle and a Treat had bore the Prize away,
But when we old Fools dote, they make us pay.


Oh! are you come! Here, here, Lucy: Here's a Fortune for thee worth twenty Maidenheads, adod! I have not so much money by me at pre∣sent, but there's security.
Gives her the Rond.



Your Lordships Bond's sufficient   Well, but that I am satis∣fied my Reputation is safe with your Lordship, or twice the summ should not have prevailed   Go to my Chamber, my Lord, I'll but step and see if my Lady wants any thing, and I'll be with you instantly.



You won't stay, Lucy? Ah Girl, buss thy Ladys Chucky; now do, now  



Oh! Lord! not here, we shall be discovered.



Will, thou art a cunning sinner: make hast, Lucy, dost hear?





You're in mighty haste, old Gentleman! but I shall deceive you,
My end is gain'd; I have my Fortune made,
Man has not me, but I have man betray'd.





ACT IV. SCENE I.
SCENE I. Armando's Lodgings.







Thou more than Friend to the distress'd Placentia!

Say, how shall I regain my lost Bassino,

My false, perfidious Husband?
Weeps.



Dear Madam, moderate your sorrow:
Reserve those Tears to move Bassino's heart,
Mine is all Pity: You may rest secure
Of all the Arguments a Friend can use
To bring him back to your endearing Arms.
Vertue's not quite extinguish'd in his Breast,
Therefore I hope the sight of bright Placentia

Will rouze his slumbring Reason  





Oh! wretched woman! Oh! that I had dy'd
E're I had known him false: Then I were happy:
And, tho contented with his second choice,
He with a pitying sigh perhaps had grac'd
My memory  
Oh! all ye Powers that Vertuous Love inspire,
Assist me now: inform my vocal Organs
With Angel Eloquence, such as can melt
His heart of Flint, and move his former kindness.


Of both our woes   Yes, that happy Charmer,
That Rival of my Love shall surely die.



Doubt not of the success: What Heart of Steel
Could e're resist such Beauty drest in Tears?
Enter a Servant.



Sir, Count Bassino enquires if you are within.



Oh! Heavens! how I tremble!



Lucky opportunity   shew him up.
Madam, be pleas'd to step into that Closer,
Till I can sound the utmost of his Thoughts,
And shew him naked to your secret view.
Then when he's in the height of impious Passion,
You like a Bolt from Heav'n shall rush on him,
And strike his Folly dumb.



Almighty Powers, whose Providential Care
Is ever kind to vertuous innocence,
Oh! help me now in this Extremity.









How does my Friend Armando?




My Lord, Armando's well,
And wishes you were so.



Dost thou discover ought that gives thee cause
To doubt I am not well? indeed, I think
I am in perfect health  



My Lord, I should be glad
To find that Fever of your mind abated
In which I left you last  




aside. I must dissemble now,
Else I'll ne're gain my ends   My dear Armando,

That Fever, thou speakest of, is now succeeded
By a cold Ague fit: The bare Remembrance
Of my unlawful Passion shakes my soul.



such sudden Cures have often prov'd pernicious,
And we have reason to suspect a wound
Too quickly heal'd  



Not when thou knowest what Balsom I applied.



There's scarce a Balm for the deep wounds of love,
Besides Possession, and I cannot think
You have enjoy'd Aurelia.




I swear I have not  
But I enjoy my Reason: my free Reason:
And who possesses that, can never cherish
A thought against himself: For such I call
Whatsoever keeps me from my lawful Wife,
My dear Placentia, to whose Arms I'll fly
With all the eager haste of a fond Bridegroom.
There I shall revel in the virtuous Pleasures
Of a chaste Bed   Oh! my Friend Armando!

My dear Placentia's Friend! Canst Thou forgive?
Indeed, I'm penitent and will offend no more.



My Lord, these are the words you spoke before:
What greater Reason have I now to think
You'll keep your promise?



Pride, Honour, Justice are come to my Aid,
And Love too feeble to withstand 'em all,
Has left the Field to my victorious Reason.
Pride, with the prospect of my future greatness,
Allures me to return with speed to Turin.

T' obey my Princes Orders.
Honour and Justice tell me I'm Placentia's,

And that Aurelia is Alonzo's Bride.
To him she gave her Virgin Vows: Nay, more,


To him her dying Father did bequeath her;
He loves her too, and shall not be depriv'd.
My Passion is subdu'd, and I'm resolv'd
My self to give Aurelia to Alonzo.




If this be true, then you are my Friend again:
But how came you to learn Aurelia's






I have it from him self, who an hour since,
With eager Fury sought to 'venge on me
His injur'd Love, and ohallenged me to fight:
I chose with Justice to defend my Life,
And quit Aurelia, rather than to vanquish in such a Cause   Alonzo strait embrac'd me,
Call'd me his Friend, and vow'd I should not go,
Till I had seen him joyn'd in solemn Marriage
With bright Aurelia   This I readily granted.
Canst thou believe me true?



My Lord, I do believe you  
And am o're joy'd to hear your Resolution:
By Heaven! There's more Glory in subduing
Our wild desires, than an embattled Foe.
Now do I wish his Wife had never come.
Aside.




Armando, Thou'rt my Friend, and on that score
I must desire you to repair to Turin,

With all the speed you can, to bear these Letters
To our great Prince: and beg he will excuse
My stay for three days more   And here this Letter
Bear to Placentia   speak to her the kindest
The softest things thy fancy can suggest.
I shall make good thy promise  
My dear Placentia! Oh! that she were here
Panting and warm within these longing Arms!
'Tis a long Age since I did see her last!
But come, my Friend, you must this hour set forward.



With all my Heart: But 'twill not be amiss
Before I go to fix the Victory
Which conquering Virtue in your Breast has gain'd;
And if what you pretend be real Truth,
I have a welcome present for Bassino.

Madam, come forth  





What do I see! My Wife! This was a lucky Plot:
Aside.
Hypocrisy did ne're befriend me more. H  
This was not like a Friend   why should Armando

Disturb her soft Tranquility of mind,
And give her ocular Proofs of my Dissoyalty?


Oh! my Placentia! my beloved Wife! Embraces her.

Oh! That I should e're think to wrong my Dear!



My Lord, waste not a sigh on my account:
My Joys are infinite since you are mine,
And what is past I easily forget.
Nay, let me beg for Pardon: for I know
I have offended you in coming hither.
I should have waited this Return of Virtue:
Or if abandon'd, silently have mourn'd
My loss, without upbraiding my lov'd Lord.
All this I should have done, but mighty Love,
Too powerful for Duty to withstand,
Guided my steps to Venice  
In hopes my presence would retrieve your Heart.



Gods! That this Woman were Aurelia!


Thou wonder of thy Sex! Thou best of Women!
I blush to think that thou hast heard my Folly:
Yet since your love cancels your just camplaints,
You make me doubly blest: and I'll reward
This excellent Goodness with eternal Fondness.
Oh! that thou hadst been here! Not all the Beauties
That Venice holds could have dive ted me,
No, not one moment from my dear Placentia.

Long absence is the Bane of new born Love,
But Fate shall ne're have power to part us more.



Oh! My dear Lord, your Goodness is too great:
And I'm o're-paid for all my sorrows past.

Armando, say, is not he wondrous kind?



Madam, I told you Virtue
Was struggling in his Breast, and that it might
O'recome his Vicious Love, I thought your presence
Was requisite   And now, My Lord, I hope
You will forgive me, since all the Endeavours
I us'd before had been in vain. I once
Design'd to let Aurelia know you. Marriage.
But then perhaps she would not have believ'd me:
Let this plead my Excuse in sending for Placentia.





I must not let him see I am concern'd.
Aside.
I know 'twas Friendship all, well meaning Friendship:
Fonly am to blame: But I'll retrieve
My Credit in your Heart, and still deserve
The Name of Friend   And thou the best of Wives,
Shalt ne're have cause to doubt my constant Love.



Oh! My Bassino! This Excess of kindness.


Exalts me o're all mortals, if you're true
There's not a blast within the Power of Fortune
Can shock my Happiness.



Thou shalt ne're find me False, I swear Thou shalt not.
Oh! that I could engage
She would return to Turin with Armando;


For if she stays I never can enjoy
My bright Aurelia, and by Heaven I will,
Altho ten thousand lives should pay the Purchase.



My Lord, you seem disturb'd.




You can't appear in Venice with a Train
That may bespeak the Rank you hold in Savoy.





to Armando. Oh! Armando!

He is so kind, I wish I ne're had come!
What if I offer to return with you?



Madma, you will do well:
For I my self cannot suspect him now:



My Lord, let not my Presence here disturb you,
I doubt your Love no more, and to convince you,
I will go back before 'tis known I'm here.
Besides, 'tis fit I should prepare all things
To welcom you at home.





Fortune I thank thee: Would my Dear then leave me
So very soon? Alas! 'twill be an Age
E're I return to Turin: Three long days;
No, my Dear, no; I will not part from thee,
At least this night, my Love  



Will then Armando stay?



No, my best Hopes, he instantly departs
With Letters to my Prince.



Then suffer me to go this very moment.
Three days will soon be o're, and you're return,
Shall make me fully blest   if I should stay
'Twould look like base distrust, and I can't think

Bassino would be false  




aside. Oh! Heaven! that I were not!



Indeed, my Lord, I think your truly happy.
Scarce does an Age produce so good a Wife.



Oh! that I could reward this wondrous Goodness!



My Lord, what makes you sigh?



To part from thee: But since 'tis your desire
It shall be so. Armando, to thy charge
I here commit the Treasure of my Soul,


Takecare of her, and think that on her safety
My Life depends.



My Lord, I hope you do not doubt my care.



Dear Friend, I do not  
May Heavens Blessings still attend my Love,
Embraces, & goes to lead her off.
My dear Placentia.




As many more guard my Bassino.





aside. A sudden horror seizes all my Limbs:
I tremble at the thought of this base Deed  
Pulls out his Hankerchief and drops a Letter, which Armando takes up.
Ha   Tears uncall'd for bath my guilty Eyes  
Gods! either give me virtue to withstand
This impious Love, or dourage to pursue it
Without Remorse: for I'm but half a Villain.





Opens the Letter. A Letter!   And to Aurelia! Now curiosity prompts me to know the subject   What's here?
Reads. I have dispatch'd Armando to the Court of Savoy, and found pre∣tence to stay behind  
False, treacherous Man!
This night I give a Mask at my Lodgings, which, I hope will divert Alonzo till the Priest has joyned our hands; and while all the Company are engaged in mirth, I'll steal to the dear Arms of my Divine Aurelia.
Oh! Villain, Villain! Monstrous Villain!
Oh! Poor Placentia! But I will prevent
His Policy, and break his wicked Measures.










Why, what makes this young Jade stay so long? Adod, This is to pay before-hand   Ha   Methinks I hear a laughing and giggling in my Wife's Apartment; I must know whence their Mirth proceeds. Ho! Here's Lucy coming   Harkee you, pray, why did you make me wait so long? Nay, I'm resolved you than't scape me now    Oh! Benedicite! What have we here? A man dilguis'd in my Wife's Chamber! And I unarm'd! Oh! Curst Minute!   Speak, Thou wicked Prophet, Thou Son of Ini∣quity, what can est Thou here for? Ha   Thou Priest of Baal, to offer Sacrifices on the Altar of my Wife? Oh! My head! My Hores weigh it down to the ground already   Within there, bring me my Sword and Pisto's.



A Pox on all Petticoats   What a Devil shall I say now! Oh! for a Sword! That would be of more use to me now than my Tengue.
Enter Lady Pizilta.




Oh! Thou wicked Salacious Woman!



What ails my dear Chucky? Why dost Thou call for Arms, Dealy



To cut down that vile Creeper, which over-runs thy Garden of Virtue  




aside. Now Impudence assist me.
Ah!   Heavens! What's here? A man in disguise? A Thief it must be
  Raise the Servants   Oh Heaven! we might have had all our
Throats cut in our Beds   Now for Lucy, for I am at a loss to come off
aside.



No, no, I warrant, you know he is more gentle in Bed.



aside. Oh! the Devil, what does she mean? Death, Hell and Furies! if I come off now, catch me at this sport again and hang me  





Oh! are you there, Mistress? how came this man here in your Cloaths? ha   Gentlewoman  



aside. How confidently she asks the question, poor Lady! as if she knew nothing of it! Now must I bring her off  
For Reasons you must not know, Madam.



Ah! Thou wicked pair of Bellows to blow the Fire of Iniquity!
Why thou art the very Casement thro which thy Mistress sucks the Air of Abomination   Tell me, I say, how he came here, and for what   and be sure it be a substantial Lie, or 'twill not pass.




aside. All my hopes are in her impudence.



Harkee, Sir, one word with you   Do you remem∣ber our agreement to night?



Why, what of that? ha  



Then imagine what I design'd that Gentleman for: I'm honest, Sir, that's all  



I'm honest, Sir, that's all   Mimicking her tone.




Honest! with a Pox   What! and so you honestly provided a Companion for my Wife in my absence   ha  



No, Sir, I design'd him for your Companion in my absence  
This is the business he was drest for: Therefore no more words, but be∣lieve my Lady honest, or all shall out.



Oh! The Devil! This shan't pass, Hussy   Do you think I'll be Cuckol'd, jilted, bubbled, and let it pass for a Christmas Gambol.
Adod give me my Bond again, or   or  
Holds up his Gane.



No   hold there, Sir: Women and Lawyers ne're refund a Fee:
But 'tis your best way to be patient now, I'll not take Blows.



Why, all this whispering? why mayn't I know the business?



I am mistaken if you have not known too much Business already:
But I am tight enough serv'd   I had more ground before than I could manage; I had no need of my Neighbour's.



Right, my Lord; Ground that lies fallow will breed Weeds in time: but yours is clear yer.



D•mn your Jests: I shall expect a better account, do you hear? I'll find a Servant to see you out of doors to Ludovico.
Exeunt Pizalta and Lady.



Well, this was an admirable Lift at a pinch   She has brought me off now   And if e're they catch me at this Musick again, I'll give 'em leave to make an Italian Singer of me   No more intrigues in Disguise   if it had not been for the Waiting-woman now, I might have been hang'd for a thief.



What all amort, Signior, No courage lest?



Faith, not much   I think I have lost my Manhood with my Breeches   This transformation may suit with Gods, but not with Mortals of my Humour   Come, prithee, good Mistress Lucy, help me to my proper shape again, for tho I have a natural inclination to Petti∣coats, I hate'em upon my own Back.. A Flourish of Musick within.



Hark! I hear Count Bassino's Musick: He gives a Mask to night, you are already drest for Masquerade, won't you stay and take a Dance?



Egad, I'd rather dance a jig with Thee elsewhere:
Faith Thou'rt a pretty Girl   And hast a good deal of wit too  
But then pox on't Thou'rt honest, Thou sayest thou cannot swallow a
Pill except 'tis gilded o're with Matrimony.



Hum   And that turns your Stomach I warrant.



Why, Ay: Faith my Stomach is damn'd squeamish in these Matters: Yet, Egad if I could find one with half as much Money as Thou hast. Wit and Beauty, I'd Marry, and live honest.



That is, you'd marry her Money  



One with the other, Child: There's no living upon Love thou knowest   Tho Faith I could Love well enough too.



Well, suppose I help you to a Lady with a round summ, you'd keep your word and marry her?



I am a Gentleman, I scorn to break my word.



Well, Sir, come to the Mask, and I'll engage you a Mistress, if you are not over-curious.



With all my Heart:
I'm now resolv'd to leave this Wenching-Trade.
For no Man's safe upon a Hackney Jade:
Th'Allay of danger makes the Pleasure Pain,
A Virtuous Wise will always be the same.
Exeunt






A Mask in Bassino Lodging. Bassino, Alonzo, Armando in a disguise; Placentia in Man's Cloaths; Signior Pizalto, Lady Pizalta, Lucy, &c. An Entry of three Men, and three Women of several Nations.


I Can't imagine where I dropt my Letter:
Pray Heaven it be where none can ever find it.


Gods! Let me once enjoy her, then call on me
Your store of Plagues, and I will meet 'em all.
Enter Ludovico singing.



Ah! Mistress Lucy! I'm come thou seest   I expect thou shalt be as good as thy word, Child   is the Lady here?



The Lady is forth coming if you are still in the same mind?



My Lover here! Harkee Lucy.




By and by, Madam, I am catering for my self now   Well, Sir, will two thousand Pistoles do?



I must humour her   Aside.] Ay, Child.



Why then I take you at your word, Sir, and can produce the aforesaid summ   To Piz. With a little of your assistance, my Lord.



aside. Hum   A pretty Wife I am like to have   Catch me there if you can  



Ha   How's that?



How! Mistress Lucy worth two thousand Pistoles?



Ay: And I have a very good Pay-master for one half of it too  
Do you know this hand, my Lord? To Pizalta. (shows the Bond)




aside. Confound your jilting snear.



Ha, ha, ha   What, a thousand Pistoles a Dish, my Lord?
I hope you don't change often, ha   ha  



Hussy, I'll be reveng'd   'Tis all false, 'tis counterfeit.



Ha   ha   But it had been current Coyn, if I had suffer'd you to put your stamp upon't   in my Bed chamber, my Lord  



How Mistress, have you trick'd my Husband out of a thou∣sand Pistoles, and never told me of it?



Nay, Madam, don't frown   Remember you have trick'd him out of something too, which I never told him of   Don't urge me to more Discoveries.



aside. So   Here's Trick upon Trick: But, faith, you shall never trick me out of my Liberty. I'm not so fond of a Wife to mar∣ry a Chamber-maid, tho with ten times as much Money: And so, sweet Mistress Abigail, your humble servant.






aside. The Jade has me upon the Hip   I must be silent.
She who has her Husbands Bed abus'd,
Can ne're expect she shou'd be better us'd.
Exit.



Ha   What! my Lover gone! With all my heart: Better now than after; for whilst I have my Fortune in my own Hands, I shall have no need to sue for a Separate Maintenance, and get nothing for it neither.




to Placent. Now, Madam, go: May Heaven be propitious
To your Designs: I'll stay, and watch Bassino:

And when he goes, will follow with Alonzo.




Oh! my sick Fancy frames a thousand Forms,
Which tell me that our meeting will proke fatal.
And warn me not to go, what shall I do?
Must I bear calmly my Bassino's loss?
Why do I tremble thus?


Sure, it can't be the fear of Death   No, for if
I go not I must lose him, and that's more
Than death to me   and if I go, I can but fall,
And Life without him is the greater Woe,
Therefore I ll on, I'll use the softest words
That Tongue can frame to sooth her into Pity,
And dissuade her from this impious Marriage.
If I succeed I am compleatly happy,
If not I'd rather dye than live with hate,
But first, curst Rival, thou shalt share my Fate.


A flourish of Musick.



'Tis now the time   But whither do I go?
Shall I a Maid, a Wife, a Friend betray?
No matter  
All Arguments are vain, where love bears sway.






When the Winds Rage, and the Seas grow high,
They bid mankind beware,
But when they smooth, and calm the Sky,
'Tis then they would ensnare.


So the bright Thais kindness shows,
By frowning on her Lovers,
For Ruin only from her flows,
When she her Charms discovers.




Come now, Gentlemen and Ladies, be pleas'd to walk into the next Room, and take a small Collation   But where's my Lord Bassino? Come, Gentlemen, He's gone before us.



Where we will quickly follow. aside. Alonzo a word with you  
Exit Omnes.










I wonder much at my Bassino's stay:
Oh! Love! how swiftly fly thy Hours away
When we are blest! How tedious are thy minutes
When cruel absence parts two longing Lovers!


Is my Bassino come? speak  



No, Madam, A young stranger desires to speak with you: He says you are not acquainted with his Name, but will soon with his business, which is something of great import, that can be told to none but your self.



A Stranger business with me! I know of none I have with strangers   Heaven! what's this?
I feel a sudden throbbing in my Heart,
As if 'twas conscious of some fatal News  
Aside.
Womanish Fears   Admit him   (Exit Florella.) it must be
One of Bassino's Friends, whom he intrusts
To be a witness of our Marriage Vows.
Enter Placentia in mans Cloaths.



Madam, I was inform'd that Count Bassino

Was to be here   And having things t'impart
That much concern him, I made bold to come  



Sir, I expect him straight   if you're his Friend
I will account you mine   Be pleas'd to sit. Both sit.




My Brother, Madam, is extreamly happy
In being favour'd by so fair a Lady  



Your Brother, Sir! is then my Lord your Brother?







Then I may call you Brother too:
For all the Solemn Vows of Love have past
Twixt him and me   And blissful Hymen waits
With lighted Torch to tie the Sacred Knot,
Which shall be done this Hour  



This hour! say you? Oh! Madam, have a care:
You tread inchanted Ground, and e're you know
What Path you take, you're hurried to Destruction.



Where lies the Danger?



Oh! 'Tis a fatal Tale, yet you must hear it:
Therefore summon your Courage to your Aid,
For you will need it all, whilst I relate
The fatal story  



Ah! how I tremble!
Say, is he dead? has any murderous Villain
Kill'd my Bassino?




No   he is well in health: but his distemper'd mind
Is of a wild and feaverish Disposition,
Longing to taste, what tasted will undo him.



Your speech is all a Riddle: Pray, speak plainer:
But yet, e're you proceed, if Count Bassino lives,
I care not what must follow, since he's mine.



No, he's not yours   Nor ever must.



Tis false   There's not a Pow'r on Earth can part us:
Perhaps
You think my Blood too base to mix with yours  
But, Sir, your Brother loves me, and in Love
All Ranks are equal  



No   I wish that were all:


But there's a greater obstacle   He   is   married  
Oh! Gods! Unfortunately married!







Yes   Married   to my Sister;
To my unfortunate, abandon'd Sister.
Oh! do not you conspire t'undo her quite;
It is enough, she's false Bassino's Wife.




And is it possible! Oh! Faithless men!
Oh! Truth! Oh! Justice! Whither are you fled?
Now all my Fears and Horrors are explain'd.



I'm glad I reach'd this place in time, to hinder
Those ills that must have waited on your Marriage,
Now it is in your power, both to be happy,
And, in some measure, make my Sister so.
Both rise.



A Paradox in Nature   Bid Aurelia

Be happy, when you rob her of her Heaven!
Her dear Bassino!

Indeed your Sister may be counted happy,
If she's his Wife   Ha   Wife   By Heaven! 'tis false  
No, no   He has no other Wife but me  
He is not married, you bely him basely  
He cannot be so treacherous  



Madam, I swear, whate're I said is truth  
Do but defer this marriage for a day,
And if I don't produce convincing Proofs,
May all the Plagues a Woman can invent
Fall on my perjur'd head  



Defer our Marriage   No, by Heaven I will not.
I can't suspect him   Neither do I think
You durst maintain this story to his Face.



Madam, I dare; Nay, which is more, I'll die,
Or vindicate my injur'd Sister's Honour  




Oh! That he were but here to answer the Affront,
Perhaps he may have wrong'd your Family:
Debauch'd your Sister; for which you would force him
To marry her?   But, I must tell Thee, Boy,
He's mine already: nor would he forsake me
To hold Command o're all the Universe.



Oh! Heaven! must I bear this!



Nay, expect more, if he should find you here,
'Tis not your being Brother to his Mistress,
That will secure you from his just Revenge.



Revenge! Nay, then away with all Disguise.


Pity, be gone   And in its room fell rage
Take place, that I may dash that haughty Insolence
That dares to treat me thus   Know, Madam,
I am his Wife   his lawful, wedded Wife.
With borrow'd Shape I came to try your Virtue,
Which I have found so light, that the least puff
Of wanton Love will blast it   Else my Visit
Had met a better welcome   Here with Sword in hand
I'll wait his coming,
Draws.
And as he enters pierce thy haughty Breast.
I know he loves Thee, and therefore 'tis brave
Revenge, to let him see thy dying Paugs:
Thy parting Sighs will rack him worse than Hell.



His Wife! Oh! Insolence!
In vain you waste your breath, it moves not me:
So much I love him, so much I'm belov'd,
That should an Angel from yond Heaven descend,
To tell me he's marry'd I'd not credit him.
Kill me if you dare   He will revenge my death:
That pleasing thought gives Courage to my Soul;
To live without him would be Death indeed!
No   he'll ne're leave me for a common thing,
For such I'm sure Thou art  



Common! Proud wretch   by Heaven that word gives wings
To my Revenge   Vile Creature, dye  
Stabs her.



Help,   Murder, murder  





Ha   That to thy heart    Wer't thou a Demi-god
And durst attempt this Shrine, thus shouldst thoufall  




falling. Oh! Bassino! Oh!



Oh! hold, my Lord, what has your rashness done?
I only should have dy'd   I'll not upbraid
Your Treachery   No, 'tis the hand of heaven
That guides the stroke that takes my guilty Life,
For being Faithless to Alonzo.




Talk not of Death, my fair, my Dear Aurelia.

That very Sound does harrow up my Soul.
But who art thou whose sacrilegious hand
Durst to profane the Temple of my Love?



I am your Wife   Your loving Wife Placentiae.

Oh! Pardon this rash Deed; blame jealous Love  
And grace me with a sigh, that I may die contented.



My VVife! And Kill'd by me!
Under what load of Miseries I stand!
Oh! horror! horror! Infinite of Guilt!
Hurl now your vengeful Bolts, Almighty Powers,
On my devoted Head!


Oh! I have wrong'd you both: Deceiv'd you basely:
Thus prostrate on the Ground, let me beg Pardon;
Threws himself on the ground.
I do not ask it with Design to live.



Oh! Dear Bassino, live:
And try to save her, for she's innocent:
We only are in fault  
I urg'd my wretched Fate with impious Language,
For which I beg forgiveness: Generous Lady,
Let not my Soul depart with Guilt opprest.



As I forgive you, so may Heaven me



Oh! Placentia! oh! my Wife!



One thing more and I'm happy  
Were but Alonzo here, that I might ask
Forgiveness for my Falshood! But, alas!
My Spirits faint within my frozen Veins,
And every Thing seems double to my sight:
Oh! How I dread th'uncertain future State!



Unhappy Maid! Oh! my once dear Aurelia!

Curst, Curst Bassino! Oh! my Wife! How dare
I stand the View of both these injar'd Women!
Oh! Heaven! Why name I Heaven! Heaven will not hear
A wretch like me   No, even Hell wants Torment
Proportion'd to my Guilt   Oh! my Placentia! oh!



Oh! My dear Lord, I cannot see you thus:
Live, live, my Lord; be happy when I'm dead.
Nay, for your sake, I wish Aurelia too
May live to make you happy  




Heap not more Curses on me by your kindness:
I wish that she might live, but not for me,
Only to clear me from her guilty blood  
Oh! Placentia!




Rise, my Lord, rise: Do not indulge your Woe,
Your Sighs atone for all, and make e'en Death a Pleasure  
I see him coming, he will soon be here  



No, I will never rise: ne're see the Day.
The Sun would blush to shine on such an impious wretch.
Here let me lye, and tear with these curst hands
Tears the ground in a di∣stracted manner.
A passage thro the Earth, and hide my Face for ever.




within. Where, where's this Villain? Where's Bassino?





Oh! fly, my Lord, fly from his just Revenge.
Enter Alonzo hastily.




Where shall I fly from Justice? No, Heaven is kind
In sending him to help my Journey forward.









rising. Here, Sir, I stand.



Then there stands a Villain   Ha   what
Do I see!   Aurelia murder'd!
Oh! treacherous Maid, thy Love hast cost thee dear.
Think on thy broken Vows, and call to Heaven for Mercy.
Thy death I will revenge, because I lov'd thee once.



Oh! Alonzo, pardon me.



Now Villain, now what story, what pretence
Canst thou invent to avoid my just Revenge?
Oh! That I ne're had listned to thy Tongue!
Thy base, perfidious Tongue! Then all these Murders
Had been prevented, and thou curst in Hell  
Thou Monstrous Fiend  



You talk too much   Let's see what you can do:
Thus I return your Villain  




They fight, Bassino falls.





Hold! hold: Oh! Gods! I'm come too late.
What has my fatal Friendship done!
Ha   Placentia too   curst Letter!



My Friend Armando! Oh! I blush to see thee:
But let me have your Pardon   now I need it.



Oh! first pardon me  
For I have been the cause of all this mischief.
Whilest my officious Friendship strives to save you,
I bring you all to this unhappy end.
Say, can you pardon me?



I do  
And oh! my Friend! had Vertue been my Guide,
As it was thine, I still were truly happy.




Why do I hover thus 'twixt Rest and Misery?
Oh! good Alonzo, say you pardon me,
And let me die in Peace, else full of Horror
My Guilty Soul must wander in the Shades
Of gloomy night, and never, never rest.



Thou hast my Pardon, and with it this Promise!
Never to love again  



Oh! you're   too   kind   And I want  
Breath to thank   you   Farewel.
Dies.



Oh! Placentia! Embraces her.

Thus in thy Arms my Thread of Life shall break.



My Lord, my Husband, Oh! come nearer yet,
That I may take a parting kiss, to smooth


My Passage to the Realms of endless night.
Kisses him.
So   Now   I dye   much happier than I lived.
Farewel  
Dies.



Farewel, Fair Excellence! Thou best of Wives!
But I shall quickly follow   Yet before I go,
I beg, Alonzo, let my Death atone
For all the Injuries my Life has done you.
Oh! spare my Memory, when I'm no more.




I see such Vertue struggling in thy Breast,
As makes me wish I could prevent the Flight
Of thy departing Soul  



No, no   I would not live:
Hadst thou not come, my Hand had set me free.
But now I fell more nobly, and less guilty.
My Friend, my Dear Armando,

Haste to inform my Prince Bassino rests:
But hide, if possible, my shame: And let
One Grave hold both this wretched Corps and mine.
Oh! my Placentia  
Dies.



Unhappy Pair! But far more wretched me!
For I must live, and live without Aurelia!

Tho I'm convinc'd she lov'd me not, I can't
Banish her Image from my Love-sick mind.
Oh! that I ne're had seen the Charmiug Fair!



The Gods are just in all their Punishments:
And by this single Act, we plainly see
That Vengeance always treads on Perjury.
And tho sometimes no Bolts be at us hurl'd,
Whilst we enjoy the Pleasures of this World;
Yet a day waits, a Day' of general Doom,
When guilty Souls must to an Audit come;
Then that we may not tremble, blush or fear,
Let our Desires be Just: our Lives unsullied here.
Exeunt Omnes.



