




SIrrah! leave your Preaching your Coun∣sel's
like an ill Clock, either stands still, or
goes to slow you ne'er thought my Ex∣travagancies
amiss, while you had your share
of 'em; and now I want money to make my
self drunk, you advise me to live sober, you Dog They
that will hunt pleasure, as I ha' done, Rascal, must never
give over in a fair Chase.



Nay, I knew you wou'd never rest, till you had
tir'd your Dogs ah Sir! what a fine pack of Guineas
have you had! and yet you would make them run till they
were quite spent. Wou'd I were fairly turn'd out of
your Service here we have been three days in Town,
and I can safely Swear I have liv'd upon picking a hollow
tooth ever since.



Why don't you Eat then Sirrah?



Even, because I don't know where, Sir.



Then stay til I Eat, hang-dog, ungrateful Rogue!
to murmur at a little fasting with me, when thou hast
been an Equal partner of my good Fortune.



Fortune! It makes me Weep to think what you
have brought your self, and me to! How well might you ha'
ivl'd, Sir, had you been a Sober Man Let me see! I ha' been
in your Service just ten years In the first you Married,
  2
and grew weary of your Wife; in the Second you Whor'd
Drank, Gam'd, run in Debt, Mortgaged your Estate,
and was forct to leave the Kingdom; in the 3d, 4th, 5th,
6th and 7th, you made the Tour of Europe, with the
State and Equipage of a French Court Favourite, while
your poor Wife at Home broke her heart for the loss of
you. In the 8th and 9th you grew poor, and little the
wiser, and now in the 10th you are resolv'd I shall starve
with you.



Despicable Rogue, canst not thou bear the Frowns
of a Common strumpet Fortune?



 S'bud I never think of the Pearl Necklace you
gave that Dam'd Venetian Strumpet, but I wish her hang'd
in't!



Why Sirrah! I knew I cou'd not have her with∣out
it, and I had a Night's Enjoyment of her, was worth
a Pope's Revenue for't.



Ah! you had better ha' laid out your money
here in London; I'll undertake you might have had the
whole Town over and over; for half the price Beside,
Sir, what a delicate Creature was your Wife! She was
the only Celebrated Beauty in Town; I'll undertake there
were more Fops and Fools run mad for her, odsb•d she
was more plagued with 'em, and more talk't of than
a good Actress with a Maiden-head! Why the Devil
cou'd not she content you?



No Sirrah! the World to me is a Garden, stockt
with all sorts of Fruit, where the greatest pleasure we can
take, is in the Variety of Taste: But a Wife is an Eternal
Apple-tree, after a pull or two you are sure to set your
Teeth on Edge.



And yet I warrant you grudg'd another Man a
bit of her, tho' you valu'd her no more, than you wou'd
a half Eaten Pippin, that had lain a Week a Sunning in a
Parlor Window But see, Sir, who's this for me∣thinks
I long to meet with an old acquaintance!



Ha! I gad he looks like one, and may be necessary
as the case stands with me 



Pray Heaven he do but invite us to Dinner!





Dear Wontby! let me embrace thee, the sight of
an old Friend warms me, beyond that of a new Mistress.



S'Death, what Bully's this? Sir, your pardon
I don't know you!



Faith Will, I am a little out of repaires at present:
But I am all that's left of honest Ned Loveless.



Loveless! I am amaz'd! what means this Meta∣morphosis?
 Faith Ned, I am glad to find thee amongst
the Living, however How long hast thou been in Town?



About three days But prithee Will, how goes
the World?



Why like a Bowl, it runs on at the old rate, In∣terest
is still the Jack it aimes at, and while it rowles,
you know, it must of necessity be often turn'd upside
down But I doubt Friend, you have bowl'd out of
the Green, have liv'd a little too fast, 
like one that has lost all his ready money, and are forc't to
be an idle Spectator Prithee what brought thee at last
to England?



Why my last hopes faith, which were to perswade
Sir Will Wisewood, (if he be alive) to whom I Mortgaged
my Estate, to let me have Five hundred pounds more up∣on
it, or else to get some honest Friend to redeem the
Mortgage, and share the over-plus! Beside, I thought that
London might now be a place of uninterrupted pleasure,
for I hear my Wife is dead; and to tell you the Truth
'twas the stalene's of her love, was the main cause of my,
going over.



His Wife dead ha! I'm glad he knows no other,
I won't undeceive him least the Rogue should go and risle
her, of what she has, (Aside.) Yes faith I was at her Buri∣al,
and saw her take possession of her long home, and am
sorry to tell you, Ned, she died with Grief! your wild
courses broke her heart.



Why Faith! she was a good natur'd Fool! that's
the truth on't, well! rest her Soul.



Now, Sir, you are a single Man indeed,; for you
have neither Wife, nor Estate.



But how hast thou improv'd thy money beyond
Sea? What hast thou brought over?



Oh! a great deal of Experience.







Not a souse, faith, Sir, as my belly can testify.



But I have a great deal more wit then T had!



Not enough to get your Estate agen, or to know
where we shall dine to day (O Lord he don't ask us
yet!)




VVhy your Rogue's witty, Ned, where did'st
thou pick him up?



Don't you remember Snap? formerly your Pimp
in Ordinary: But he is much improv'd in his calling I as∣sure
you, Sir.



I don't doubt it, considering who has been his
Master.



Yes, Sir, I was an humble Servant of yours, and am
still, Sir, and shou'd be glad to stand behind your Chair at
Dinner, Sir.




Oh! Sir, that you may do another time: But
to day I am ingag'd upon business, however, there's a
meales meat for you?

(Throws him a Guinea.


Bless my eye sight, a Guinea Sir! is there
e'er a VVhore you wou'd have kickt, any old Bawds win∣dows
you wou'd have broken, shall I beat your Taylor
for disappointing you? or your Surgeon that wou'd be paid
for a Clap of two years standing? if you have occasion,
you may command your humble Servant 



Sweet Sir, I am oblig'd to you! but at present
am so happy, as to have no occasion for your assistance 
But hark you Ned! Prithee what hast thou done with thy
Estate?



I pawn'd to buy pleasure, that is, old VVine,
young VVhores, and the conversation of Brave Fellows,
  5
as Mad as my self; Pox! If a Man has Appetites, they
are Torments, if not indulged! I shall never complain, as
long as I have Health, and Vigour; and as for my Pover∣ty,
why the Devil shou'd I be asham'd of that, since a Rich
Man wont blush at his Knavery.



Faith Ned, I am as much in Love with Wicked∣ness,
as thou can'st be, but I am for having it at a Cheap∣er
rate, than my Ruine! Don't it grate you a little to see
your Friends blush for you?



Tis very odd, that People shou'd be more asham'd
of others Faults, then their own; I never yet cou'd meet
with a Man that offer'd me Counsel, but had more occa∣sion
for himself.



So far you may be in the right: For indeed good
Counsel is like a home Jest, which every busie Fool is offer∣ing
to his Fellow, and yet won't take himself.



Right thus have I known a jolly Red-Nos'd Par∣son,
at Three a Clock in the Morning, Belch out Invectives
against late Hours, and hard Drinking: And a Canting
Hypocritical Sinner, protest against Fornication, when the
Rogue was himself just crawling out of a Flux.



Tho these are Truths Friend, yet I don't see any
Advantage you can draw from them. Prithee how will
you live now, all your Money's gone?



Live! How dost thou live? thou art but a younger
Brother I take it.



Oh! very well, Sir, (tho faith my Father left me
but 3000 l.) one of which I gave for a place at Court, that
I still enjoy; the other two are gone after pleasure, as thou
say'st. But beside this, I am supply'd by the continual boun∣ty
of an indulgent Brother; now I am loath to load his
good Nature too much, and therefore have e'en thought
fit, like the rest of my raking Brother-hood, to Purge out
my wild Humours with Matrimony: By the way I have
taken care to see the Dose well sweetned, with a swinging
Portion.



Ah! Will, You'll find Marrying to Cure Lewd∣ness,
is like Surfoiting to Cure Hunger: For all the Conse∣quence
  6
is, you Loath what you Surfeit on, and are only
Chast to her you Marry but prithee, Friend, what is
thy Wife that must be?



Why faith, since I believe the matter is too far
gone for any Man to Postpone me, (at least, I am sure, thou
wilt not do me an Injury to do thy self no good) I'll tell
thee you must know, my Mistress is the Daughter
of that very Knight to whom you Mortgag'd your Estate,
Sir William Wisewou'd.



Why, she's an Heiress, and has a 1000 l, a year in
her own Hands, if she be of Age▪ But I suppose the Old
Man knows nothing of your intentions. Therefore prithee
how have you had opportunities of promoting your Love?



Why thus you must know, Sir William (be∣ing
very well acquainted with the largeness of my Brothers
Estate,) designs this Daughter for him, and to Encourage
his Passion offers him, out of hi• own Pocket, the Additi∣onal
Blessing of 5000 l. This Offer, my Brother, knowing
my Inclinations, seems to embrace; but at the same time,
is really in Love with his Neice, who lives with him in the
same House, and therefore to hide my design from the Old
Gentleman, I pretend visits to his Daughter, as an Inter∣cessor
for my Brother only, and thus he has given me day∣ly
opportunities of advancing my own Interest. nay,
and I have so contriv'd it, that I design to have the 5000 l.
too.



How is that possible, since I see no hopes of the Old
Mans consent for you?



Have a Days patience, and you'll see the effects
on't; in a word, 'tis so sure, that nothing but delays can
hinder my Success; therefore I am very earnest with my
Mistress that to Morrow may be the Day. But a Pox on't,
I have two Women to prevail with, for my Brother Quar∣rels
every other Day with his Mistriss, and while I am re∣conciling
him, I loose, Ground in my own Amour.



Why, has not your Mistriss told you her Mind yet?



She will I suppose, as soon as she knows it her
self, for within this Week, she has chang'd it as often, as
  7
her Linnen, and keeps it as secret too; for she wou'd no
more own her Love before my Face, then she wou'd shift
her self before my Face.



P'shaw! She shows it the more, by striving to con∣ceal
it.



Nay, she does give me some Proofs indeed, for
she will suffer no body but her self to speak ill of me, is al∣ways
uneasy till I am sent for, never pleas'd when I am
with her, and still Jealous when I leave her.



Well. Success to thee Will; I will send the Fiddles
to release you from your first Nights Labour.



But hark you! Have a care of disobliging the
Bride, thô Ha! Yonder goes my Brother! I am afraid
his walking so Early proceeds from some disturbance in his
Love; I must after him, and set him right Dear Ned
you'll Excuse me; shall I see you at the Blue Posts between
Five and Six this Afternoon?



With all my Heart but dee ye hear can'st
not thou lend me the fellow to that same Guinea you gave
my Man, I'll give you my Bend if you mistrust me.



Oh Sir! Your necessity is Obligation enough 
there 'tis, and all I have faith, when I see you at Night,
you may command me farther Adieu at Six at
farthest.
(Exit Y. Wor.




Without fail so! Now Rascal you are
an hungry are you! Thou deservest never to Eat
again Rogue! Grumble before Fortune had quite for∣saken
us!



Ah! Dear Sir, the thoughts of Eating again, have
so transported me, I am resolv'd to Live and Die with
you.



Look ye, Sirrah, here's that will provide us of a
Dinner and a brace of Whores into the bargain, at least as
Guinea's and Whores goe now.



Ah! Good Sir! No Whores before Dinner. I be∣seech
you.



Well, for once I'll take your advice; for to say
Truth, a Man is as unfit to follow Love with an empty
  8
Stomach, as business with an empty Head: Therefore I
think a Bit and a Bottle won't be amiss first.
The Gods of Wine, and Love, were ever Friends;
For by the help of Wine, Love gains his Ends.





How hard is it to find that Happiness which our
short sighted Passions hope from Woman? 'tis not their
cold disdain, or Cruelty shou'd make a faithful Lover Curse
his Stars, that is but reasonable; 'tis the shadow in our
Pleasures Picture! Without it Love cou'd ne'er be height∣ned!
No 'tis their Pride, and vain desire of many Lovers,
that robs our hope of its imagin'd Rapture: The Blind are
only happy! For if we look through Reason's never erring
Perspective, we then Survey their Souls, and view the
Rubbish we were Chaffring for: And such I find, Hilla∣ria's
mind is made of. This Letter is an Order for the knock∣ing
off my Fetters, and I'll send it her immediatly.





Morrow Brother! (seeing the Letter) what! Is
your Fit returned again? What Beaux Box has Hil∣laria
taken Snuff from? What Fool has led her from the
Box to her Coach? What Fop has she suffer'd to read a Play
or Novel to her? Or whose Money has she indiscreetly
woh at Baffet come, let's see the Ghastly Wound
she has made in your quiet, that I may know how much
Claret to prescribe you?



I have my Wound, and Cure from the same Per∣son
I'll assure you; the one from Hillaria's Wit and Beau∣ty,
the other from her Pride and Vanity?



That's what I cou'd ne'er yet find her guilty of:
are you angry at her Loving you.



I am angry at my self, for believing she ere
did.



Have her Actions spoke the contrary? Come
you know she Loves.



Indeed she gave a great proof on't last Night
here in the Park, by fastning upon a Fool, and Caressing him
before my Face, when she might have so easily avoided
him.



What! And I warrant interrupted you in the
middle of your Sermon; for I don't Question but you were
Preaching to her. But Prithee who was the Fool she fast∣ned
upon?



One that Heaven intended for a Man; but the
whole business of his Life is to make the World believe, he
is of another Species. A thing that affects mightily to re∣dicule
himself; only to give others a kind of necessity of
praising him. I can't says he's a Slave to every New Fashi∣on,
for he pretends to be the Master of it, and is ever re∣viving
some Old, or advanceing some New Piece of Foppe∣ry;
and thÃ´ it. don't take is still as well pleas'd, because it
then obliges the Town to take the more notice of him:
He's so fond of a Publick Reputation, that he is more ex∣travagant
in his Attempts to gain it, then the Fool that
Fir'd Diana's Temple, to Immortalize his Name.



You have said enough to tell me his Name is Sir
Novelty Fashion.



The same; but that which most concerns me,
is that he has the Impudence to Address to Hillaria, and she
Vanity enough to discard him.



Is this all? Why thou art as hard to please in a
Wife, as thy Mistriss in a New Gown: How many Wo∣men
have you took in hand; and yet can't please your self
at last!



I had need to have the best Goods, when I offer
so great a price as Marriage for them: Hillaria has some
good Qualities, but not enough to make a Wife of.















Too much: Enough to supply her Vanity.







Not enough to believe I am no Fool.







Not enough to deceive me.



Why then you are happy, if she can't deceive
you.



Yet she has Folly enough to endeavour it: I'll
see her no more, and this shall tell her so.



Which in an Hour's time you'll repent, as much as
over.



As ever I shou'd Marrying her.



You'll have a damn'd meaking look, when you
are forc't to ask her Pardon, for your ungenerous Sus∣picion,
and lay the fault upon Excess of Love.



I am not so much in Love as you Imagine.



Indeed, Sir, you are in Love, and that Letter tells
her so.



Read it, you'll find the contrary.



Prithee I know what's in't, better then thou dost:
You say, 'tis to take your leave of her; but I say 'tis in hopes
of a kind Excusive Answer: But Faith you mistake her
and your self too; she is too high Spirited not to take you
at your word; and you are too much in Love, not to ask
her Pardon.



Well then, I'll not be too rash: but will show my
resentment in forbearing my Visits.



Your Visits! Come, I shall soon try what a Man
of resolution you are for yonder she comes now,
Let's see if you have power to move.



I'll soon convince you of that farewell.
(Exit.



Ha! Gone! I don't like that? I am sorry to find
him so resolute: But I hope Hillaria has taken too fast hold
of his Heart, to let this Fit shake him off. I must to her,
and make up this breach: For while his Amour stands still
I have no hopes of advancing my own.
(Exit.






Well, dear Amanda, thou art the most Constant
Wife I ever heard of: Not to shake off the Memory of an
ill Husband, after 8 or 10 years absence; nay, to Mourn
for ought you know for the Living too, and such an Hus∣band,
that thÃ´ he were alive, wou'd never thank you for't:
whyd'ye persist in such a hopeless Grief?



Because 'tis hopeless! For if he be alive, he is Dead
to me; his Dead Affections not Virtues self can e'er retrive;
wou'd I were with him, thÃ´ in his Grave!



In my mind, you are much better where you are!
The Grave! Young Widows use to have warmer wishes.
But methinks the Death of a Bich old Uncle, shou'd be a
Cordial to your Sorrows.



That adds to 'em; for he was the only Relation I
had left, and was as tender of me, as the nearest! He was
a Father to me.



He was better then some Fathers to you; for he dy∣ed,
just when you had Occasion for his Estate.



I have an old Father, and the Duce take me, I think
he only lives to hinder me of my Occasions; but Lord bless
me, Madam, how can you be unhappy with 2000 l. a
year in your own Possession?



For my part, the greatest Reason I think you have
to grieve, is that you are not sure your Husband's dead, for
were that confirm'd, then indeed there were hopes, that
one Poyson might drive out another, you might Marry
agen.



All the Comfort of my Life is, that I can tell my
Conscience, I have been true to Virtue.



And to an Extravagant Husband, that cares not
a Farthing for you. But come let's leave this unseasona∣ble
Talk, and pray give me a little of your Advice! what
  10〈1 page duplicate〉  11〈1 page duplicate〉  12
shall I do with this Mr. Worthy? wou'd you advise me to
make a Husband of him?



I am but an ill Judge of Men; the only one I thought
my self secure of, most cruelly deceived me?



A losing Gamester is fittest to give Counsel; what
d'ye think of him?



Better then of any Man I know: I read nothing in
him but what is some part of a good Man's Character.











He Taxes me with a Fool!



He would preserve your Reputation, and a Fool's
love ends only in the Ruin of it.



Methinks he's not Handsom?



He's a Man, Madam.



Why then e'en let him make a Woman of me.



Pray, Madam, what d'ye think of his Brother?




I wou'd not think of him.



Oh dear, why pray?



He puts me in mind of a Man too like him, one that
had Beauty, Wit, and Falsehood! 



You have hit some part of his Character,
I must
confess Madam; but as to his Truth, I'm sure he loves
only me.



I don't doubt but he tells you so, nay, and swears
it too.



O Lord! Madam, I hope I may without Vanity
believe him.



But you will hardly without Magick secure him.



I shall use no Spells, or Charms, but this Poor Face,
Madam.



And your Fortune, Madam.



(Senseless Malice!) (aside.)I know he'd marry
me without a Groat.



Then he's not the Man I take him for.



Why pray what do you take him for?



A wild young Fellow, that loves every thing he
sees.



He never lov'd you yet.




I hope, Madam, he never saw any thing in me to
Encourage him.



In my conscience you are in the right on't, Madam,
I dare swear he never did, nor e'er wou'd, thÃ´ he gaz'd
till Dooms-day.



I hope, Madam, your Charms will prevent his
putting himself to the Tryal, and I wish he may never 



Nay, dear, Madam, no more railing at him, un∣less
you wou'd have me believe you love him.



Indeed Ladies you are both in the wrong, you,
Cousin, in being angry at what you desir'd, her Opinion
of your Lover; and you, Madam, for speaking truth against
the Man she resolves to Love.



Love him! prithee, Cousin, no more of that old
stuff.



Stuff! why? don't you own you are to marry him
this week Here he comes, I suppose you'l tell him a∣nother
thing in his Ear.





Mr. Worthy, your Servant! you look with the face
of Business, what's the News, pray?



Faith, Madam, I have news for you all, and pri∣vate
news too: But that of the greatest consequence is with
this Lady: Your pardon Ladies, I'll whisper with you all,
one after another.



Come, Cousin, will you walk, the Gentleman
has business, we shall interrupt him.



Why really, Cousin, I don't say positively you
love Mr. Worthy, but I vow this looks very like Jealousie.



Pish! Lord! Hillaria, you are in a very odd hu∣mour
  14
to day. But to let you see I have no such weak
thoughts about me, I'll wait as unconcern'd as your self
(I'll ratile him.)




Not unpleasing say you? pray, Sir, unfold your
self, for I have long despair'd of welcome news.



Then in a word, Madam, your Husband Mr. Love∣less
is in Town, and has been these three days, I parted
with him not an hour ago.



In Town, you amaze me! for heaven's sake go on.



Faith, Madam, considering Italy, and those parts
have furnisht him with nothing but an improvement of
that Lewdness he carry'd over; I can't properly give you
joy of his arrival: Besides, he is so very poor, that you
wou'd take him for an Inhabitant of that Country. And
when I confirm'd your being dead, he only shook his
Head, and call'd you good natur'd fool, or to that effect
Nay, thÃ´ I told him his unkindness broke your heart.



Barbarous Man! not shed a Tear upon my grave?
But why did you tell him I was dead?



Because, Madam, I thought you had no mind
to have your house plundered, and for another reason,
which if you dare listen to me, perhaps you'l not dislike.
In a word 'tis such a Stratagem that will either make
him asham'd of his Folly, or in love with your Virtue.



Can there be a hope, when even my death cou'd not
move him to a relenting sigh! Yet pray instruct me, Sir.



You know, Madam, 'twas not above four or
five months after you were Married, but (as most young
Husbands do) he grew weary of you: Now I am confi∣dent
'twas more an Affectation of being Fashionably
Vicious, than any reasonable dislike, he cou'd either find
in your Mind or Person: Therefore cou'd you by some
artifice, pass upon him, as a new Mistress, I am apt to
believe you wou'd find none of the wonted coldness in his
Love; But a younger heat, and fierce desire.



Suppose this done! What wou'd be the consequence!



O your having then a just occasion to reproach
  15
him with his broken Vows, and to let him see the weak∣ness
of his deluded Fancy, which even in a Wife, while
unknown, cou'd find those real Charms, which his blind,
ungrateful lewdness wou'd ne'er allow her to be Mistress
of. After this, I'd have you seem, freely to resign him to
those Fancy'd Raptures, which he deny'd were in a Vir∣tuous
Woman▪ who knows but this with a little Submis∣sive
Eloquence, may strike him with so great sense of
shame, as may reform his thoughts, and fix him yours?



You have reviv'd me, Sir: But how can I assure
my self he'll like me as a Mistress?



From your being a new one Leave the
management of all to me; I have a trick shall draw him
to your Bed, and when he's there, Faith e'en let him
Cuckold himself, I'll engage he likes you as a Mistress,
thô he cou'd not as a Wife. At least she'l have the plea∣sure
of knowing the difference between a Husband and a
Lover, without the Scandal of the former.




You have oblig'd me, Sir; If I succeed, the Glo∣ry
shall be yours.



I'll wait on you at your Lodging, and consult
how I may be farther serviceable to you: But you must
put this in a speedy Execution, least he should hear of you,
and prevent your designs, in the mean time, 'tis a secret
to all the World, but your self and me.



I'll study to be greateful, Sir.



Now for you, Madam.




So! I am to be last serv'd: very well!




My Brother, Madam, confesses he scatter'd some
rough Words last Night, and I have taken the Liberty to
tell you, you gave him some provocation.



That may be; but I'm resolv'd to be Mistress of
my Actions before Marriage, and no Man shall Usurp a
power over me, till I give it him.



At least, Madam, consider what he said, as the
effects of an Impatient passion, and give him leave this
afternoon to set all right again.



Well, if I don't find my self out of Order after
Dinner, perhaps I may step into the Garden: But I won't
promise you neither.



I dare believe you without it Now, Madam,
I am your humble Servant.




And every body's humble Servant.




Why, Madam, I am come to tell you 



What Success you have had with that Lady, I sup∣pose,
I don't mind Intrigues, Sir.



I like this Jealousie however, tho' I scarce know
how to appease it. 'Tis business of Moment, Madam, and
may be done in a Moment.



Yours is done with me, Sir, but my business is not
so soon done as you imagine.



In a word, I have very near reconcil'd my Bro∣ther,
and your Cousin, and I don't doubt but to morrow
will be the day, if I were but as well assur'd of your con∣sent
for my Happiness too!



First tell me your Discourse with that Lady; and
afterwards if you can, look me in the Face Oh are
you studying, Sir?



S'Death! I must not trust her with it, she'll tell it
the whole Town for a Secret Pox, ne'er a lye!



You said it was of the greatest consequence too!



A good hint Faith. (Aside.) Why, Madam, since
you will needs force it from me, 'twas to desire her to ad∣vance
my Interest with you: But all my intreaties cou'd
not prevail: For she told me I was unworthy of you:
Was not this of consequence, Madam?



Nay, now I must believe you, Mr. Worthy, and I
ask your pardon, for she was just railing against you for
a Husband, before you came.



Oh! Madam, a favour'd Lover like a good Poem,
for the malice of some few, makes the generous temper
more admire it.



Nay, what she said, I must confess, had much
the same effects as the Coffee Criticks ridiculing Prince
  17Arthur, for I found a pleasing disappointment in my rea∣ding
you, and till I see your Beauty's Equal'd, I shan't dis∣like
you for a few faults.



Then, Madam, since you have blest me with your
good Opinion, let me beg of you, before these Ladies, to
compleat my Happiness to morrow. Let this be the last
night of your lying alone.







To marry you to Morrow, Madam.



Marry me! Who put that in your head?



Some small Encouragement which my Hopes have
form'd, Madam.



Hopes! Oh Insolence! if it once comes to that I
don't question but you have been familiar with me in your
Imagination. Marry you! What lye in a naked bed with
you! Trembling by your side, like a tame Lamb for Sacri∣crifice!
De'e think I can be mov'd to love a Man, to kiss
him, toy with him, and so forth!



I gad! I find nothing but down right Impudence
will do with her. (Aside.) No, Madam, tis the Man
must kiss, and toy with you, aud so forth! Come my
dear Angel, pronounce the Joyful Word, and draw the
Scene of my Eternal Happiness. Ah! methinks I'm there
already, Eager and Impatient of approaching Bliss! Just
laid within the Bridal Bed, our Friends retir'd, the Curtains
close drawn around us, no light but Caelia's Eyes, no noise
but her soft trembling words, and broken sighs, that plead
in vain for mercy: And now a trickling Tear steals down
her glowing Cheek, which tells the Rushing Lover at
length she yields: Yet vows she'd rather dye. But still
submits to the unexperienc'd Joy.




What Raptures Mr. Worthy!



Only the force of Love in imagination, Madam.



O Lord! dear Cousin! and Madam! let's be gone,
I vow he grows rude! Oh! for Heavens sake, I shant
shake of my fright these ten days, O Lord! I will not
  18
stay begon! for I declare I loath the sight of you.
(Exit.



I hope you'l stand my Friend, Madam.



I'll get her into the Garden after dinner.




I find there's nothing to be done with my Lady
before Company, 'tis a strange affected piece But
there's no fault in her 1000 l. a year, and that's the Load∣stone
that attracts my heart The Wise, and Grave,
may tell us of strange Chimaera's call'd Virtues in a Woman,
and that they alone are the best Dowry; but faith we
younger Brothers are of another mind.
Women are changed from what they were of old:
Therefore let Lovers still this Maxim hold,
She's only worth that brings her weight in Gold.
(Exit.










OH! for Heavens sake! no more of this Gal∣lantry
Sir Novelty: For I know you say,
the same to every Woman you see.




Every one that sees you, Madam, must say
the same. Your Beauty, like the Rack forces every be∣holder
to Confess his Crime of daring to adore you



Oh! I •an't Patience to hear all this! if he be Blind
I'll open his Eyes I vow Sir Novelty, you Men of Amour
are Strange Creatures: You think no Woman worth
your while, unless you Walk over a Rivals Ruine to her
Heart; I know nothing has encouraged your Passion to
my Couzen more, than her Engagement to Mr. Worthy.



Poor Creature now is she Angry▪ she han't the
Address of a Fop Inauseate!





Oh! Madam, as to that, I hope the Lady
will easily Distinguish the Sincerity of her Adorers. Tho
I must allow Mr. Worthy is Infinitely the Hansomer Per∣son!



O! fye Sir Novelty, make not such a Preposter∣ous
Comparison!




Oh! Ged! Madam, there is no Comparison▪



Pardon me Sir! he's an unpolisht Animal!




Why does your Ladiship really think me
tolerable?



So! she has Snapt his Heart already.





Pray Madam, how do I looke to day?
What, Cursedly? I'll warrant with a more Hellish Com∣plexion,
than an Stale Actress at a Rehearsal I
don't know Madam tis true the Town does talk of me
indeed but the Devil take me in my mind I am a very
ugly Fellow!



Now you are too severe, Sir Novelty!




Not I, burn me For Heavens take deal freely
with me, Madam, and if you can, tell me one tolerable
thing about me?



T'wou'd pose me, I'm sure.




Oh! Sir Novelty this is unanswerable; tis hard
to know the brightest part of a Diamond.




You'l make me blush, stop my Vitals, Ma∣dam
 I ga'd I always said she was a Woman of Sense.
Strike me Dumb, I am in love with her I'll try her far∣ther
(aside.) But Madam, is it possible I may vie with
Mr. Worthy not that he is any Rival of mine, Madam,
For I can assure you my Inclinations lye, where perhaps
your Ladyship little thinks.



So! now I am rid of him.





But Pray tell me, Madam: For I really Love
a severe Critick, I am sure you must believe he has a more
happy Genius in Dress: For my part I am but a Sloven.



He a Genius! unsufferable! why he dresses worse
than a Captain of the Militia: But you Sir Novelty
are a true Original, the very Pink of Fashion; I'll war∣rant
there's not a Milliner in Town, but has got an
Estate by you?




I must Confess Madam, I am for doing
good, to my Country: For you see this Suit, Ma∣dam, I
Suppose you are not ignorant what a hard
time the Ribbon Weavers have had since the late
Mourning: Now my design is to set the Poor Rogues
up again, by recommending this sort of Trimming:
The Fancy is pretty well for second Mourning, By
the way Madam, I had Fifteen Hundred Guineas
••id in my hand as a Gratuity to encourage it: But
  21
I gad I refus'd 'em being too well acquainted with
the consequence of taking a Bribe, in a National con∣cern!



A very Charitable Fashion indeed Sir Novelty;
But how if it should not take?



Ridiculous! take! I warrant you in a Week
the whole Town will have it: Tho' perhaps Mr.
Worthy will be one of the last of 'em: He's a meer
Valet de Chambre to all Fashion; and never is in any
till his Betters have left them off.




Nay Ged now I must laugh, for the Devil
take me, if I did not meet him, not above Fortnight
ago, in a Coat with Buttons no bigger than Nut∣megs.



There I must Confess you out-do him, Sir
Novelty.




Oh dear, Madam, why mine are not
above three Inches Diameter.



But methinks, Sir Novelty, your Sleeve is a
a little too Extravagant.




Nay, Madam, there you wrong me, mine does
but just reach my Knuckles. But my Lord Overdo's
covers his Diamond Ring.



Nay, I confess, the Fashion may be very useful
to you, Gentlemen, that make Campaigns; for shou'd
you unfortunately lose an Arm, or so, that Sleeve might
be very convenient to hide the defect on't.




Ha! I think your Ladiship's in the right on't,
Madam.




Oh! such an Air! so becoming a Negligence!
Upon my Soul, Sir Novelty, you'll be the Envy of the
Beau Monde!



Mr. Worthy! a good Fancy were thrown away
upon him! But you, Sir, are an ornament to your Cloths.




Then your Ladiship really thinks they are 
Bien Entenduè!








She has almost as much Wit as her Cousen 
  22
I must confess, Madam, this Coat has had a Universal
Approbation: For this, Morning I had all the Eminent
Taylors about Town at my Levèe, earnestly Petitioning
for the first Measure of it: Now, Madam▪ if you thought
'twou'd oblige Mr. Worthy, I would let his Taylor
〈◊〉 it before any of 'em.



 See here he comes, and the Duce take me, I
think 'twou'd be a great piece of good nature; for I de∣clare
he looks as Rough as a Dutch Corporal Prithee,
Sir Novelty lets laugh at him.




O God! No, Madam, that were too cruel:
Why you know he can't help it Lets take no no•ice
of him.










I find my Resolution is but vain, my Feet have
brought me hither 'gainst my will. But sure I can com∣mand
my Tongue, which I'll bite off▪ ere it shall seek a
Reconciliation, Still so familiar there! But 'tis no mat∣ter,
I'll try if I can wear. Indifference, and seem as care∣less
in my Love, as she is of her Honour, which she can
never truly know the worth of, while she persists to let a
Fool thus play with it. Ladies, your humble Servant.



Now can't I forbear fretting his Spleen a little
(aside.) Oh! Mr. Worthy, we are admiring Sir. Novel∣ty,
and his new Suit, did you ever see so sweet a Fan∣cy?
He is as full of variety as a good Play.



He's a very pleasant Comedy indeed, Ma∣dam,
and drest with a great deal of good Satyr, and no
doubt may oblige both the Stage and the Town, especi∣ally
the Ladies.



So! There's for me. 





O Ged! Nay prithee, Tom. know my
Humour, Ladies! Stop my vitals! I don't believe there
are five Hundred in Town that ever took any notice of
me.



Oh, Sir, there are some that take so much no∣tice
of you, that the Town takes notice of them for't.









How of them, Tom, upon my account! O
Ged, I wou'd not be the Ruin of any Lady's Repu∣tation
for the World: Stop my Vitals, I am very sorry
for't; Prethee name but one, that has a favourable
Thought of me, and to convince you that I have no
design upon her, I'll instantly visit her in an unpow∣der'd
Periwig.



Nay, she, I mean, is a Woman of Sense
too.




Phoo! Prithee, Pox, don't banter me: 'Tis
impossible! what can she see in me?



Oh, a thousand taking Qualities! This
Lady will inform you Come, I'll Introduce you.





O Ged no! Prithee! Hark you in your
Ear I am off of her! Demmy if I ben't, I am, stop
my Vitals!



Wretched Rogue! (aside) Pshaw! no mat∣ter,
I'll reconcile you, Come, come, Madam.







This Gentleman humbly begs to kiss your
Hands.



He needs not your Recommendation, Sir.



True! a Fool recommends himself to
your Sex, and that's the Reason Men of common Sense
live unmarried.



A Fool without Jealousy, is better than a Wit
with Ill-nature.



A friendly Office, seeing your Fault is Ill-Nature.



Believing more than we have is pitiful, 
You know I hate this Wretch, loath, and scorn
him.



Fools have a secret Art of pleasing Wo∣men:
If he did not delight you, you wou'd not ha∣zard
your Reputation, by encouraging his Love.



Dares he wrong my Reputation?



He need not; the World will do it for him,
while you keep him company.



I dare answer it to the World.



Then why not to me?



To satisfy you, were a Fondness, I never shou'd
forgive my self.



To persist in it, is what I'll ne'er forgive.



Insolence! is it come to this? Never see me
more.



I have lost the sight of you already;
there hangs a Cloud of Folly between you, and
the Woman I once thought you.

(As Hillaria is go∣ing
off.)
Enter Young Worthy.



What to our selves in Passion we propose,
The Passion ceasing does the Purpose lose: Madam,
therefore pray let me engage you to stay a little
till your Fury is over, that you may see whether
you have reason to be angry, or no.




(To Nar.) Pray, Madam, who is that
Gentleman?



Mr. Worthy's Brother, Sir, a Gentleman of no
mean parts, I can assure you.




I don't doubt it, Madam, He has a
very good walk.



To be jealous of me with a Fool, is an affront
to my understanding.




Tamely to Resign your Reputation to the
merciless Vanity of a Fool, were no proof of his Love.



Tis Questioning my Conduct.




Why you let him Kiss your Hand last
Night before his Face.



The Fool diverted me, and I gave him my
hand, as I wou'd lend my Mony, Fan, or Hanker∣chief
to a Legerdemain, that I might see him play all
his Tricks over.




O Madam! no Juggler is so deceitful as a
Fop; for while you look his Folly in the Face, he
Steals away your Reputation, with more Ease, than
the other Picks your Pocket.



Some Fools indeed are dangerous.




I grant you, your design is only to laugh
at him: But that's more than he finds out: There∣fore
you must expect he will tell the World another
Story: And 'tis Ten to One, but the consequence
makes you repent of your Curiosity.



You speak like an Oracle: I tremble at the
thoughts on't.




Here's one shall reconcile your Fears Bro∣ther
I have done your business: Hillaria is convinced of
her Indiscretion, and has a pardon ready for your ask∣ing
it.




She's the Criminal, I have no occasion for
it.




See she comes toward you, give her a Ci∣vil
word at least.



Mr. Worthy, I'll not be behind-hand in the Ac∣knowledgment
I owe you: I freely confess my Folly,
and forgive your harsh Construction of it: Nay, I'll not
condemn your want of good Nature, in not indeavour∣ing,
(as your Brother has done,) by mild arguments to
convince me of my Error.




Now you vanquish me! I blush to be out
done in Generous Love! I am your Slave, dispose of
me as you please.



No more, from this hour be you the Master
of my Actions, and my Heart.




This goodness gives you the Power, and I
obey with Pleasure.




So! I find I han't preach't to no purpose!
Well Madam if you find him Guilty of Love, ev'n
let to Morrow be his Execution day, make a Husband
of him, and there's the Extent of Loves Law.




Brother I am indebted to you.




Well I'll give you a discharge, if you will
but leave me but half an hour in private with that
Lady.



How will you get rid of Sir Novelty?




I'll warrant you, leave him to me.



Come, Mr. Worthy, as we
walk, I'll inform you, how I intend to sacrifice that Wretch to your
laughter.




Not, Madam, that I want Revenge on so
contemptible a Creature: But, I think, you owe this
Justice to your self, to let him see (if possible) you
never took him for any other, than what he really
is.




Well! Pox of you Politicks, Prithee con∣sult
of 'em within.



We'll obey you Sir.







Pray, Madam, give me leave to beg a word
in private with you; Sir if you please 


who is taking Snuff)



Ay Sir, with all my heart.









Nay, 'tis right, I'll assure you,






Ay Sir but now the Lady wou'd be alone.









The Lady wou'd be alone, Sir.




I don't hear her say any such thing.




Then I tell you so, and I wou'd advise you
to believe me.




I shall not take your advice, Sir: But if
you really think the Lady wou'd be alone, why you
had best leave her.




In short, Sir, your Company is very un∣seasonable
at present.




I can tell you, Sir, if you have no more Wit,
than Manners, the Lady will be but scurvily entertain'd.



Oh fie, Gentlemen, no Quarrelling before a Woman,
I beseech you. Pray let me know the Business.




My business is Love, Madam.








What, I hope you are no stranger too, Ma∣dam:
As for that Spark you need take no Care of him,
for if he stays much longer I will do his Business myself.



Well, I vow Love's a pleasant thing, when
the Men come to cutting of Throats once: O Gad!
I'de fain have them fight a little Methinks Narcissa
wou'd sound so great in an Expiring Lover's Mouth 
Well, I am resolved Sir Novelty shall not go yet; for
I will have the pleasure of hearing my self prais'd a
little, though I don't marry this Month for't Come,
Gentlemen, since you Both say Love's your business, ev'n
plead for your selves, and he that speaks the greater
Passion, shall have the fairest Return.




Oh, the Devil! now is she wrapt with the
hopes of a little Flattery! There's no remedy but Pati∣ence.
S'Death, what peice have I to work upon!



Come Gentlemen, one at a time, Sir Novelty
what have you to say to me?




In the first place, Madam, I was the first
Person in England that was complemented with the name
of Beau, which is a Title I prefer before Right Honour∣able:
For that may be Inherited: But this I Extorted
from the whole Nation, by my surprising Mien, and
unxampled Gallantry.








Then another thing, Madam, it has been ob∣served,
that I have been Eminently successful in those Fash∣ions,
I have recommended to the Town, and I don't
  28
question, but this very Suit will Raise as many Ribbond-Weavers,
as ever the Clipping, or Melting Trade did
Gold-Smiths.



Pish! what does the Fool mean! he says no∣thing
of me yet.




In short Madam, the Cravat-string, the
Garter, the Sword-knot, the Centurine, the Bardash,
the Steinkirk, the large Button, the long Sleeve, the
Plume, and full Peruque, were all created, cry'd down,
or revived by me; in a word Madam, there has ne∣ver
been any thing particularly taking, or agreeable for
these ten Years past, but your humble Servant was the
Author of it.




Where the Devil will this end?



This is all Extravagant, Sir Novelty; but what
have you to say to me Sir?




I'll come to you presently Madam, I have
just done: Then you must know my Coach, and
Equipage are as well known, as my self; and since
the conveniency of two Play-Houses I have a better
Opportunity of shewing them: For between every
Act Whisk I am gone from one to th' other Oh!
what Pleasure 'tis at a good Play, to go out before
half an Act's done!



Why at a good Play?




O! Madam it looks Particular, and gives
the whole Audience an Opportunity of turning upon
me at once: Then do they conclude I have some Ex∣traordinary
Business, or a Fine Woman to go to at
least: And then again it shews my Contempt of what
the dull Town think their cheifest Diversion: But if I
do stay a Play out, I always set with my Back to the
Stage.








Then every Body will imagine I have been
tired with it before; or that I am jealous who talks to
who in the Kings Box. And thus, Madam, do I
take more pains to preserve a Publick Reputation, then
  29
ever any Lady took after the Small-Pox, to recover
her Complexion.



Well but to the Point, what have you to say to
me, Sir Novelty?




Now does she expect some Compliment
shall out-flatter her Glass.




To you Madam, Why I have been
saying all this to you.



To what end, Sir?




Why all this have I done for your sake.



What Kindness is it to me?




Why, Madam don't you think it more Glory
to be beloved by one Eminently Particular Person, whom
all the Town knows and talks of; than to be ador'd
by five Hundred dull Souls, that have lived Incog∣nito?



That I must confess is a prevailing Argument,
but still you han't told me why you Love me?




That's a Task he has left for me, Ma∣dam.




Tis a Province I never undertake, I must
Confess, I think tis sufficient if I tell a Lady why she
shou'd Love me?



Hang him! he's too conceited, he's so in Love
with himself, he won't allow a Woman the bare
Comfort of a Cold Compliment: Well Mr Worthy,




Why, Madam, I have observed several per∣ticular
Qualities in your Ladyship, that I have perfectly
ador'd you for, as the Majestick toss of your Head 
Your obliging Bow'd Curtesie your Satyrical Smile 
Your blushing Laugh your Demure Look 
the careless Tye of your Hood the Gen∣teel
flirt of your Fan The designed Acci∣dent
in your letting fall, and your agree∣able
manner of receiving it from him that
takes it up.
What be spoaks she imitates in dumb shew.

  30They both offer to take up her Fan, and in striving
Y. Worthy pushes Sir Novelty on his Back.





(Adjusting himself) I hope you Ladi∣ship
will excuse my disorder, Madam, How now!





Oh! Sir, Mrs. Flareit. 




Ha! speak lower, what of her?



By some unlucky Accident has discover'd your
being here, and raves like a Mad-woman: She's at your
Lodging Sir, and had broke you above Forty Pounds
worth of China before I came away; she talkt of fol∣lowing
hither, and if you don't make haste, I'm
afraid will be here before you can get through the
House, Sir.




This Woman is certainly the Devil; her
Jealousie is Implacable, I must get rid of her, though
I give her more for a separate Maintenance, than her
Conscience demanded for a Settlement before Enjoy∣ment.
 See the Coach ready, and if you meet her,
be sure you stop her with some pretended business,
till I am got away from hence Madam, I ask
your Ladiship ten thousand Pardons: There's a Per∣son
of Quality expects me at my Lodging upon ex∣traordinary Business.



What, will you leave us, Sir Novelty?




As unwillingly as the Soul the Body:
But this is an Irresistible Occasion! Madam your
most Devoted Slave. Sir your most humble Ser∣vant.
 Madam, I kiss your hands. Oh
Ged, no farther dear Sir, upon my Y. W. Sees him
to the Door.

Soul I won't stir if you do. 





Nay then Sir, Your humble Servant: So!
this was a lucky Deliverance.



I over-heard the Business. You see, Mr.
Worthy, a Man must be a slave to a Mistress some∣times,
as well as a Wife; Yet all can't perswade
your Sex to a favourable Opinion of Poor Marri∣age.




I long, Madam, for an Opportunity to
Convince you of your Error; And therefore give me
leave to hope to Morrow you will free me from the
pain of farther Expectation, and make an Husband
of me Come I'll spare your Blushes, and believe I
have already nam'd the day.



Had not we better consider a little?




No, let's avoid Consideration, 'tis an E∣nemy
both to Love and Courage; They that consider
much, live to be Old Batchelors, and Young Fighters.
No! no! we shall have time enough to consider af∣ter
Marriage But why are you so serious, Ma∣dam?



Not but I do consent to Morrow shall be
the day, Mr. Worthy▪ But I'm afraid you have not
lov'd me long enough to make our Marriage be the
Town-talk: For 'tis the Fashion now to be the Town-talk,
and you know one had as good be out of the
World, as out of the Fashion.




I don't know, Madam, what you call
Town-talk, but it has been in the News-Letters
above a Fortnight ago, that we were already marri∣ed.
Beside, the last Song I made of you, has been
sung at the Musick Meeting; and you may Imagine,
Madam, I took no little care to let the Ladies and
the Beaux know who 'twas made on.



Well, and what said the Ladies?




What was most observable, Madam, was
that while it was singing my Lady Manlove went out
in a great Passion.



Poor Jealous Animal! on my Conscience that
Charitable Creature has such a Fund of kind Com∣pliance
for all young Fellows, whose Love lies dead
upon their hands, that she has been as great a Hin∣drance
to us Vertuous Women, as ever the Bank of
England was to City Gold-Smiths.




The Reason of that is Madam, because you
Vertuous Ladies pay no Interest: I must confess the Prin∣cipal,
our Health is a little securer with you.



Well, and is not that an Advantage worth entr∣ing
into Bonds for? not but I vow we vertuous Devils
do love to insult a little; and to say Truth, it looks
too Credulous, and Easy in a Woman to Encourage
a Man before he has sigh'd himself to a Skele∣ton.




But Heaven be thankt, we are pretty
even with you in the End: For the longer you hold
us off before Marriage, the sooner we fall off after
it.



What then, you take Marriage to be a kind
of Jesuits Powder, that infallibly cures the Fever of
Love?




'Tis indeed a Jesuits Powder; for the
Priests first invented it: And only abstain'd from it,
because they knew it had a better Taste: Then guil∣ded
it over with a pretended Blessing, and so palm'd
it upon the unthinking Laity.



Prithee don't scrue your, Wit beyond the
compass of Good Manners Dee think I shall be
Tun'd to Matrimony by your railing against it? If
you have so little stomach to it, I'll ev'n make you
fast a Week longer.




Ay, but let me tell you, Madam, 'tis no
pollicy to keep a Lover at a thin Diet in hopes to
raise his Appetite on the Wedding-Night, for then

  33We come like starving Beggars to a Feast,
Where unconfin'd we Feed with Eager Haste,
Till each repeated Morsel palls the Taste.
Marriage gives Prodigals a Boundless Treasure,
Who squander that, which might be lasting Pleasure,
And Women think they ne'er have over Measure.








MY Dear, I have News for you.



I guess at it: And wou'd be fain
satisfied of the Particulars: Your Husband
is returned, and I hear knows nothing of your being
alive: Young Worthy has told me of your design up∣on
him.



T'is that I wanted your advice in; what think
you of it?



O! I admire it: Next to forgetting your Hus∣band,
tis the Best Council was ever given you; for un∣der
the Disguise of Mistress, you may now take a fair
advantage of Indulging your Love, and the little Ex∣perience
you have had of it already, has been just
enough not to let you be afraid of a Man.



Will you never leave your Mad humour?



Not till my youth leaves me: Why should
Women affect Ignorance among themselves, when we
converse with Men indeed? Modesty and Good Breed∣ing
Oblige us not to understand, what sometimes we
can't help thinking of.



Nay I don't think the worse of you for what
you say: For 'tis observed that a Bragging Lover, and
an over shy-Lady, are the farthest from what they
would seem; the One is as seldom known to receive
a Favour, as the other to Resist an Opportunity.



Most Women have a wrong Sense of Mode∣sty,
as some Men of Courage; if you don't Fight
with all you Meet, or Run from all you see, you are
presently thought a Coward, or an ill Woman.



You say true, and tis as hard a matter now a
days for a Woman to know how to converse with
Men, as for a man to know, when to draw his Sword:
For many times both Sexes are apt to over-act their
Parts: To me the Rules of Virtue have been ever
sacred; and I am loath to break 'em by an unadvi∣sed
Understanding: Therefore, dear Hillaria, help me,
for I am at a loss Can I justifie, think you, my
intended design upon my Husband?







Why, if I Court and Conquer him, as a Mi∣stress,
am not I accessary to his violating the Bonds
of Marriage? For though I am his Wife, yet while
he Loves me not as such, I encourage an Unlawful
Passion; and though the Act be safe, yet his Intent
is Criminal: How can I answer this?



Very Easily, for if he don't intridgue with
you, he will with some Body else in the mean time,
and I think you have as much Right to his Remains
as any one.



Ay! but I am assured the love he will pretend
to me is vicious: And tis Uncertain, that I shall pre∣vent
his doing worse elsewhere.



Tis true, a Certain Ill ought not to be done
for an Uncertain Good. But then again of two Evils
choose the least; and sure tis less Criminal to let him
love you as a Mistress, than to let him hate you as
a Wife: If you Succeed I suppose you will easily for∣give
your Guilt in the Undertaking.



To say truth, I find no Argument yet strong
enough to conquer my Inclination to it. But is their
no danger think you of his knowing me?



Not the least, in my opinion: In the first
place he confidently believes you are Dead: Then he
has not seen you these eight or ten Years: Besides,
you were not above sixteen when he left you: This
with the alteration the small-Pox have made in you,
(tho' not for the worse,) I think are sufficient Disguises
to secure you from his knowledge.



Nay and to this I may add the considerable
amendment of my Fortune; for when he left me I
had only my bare Jointure for a Subsistence: Beside
my strange manner of receiving him.



That's what I wou'd fain be acquainted with.



I expect further instructions from Young Wor∣thy
every Moment; then you shall know all, my
Dear.



Nay he will do you no small service: For a
Thief is the best Thief-catcher.





Madam, your Servant is below, who says
Young Mr. Worthy's Man waits at your Lodgings
with earnest business from his Master.



Tis well Come, my Dear I must have your
assistance too.



With all my Heart, I love to be at the bot∣tom
of a Secret: For they say the Confident of any
Amour, has sometimes more pleasure, in the Observa∣tion,
than the parties concern'd in the Enjoyment: But
  36
methinks, you don't look with a good Heart upon the
Business.



I can't help a little concern in a Business
of such Moment: For though my Reason tells me my
Design must prosper; yet my Fears say 'twere
Happiness too great. Oh! to reclaim the Man I'm
bound by Heaven to Love, to expose the Folly of a
Roving Mind in pleasing him with what he seem'd
to loath, were such a sweet Revenge for slighted Love,
so vast a Triumph of rewarded Constancy, as might
perswade the Looser part of Womankind ev'n to for∣sake
themselves, and fall in Love with Virtue.





Sir Novelty Fashion is below in his Coach,
Madam, and enquires for your Ladiship, or Madam
Narcissa.



You know my Cousin is gone out with my Lady
Tattle-tongue: I hope you did not tell him I was
within!



No, Madam, I did not know if your Ladiship
wou'd be spoke with, and therefore came to see.



Then tell him I went with her.








You must know, my Dear, I have sent to that
Fury Mrs. Flareit, whom this Sir Novelty keeps, and
have stung her to some purpose with an account of his
Passion for my Cousin: I ow'd him a Quarrel for that he
made between Mr. Worthy and me, and I hope her
Jealousy will severely revenge it; Therefore I sent my
Cousin out of the way, because unknown to her, her
Name is at the bottom of my Design. Here he comes,
Prithee, my Dear, let's go down the Back-Stairs, and
take Coach from the Garden. 








Both the Ladies abroad say you? I Sir
William within?



Yes Sir, if you please to walk in, I'll acquaint
him that you expect him here.




Do so Prithee and in the mean time let
me consider what I have to say to him Hold! In the
first place his Daughter is in Love with me! Wou'd I
marry her? Noh! Demm it, 'tis Mechanical to marry
the Woman you Love: Men of Quality shou'd always
marry those they never saw But I hear Young Wor∣thy
marries her to Morrow! which if I prevent not, will
spoil my design upon her? Let me see! I have it 
I'll perswade the old Fellow, that I wou'd marry her
my self! upon which he immediately rejects Young
Worthy, and gives me free access to her! Good! What
follows upon that? Opportunity, Importunity, Re∣sestance,
Force, Intreaty, Persisting! Doubting, Swear∣ing,
Lying Blushes, Yielding, Victory, Pleasure! 
Indifference, O! here he comes in ordine ad. 






Sir Novelty, your Servant, have you any
commands for me, Sir?




I have some Proposals to make, Sir, con∣cerning
your Happiness and my own, which perhaps
will surprize you. In a word Sir, I am upon the very
brink of Matrimony.



'Tis the best thing you can pursue, Sir,
considering you have a good Estate.



But whom do you think I intend to
marry?



I can't imagine, dear Sir, be brief, least
your delay transport me into a Crime I wou'd avoid,
which is Impatience. Sir, pray go on.



In fine, Sir, 'tis to your very Daughter,
the Fair Narcissa.



Humh! Pray, Sir, how long have you had
this in your head?



Above these two hours, Sir.



Very Good! then you han't slept upon't?



No! nor shan't sleep, for thinking on't; did
not I tell you I wou'd surprize you?



O! you have indeed, Sir, I am amaz'd! I
am amaz'd!



Well, Sir, and what think you of my Pro∣posal?



Why truly, Sir, I like it not: But if I did,
'tis now too late; my Daughter is dispos'd of to a Gen∣tleman,
that she and I like very well; at present, Sir,
I have a little Business, if this be all, your humble Ser∣vant,
I am in haste.



Demmee! what an insensible Blockhead's
this? Hold, Sir, dee hear is this all the Acknowledg∣ment
you make for the Honour I design'd you?



Why truly, Sir, 'tis an Honour, that I am
not ambitious of: In plain terms, I do not like you for
a Son-in-Law.



Now you speak to the purpose, Sir: But
prithee what are thy Exceptions to me?



Why in the first place, Sir, you have
too great a Passion for your own Person to have any
for your Wives: In the next place you take such an
Extravagant Care in the Cloathing your Body, that
your Understanding goes naked for't: Had I a Son so
dress'd, I shou'd take the liberty to call him an Egregi∣ous
Fop.



I Gad thou art a Comical old Gentleman,
and I'll tell thee a Secret: Understand then, Sir, from
me, that all Young Fellows hate the name of Fop, as
Women do the name of Whore: But I'Gad they both
Love the pleasure of being so: Nay Faith, and 'tis as
  39
as hard a matter for some Men to be Fops, as you
call 'em, as 'tis for some Women to be Whores.



That's pleasant, I Faith, can't any Man
be a Fop, or any Woman be a Whore, that has a mind
to't?



No Faith, Sir; for let me tell you, 'tis
not the Coldness of my Lady Freelove's Inclination: But
her Age and Wrinkles that won't let her Cuckold her
Husband: And again, 'tis not Sir Iohn Wou'dlook's
Aversion to Dress; but his want of a fertile Genius,
that won't let him look like a Gentleman: Therefore
in Vindication of all well dress'd Gentleman, I intend
to write a Play, where my Chiefest Character shall
be a down-right English Booby, that affects to be a
Beau, without either Genius, or Foreign Education, and
to call it in Imitation of another famous Comedy, He
wou'd if he cou'd, and now, I think, you are answer'd,
Sir; have you any Exceptions to my Birth, or Family,
pray Sir?



Yes, Sir, I have, you seem to me the
Off-spring of more than one Man's Labour: For cer∣tainly
no less, than a Dancing Singing, and Fencing-Master,
with a Taylor, Milliner, Perfumer, Peruque-Maker,
and French Vallet de Chambre, cou'd be at
the Begetting of you.



All these have been at the Finishing of
me since I was made.



That is, Heaven made you a Man, and
they have made a Monster of you: And so farewel to
yee!





hark yee Sir, am I to expect no farther
satisfaction in the Proposals I made you?



Sir Nothing makes a Man loss him∣self
like Passion: Now I presume you are Young, and
consequently Rash upon a Disappointment, therefore
to prevent any difference that may arise by repeat∣ing
my refusal of your Suit; I do not think it conve∣nient
to hold any farther Discourse with you.



Nay Faith thou shalt stay to hear a little
more of my mind first.



Since you press me, Sir, I will rather
bear than resist you.



I doubt, Old Gentleman, you have such
a Torrent of Philosophy running throngh your Pe∣ricranium,
that it has washt your Brains away.



Pray, Sir, why do you think so?



Because you Choose a beggerly unac∣countable
sort of Younger Brotherish Rake-hell for
you Son-in-Law, before a Man of Quality, Estate, good
Parts and Breeding, Demmy.



Truly, Sir, I know neither of the Per∣sons
to whom these Characters belong, if you please
to write their Names under 'em, perhaps I may tell
you, if they be like or no.



Why then, in short, I wou'd have been
your Son-in-Law; and you, it seems, prefer Young
Worthy before me. Now are your Eyes open?



Had I been blind, Sir, you might have
been my Son-in-Law, and if you were not blind you
wou'd not think, that I design my Daughter for
Young Worthy his Brother, I think, may deserve
her.



Then you are not Jealous of Young Wor∣thy!
humh!



No really, Sir, nor of you neither.



Give me thy hand, thou art very hap∣py:
Stop my Vitals: For thou dost not see thou art
blind: Not Jealous of Young Worthy? Ha! ha! How
now!





Sir, here's a Porter with a Letter for your
Honour.



I was ordered to give it into your own hands, Sir, and expect an Answer.



(Reads)Excuse my dear Sir Novelty the forc't Indifference I have shewn you, and let me Recom∣pence
your past Sufferings with an hours Conversation, af∣ter
the Play at Rosamond's Pond, where you will find an
hearty Welcome to the Arms of your Narcissa! Unex∣pected
happiness! The arms of your Narcissa! I gad and
when I am there, I'll make my self Welcome!
Faith I did not think she was so far gone neither!
But I don't question there are five Hundred more in
her Condition. I have a good mind not to go Faith!
Yet hang it, I will though only, to be revenged of
this Old Fellow! Nay, I'll have the Pleasure of mak∣ing
it publick too: For I will give her the Musick,
and draw all the Town to be Witness of my Tri∣umph!
Where is the Lady  To the Porter.



In a Hackney-Coach at the Corner of the
Street.




Well, Old Gentleman then you are resolv'd I shall be on
Kin to you? Your Daughter is disposed of: Humh!



You have your Answer, Sir, you
shall be
on Kin to me.




Farewell Old Philosophy: And d'ee hear,
I wou'd advise you to study nothing but the Art of
Patience: You may have an unexpected Occasion for it.
Hark you! wou'd not it nettle you damnably to hear
my Son call you Grandfather?




Sir Notwithstanding this provocation, I
am calm; but were I like other Men, a Slave to Pas∣sion,
shou'd not for-bear calling you Impertinent! How
  42
I swell with rising vexation Leave me, leave
me; go Sir, go, get you out of my House





Oh! have a care of Passion, Dear Diogenes, ha! ha! ha! he!




So! (Sighing) at last I have Conquer'd it; Pray
Sir Oblige me with your absence (taking off his Hat) I
protest I am tired with you, Pray leave my House.
(Submissively.)




Damm your House, your Family, your
Ancestors, your Generation, and your Eternal Posterity.





Ah! A Fair Riddance; how I bless
my self, that it was not in this Fools power to pro∣voke
me beyond that Serenity of Temper, which a
wise man ought to be Master of: How near are men
to Brutes, when their unruly Passions break the Bounds
of Reason? And of all Passions, Anger is the most vio∣lent,
which often puts me in mind of that admirable
Saying,
He that strives not to Stem his Angers Tide,
Does a Mad Horse without a Bridle ride.




Y. Worthy and Loveless as from the Tavern 
Snap following.



What a Sweet Evening tis Prithe Ned,
lets walk a little Look how lovingly the Trees are
joyned, since thou wert here, as if Nature had design'd
this Walk for the private Shelter of forbddien Love.
Several crossing the Stage.
Look here are some for making use of the Conveni∣ency.



But, hark ye Friend, are the Women as tame
and civil as they were before I left the Town? Can
they Endure the Smell of Tobacco, or Vouchsafe a Man
a Word with a Dirty Cravat on?




Ay, that they will; for Keeping is almost out of
Fashion: so that now an Honest Fellow with a Promising
Back need not fear a Nights lodging for Bare Goodfellow∣ship.



If Whoring be so poorly encourag'd, methinks
the Women shou'd turn honest in their own Defence.




Faith I don't find there's a Whore the less for
it; the Pleasure of Fornication is still the same; all the
Difference is, Lewdness is not so Barefac'd, as heretofore,
 Virtue is as much debased as our Money; for Mal∣denheads
are as scarce as our Mill'd Half-crowns; and
Faith, Dei gratia is as hard to be found in a Girl of Sixteen,
as round the Brims of an Old Shilling.



Well, I find, in spight of Law and Duty, the fish
will get the Better of the Spirit. But I see no Game yet. 
Prithee Will, let's go and take t'other! Bumper to En∣liven
Assurance that we may come downright to the
Business.




No, no; what we have in our Bellies already,
by the help of a little Fresh Air, will soon be in our
Pericraniums, and work us to a right pitch, to taste the
Pleasures of the Night.



The Day thou mean'st; my Day always breaks
at Sun-set. We wise Fellows, that know the Use of
Life, know too that the Moon lights Men to more
Pleasures than the Sun, the Sun was meant for
dull Soul of Business, and poor Rogues that have a mind
to save Candles.




Nay, the Night was always a Friend to Plea∣sure,
and that made Diana run a Whoring by the light of
her own Horns.



Right: And, prithee what made Daphne run
away from Apollo, but that he wore so much Day-light
about his Ears?




Ha! Look out Ned, there's the Enemy be∣fore
you!



Why then, as Caesar said, come follow me.





I hope 'tis his Wife, whom I desir'd to meet
me here, that she might take a View of her Soldier before
she new-mounted him.





I wonder, Madam, Sir Novelty don't come yet:
I am so afraid he shou'd see Narcissa, and find out the trick
of your Letter.



No! No! Narcissa is out of the way: I am sure
he won't be long; for, I heard the Hautbois, as they
pass'd by me, mention his Name; I suppose to make the
Intrigue more Fashionable, he intends to give me the
Musick.



Suppose he do take you for Narcissa, What Ad∣vantage
do you propose by it?



I shall then have a just occasion to Quarrel with
him for his Perfidiousness, and so force his Pocket to make
his Peace with me: Beside, my Jealousie will not let me rest
till I am reveng'd.



Jealousie! why, I have often heard you say, you
loath'd him!



'Tis my Pride, not Love, that makes me Jealous:
For, though I don't love him, yet I am incens'd to think
he Dares love another.



See! Madam, Here he is, and the Musick with
him.



Put on your Mask, and leave me. 







Here, Gentlemen, place your selves on this

Musick prepare to Play]. This taking a Man at his
first word, is a very new way of preserving Reputa∣tion,
stop my Vitals, nay, and secure one too;
for now may we Enjoy and grow Weary of one another,

making towards him] Ha! this must be She. I sup∣pose,
Madam, you are no Stranger to the Contents of this
Letter.



Dear Sir, this place is too publick for my Ac∣knowledgment,
if you please to withdraw to a more Pri∣vate
Conveniency.


The Musick prepare to Play, and all sorts of People gather
about it. Enter at one Door Nar. Hill. Am. Eld.
Worthy, and Y. Worthy; at another Loveless and
Snap, who talk to the Masks.



What say you Ladies, shall we walk Home∣wards?
It begins to be dark.




Prithee don't be so Impatient, it's light enough
to hear the Musick, I'll warrant ye.



Mr. Worthy, you promis'd me a Sight I long for:
Is Mr. Loveless Among all those?




That's He, Madam, a surveying that Mask∣ed
Lady.



Ha! Is't possible! Methinks I read his Vices
in his Person! Can he be Insensible, ev'n to the smart of
Pinching Poverty? Pray, Sir, your Hand, I find my
self Disorder'd. It troubles me to think I dare not speach
to him after so long an Absence.




Madam, your staying here may be Dangerous,
therefore let me Advise you to go home, and get all
things in order to Receive him: About an hour hence
will be a convenient time to set my Design a-going;
till when let me beg you to have a little Patience: Give
me Leave, Madam, to see you to your Coach.



I'll not trouble you, Sir, yonder's my Cousin Wel∣bred, I'll beg his Protection.


The Musick Plays, after which Nar. speaks.


I vow it's very fine, considering what dull Souls
our Nation are: I find 'tis an harder matter to reform
their Manners than their Government, or Religion.




Since the One has been so happily Accomplish'd,
I know no reason why we should despair of the Other:
I hope in a little time to see our Youth return from Tra∣vel
Big with Praises of their own Country. But
come, Ladies, the Musicks's done I suppose, shall we
walk?



Time enough, why you have no Tast of the
true Pleasure of the Park: I'll warrant you hate as
much to ridicule others, as to hear your self prais'd: for
my part, I think a little harmless Railing's half the
Pleasure of ones Life.




I don't love to create my self Enemies by ob∣serving
the Weakness of other People; I have more
Faults of my own than I know how to mend.



Protect me! How can you see such a Medley of
Human Stuffs as here is, without venting your Spleen?
 Why look there now, is not it Comical to see that
wretched Creature there with her Autumnal Face, dresft
in all the Colours of the Spring?




Pray, who is she Madam?



A thing that won't believe her self out of date,
though she was a Known Woman at the Restaura∣tion.




O! I know her, 'tis Mrs. Holdout, one that is
proud of being an Original of Fashionable Fornication,
and values her self mightily for being one of the first
Mistrisses that ever kept her Coach publickly in En∣gland.



Pray who's that Impudent young Fellow
there?




Oh, that's an Eternal Fan-tearer, and a con∣stant
Persecuter of Woman-kind: He had a great Mis∣fortune
lately.



Pray what was it?




Why, impudently presuming to Cuckold a
Dutch Officer, he had his fore-teeth kick'd out.







There's another too, Mr. Worthy, do you know
him?




That's Beau Noisy, one that brags of Favours
from my Lady, tho' refused by her Woman; that Sups
with my Lord, and borrows his Club of his Footman;
that beats the Watch, and is kick'd by his Companions;
that is one day at Court, and the next in Jayl; that
goes to Church without Religion, is valiant without
Courage, witty without Sense, and Drunk without Mea∣sure.




A very Compleat Gentleman.



Prithee Cousin, who's that over-shy Lady there,
that won't seem to understand what that Brisk young
fellow says to her?



Why, that's my Lady Slylove: That other Ce∣remonious
Gentleman is her Lover: She is so overmodest,
that she makes a scruple of Shifting her self before her
Woman, but afterwards makes none of doing it before
her Gallant.




Hang her, she's a Jest to the whole Town:
For, tho' she has been the Mother of two By blows, en∣deavours
to appear as Ignorant in all Company as if she
did not know the Distinction of Sexes.



Look, Look! Mr. Worthy, I vow there's the
Countess of Incog out of her Disabillee, in a high Head,
I protest!




'Tis as great a wonder to see her out of an
Hackney Coach, as out of Debtor .



Or out of Countenance.




That, indeed, she seldom changes; for she is
never out of a Mask, and is so well known in't, that
when she has a mind to be Private, she goes Bare∣fac'd.



But come, Cousin, now let's see what Monsters
the next Walk affords.




With all my Heart, 'tis in our way home.




Ladies, I must beg your Pardon for a moment,
yonder comes one I have a little business with, I'll di∣spatch
it immediately, and follow you.



No, no; we'll stay for you.



You may, if you please, Cousin; but, I suppose,
he will hardly thank you for't.



What, then you conclude 'tis a Womans busi∣ness,
by his promising a quick dispatch!




Madam, in three minutes you shall know the
Business, if it displease you, condemn me to an Eternal
absence.




Come, Madam, let me be his Security.



I dare take your Word, Sir 








Well! how go matters, is she in a Readiness to
receive him?



To an Hair, Sir, every Servant has his Cue, and
all are Impatient till the Comedy begins.




Stand aside a little, and let us watch our Oppor∣tunity.



 Enquire about half an hour hence
for Number Two, at the Gridiron.



To morrow with all my Heart, but to Night
I am engaged to the Chaplain of Collonel Thunder's Re∣giment.



What, will you leave me for a Mutton-chop,
for that's all he'l give you, I'm sure.



You are mistaken, faith he keeps me.



Not to himself, I'll engage him: Yet he may
too, if no body likes you no better than I do. Hark
you Child, prithee when was your Smock wash'd?



Why dost thou pretend to fresh Linnen, that
never wore a clean Shirt but of thy Mothers own Wash∣ing?




What, no Adventure, no Game, Snap?



None, None, Sir, I can't prevail with any from
the point Headoloths to the Horse-Guard-Whore.



What a-Pox! sure the Whores can't smell an
Empty Pocket.



No, no, that's Certain, Sir, they must see it in
our Faces▪



 My Dear Boy, how is't? I-gad,
I am glad thou art come to Town: My Lady expected
you above an hour ago, and I am overjoy'd I ha'
found thee: Come, come, come along, she's Impatient
till she sees you.



Odsbud, Sir, follow him, he takes you for
another.



I-gad, it looks with the face of an Intrigue ,
I'll humour him : Well, what, shall we go
now?



Ay, ay, now it's pure and dark, you may go un∣discover'd.



That's what I would do.



Odsheart, she longs to see thee, and she is a curi∣ous
fine Creature, ye Rogue! such Eyes! such Lips! 
and such a Tongue between 'em! ah, the Tip of it will
set a Mans Soul on fire!



 The Rogues make me Impatient!



Come, come, the Key, the Key, the Key, you dear
Rogue!



O Lord, the Key, the Key!




The Key: why sh sh sh shu'd yo 
yo you have it?



Ay, ay! Quickly, give's it!



Why what the Devil , sure I han't
lost it ; oh! no Gad, it is not there ;What the
Devil shall we do?



Oon's, ne'r stand fumbling; if you have lost it
we must shoot the Lock I think.



I-gad, and so we must, for I han't it.



Come, come along, follow me.



Snap, Stand by me, you Dog.










Ha, ha! the Rogue managed him most dexte∣rously;
how greedily he Chopt at the Bait? What the
Event will be, Heaven knows; but thus far 'tis Pleasant;
And since he is safe, I'll venture to divert my Company
with the Story. Poor Amanda, thou well deservest a bet∣ter
Husband: Thou wert never wanting in thy Endea∣vours
to reclaim him: And, faith, considering how a long
Dispair has worn thee,
'Twere pity now thy Hopes should not succeed;
This new Attempt is Loves last Shift indeed.









DAmme! Iack, let's after him, and fight
him; 'tis not to be put up.



No! Dam him! no body saw the affront, and
what need we take notice of it?



Why that's true! But Damme! I have much
ado to forbear cutting his Throat.




Pray Gentlemen, what's the matter? Why
are you in such a Passion?



What's that to you, Sir? What wou'd you have?




I hope, Sir, a Man may ask a Civil Question.



Damme! Sir, we are Men of Honour; we dare
answer any Man.




But why are you angry, Gentlemen? Have you received any wrong?



We have been called Rascals, Sir, have had the
Lye given us, and had like to have been kickt!




But I hope, you were not kickt, Gentlemen.



How, Sir! we kickt!




Nor do I presume, that you are Rascals!



Bloud! and Thunder! Sir, let any Man say it that
wears an head! we Rascals!




Very good! since then you are not Rascals,
he rather was one, who maliciously call'd you so: Pray
take my Advice, Gentlemen; never disturb your selves,
for any ill your Enemy says of you; for from an Enemy
the World will not believe it: Now you must know, Gen∣tlemen,
that a Flea-bite is to me more offensive, than the
severest Affront any Man can offer me!



What, and so you wou'd have us put it up!
  66
Damme! Sir, don't preach Cowardice to us, we are Men
of Valour: you won't find us Cowards, Sir.



No, Sir! we are no Cowards, tho' you are.



Hang him▪ let him alone, I see a Coward in his
••ce.




If my face make any Reflection, Sir, 'tis a∣gainst
my will.



Prithee Tom, let's Affront him, and raise his Spleen
a little.




Raise my Spleen! that's more than any Man
cou'd ever boast of.








I am not angry yet, therefore I do not Lye,
Sir: Now one of us must lye, I do not lye, Ergo 



Damme! Sir, have a care! Don't give me the
Lye, I shan't take it, Sir.




I need not, Sir! you give it your self.



Well, Sir, what then? if I make bold with my
self, every old Puppy shall not pretend to do it.




Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!



Damme, Sir, what do you laugh at!




To let you see, that I am no Puppy, Sir, for
Puppies are Brutes, now Brutes have not Risibility: But
I laugh, therefore I am no Puppy, ha! ha!



Bloud and Thunder, Sir! dare you fight?




Not in cool blood, Sir, and I confess 'tis im∣possible
to make me angry.



I'le try that! Heark ye, don't you know you are
a sniveling old Cuckold?








Why then I know you to be one.




Look you, Sir, my Reason weighs this Injury▪
which is so light, it will not raise my Anger in the other
Scale.



Oon's! what a tame old Prig's this? I'll give you
better weight then. I know who got all your Children.




Not so well as my Wife I presume Now
she tells me, 'twas my self, and I believe her too.



She tells you so, because the poor Rogue tha•
got 'em is not able to keep 'em.




Then my keeping them in Charity.



Bloud and Thunder, Sir, this is an Affront to us,
not to be Angry after all these Provocations Damme!
Iack, let's souse him in the Canal.

(as they lay hold on him)





S'Death, what's here? Sir William in the Rogues
hands that affronted the Ladies Oh, forbear, forbear 




So, Gentlemen, I thought you had fair warn∣ing
before, now you shall pay for't. (Enter three or four
Sentinels.) Heark you, honest Soldiers, pray do me the
favour to wash these Rascals in the Canal, and there's a
Guinea for your trouble.



Damme, Sir! we shall expect satisfaction.





Oh dear Gentlemen, I am obliged to you, for
I was just going to the Canal my self, if you had not come
as you did.



Pray, Sir, what had you done to 'em?




Why, hearing the Musick from my Parlour
Window, and being invited by the sweetness of the Even∣ing,
I ev'n took a Walk to see if I could meet with you,
when the first Objects that presented themselves were these
Bullies, threatning to cut some bodies Throat: Now, I
endeavouring to allay their Fury, occasioned their giving
me scurrilous Language: and finding they cou'd not make
me as angry as themselves, they off'red to fling me into
the Water.



I am glad we stept to your deliverance.




Oh, I thank you, Gentlemen. I'll e'en go
home, and recover my fright. Good Night, Good Night
to you all.





Harry, see Sir William safe to his Lodging.

Well, Ladies, I believe it's time for us to be walking too.



No, pray let me engage you to stay a little longer:
Yonder comes Sir Novelty and his Mistress, in pursuance of
the Design I told you of; pray have a little patience, and
you will see the effect on't.




With all my heart, Madam.






Generous Creature! this is an unexampled
condescension to meet my Passion with such early kind∣ness:
Thus let me pay my soft Acknowledgments.




You must know he has mistaken her for another.



For Heaven's sake let me go, if Hillaria shou'd be
at home before me, I am ruined for ever.



Hillaria! what does she mean?




Narcissa's Reputation shall be ever safe, while
my Life and Fortune can protect it.



O Gad▪ let me go, does the impudent Creature
take my Name upon her I'll pull off her Head-cloaths.



Oh! fye! Cousin, what an ungenteel Revenge
wou'd that be! have a little patience.



Oh! I am in a flame.




But will you never see that common Creature Fla∣reit
more?




Never! never! Feed on such homely Fare af∣ter
so rich a Banquet?



Nay, but you must hate her too.




That I did long ago for her stinking breath!
'Tis true, I have been led away; but I detest a Strumpet:
I am informed she keeps a Fellow under my Nose, and for
that reason, I wou'd not make the Settlement I lately gave
her some hopes of: But e'en let her please her self, for now
I am wholly yours.



Oh, now you charm me! but will you love me
ever?




Will you be ever kind?



Be sure you never see Flareit more.




When I do, may this soft Hand Revenge my
Perjury.



So it shall, Villain!














What, will nothing but a Maidenhead go down
with you! Thou miserable conceited Wretch Foh! my
breath stinks does it! I'm a homely Puss! a Strumpet, not
worth you notice! Devil, I'll be reveng'd.




Damn your Revenge, I'm sure I feel it.




Really, Sir Novelty, I am obliged to you, for your
kind thoughts of me, and your extraordinary care of my
Reputation.




S'Death, she here! expos'd to half the Town! 
well, I must brasen it out however!




What! no Pretence! no Evasion now!




There's no occasion for any, Madam.



Come come, swear you knew me all this while.




No, faith, Madam, I did not know you: For
if I had, you wou'd not have found me so furious a Lover.



Furies and Hell! dares the Monster own his guilt!
this is beyond all sufferance! thou Wretch, thou Thing,
thou Animal, that I (to the everlasting forfeiture of my
Sense and Understanding) have made a Man. For till
thou knewest me, 'twas doubted if thou wert of Humane
kind. And dost thou think I'll suffer such a worm as Thee
to turn against me! No! when I do, may I be curs'd to
thy Embraces all my Life, and never know a Joy beyond
thee.




Why wh wh what will your Lady∣ship's
Fury do, Madam?




Only change my Lodging, Sir.




I shall keep mine, Madam, that you may
know where to find me when your fury is over You see
I am good natur'd.


  68〈1 page duplicate〉  69〈1 page duplicate〉



This Bravery's affected: I know he loves me, and
I'll pierce him to the quick: I have yet a surer way to fool him.




Methinks the Knight bears it bravely.



I protest the Lady weeps.



She knows what she does, I'll warrant you.



Ay, Ay, the Fox is a better Politician than the
Lion.



(VVith tears in her eyes) Now woman.
(Aside.)
Sir Novelty, pray Sir, let me speak with you.








Before we part (for I find I have irrecoverably lost
your Love) let me beg of you, that from this hour, you
ne'er will see me more, or make any new attempts to de∣ceive
my easie Temper: For I find my Nature's such, I
shall believe you, though to my utter Ruine.




Pray Heaven she be in earnest.




One thing more, Sir; since our first Acquaintance,
you have received several Letters from me; I hope you
will be so much a Gentleman as to let me have 'em again:
Those I have of yours shall be returned to Morrow Morn∣ing.
And now, Sir, wishing you as much Happiness in
her you Love, as you once pretended I cou'd give you 
I take of you my everlasting leave Farewel, and may
your next Mistress love you till I hate you.





So! now must I seem to perswade her. Nay,
prithee my Dear! why do you struggle so? whither wou'd
you go?



Pray, Sir, give me leave to pass, I can't bear to
stay.





VVhat is't that frightens you?



Your Barbarous Usage: Pray let me go.




Nay, if you are resolved, Madam, I won't
press you against your will: Your humble servant. (Leaves
her) and a happy riddance, stop my Vitals.





Ha! not move to call me back! so unconcerned!
Oh! I cou'd tear my flesh, stab every feature in this dull,
  71
decaying Face, that wants a Charm to hold him! Dam
him! I loath him too! But shall my Pride now fall from
such an height, and bear the Torture unreveng'd? No!
my very Soul's on fire, and nothing but the Villain's blood
shall quench it. Devil, have at thee.




Have a care, Sir.




Let her alone, Gentlemen, I'll warrant you.





Prevented! Oh! I shall choak with boyling Gall.
Oh! Oh! uumh! let me go; I'll have his blood, his blood,
his blood!





Let her come, let her come, Gentlemen!



Death and Vengeance, am I become his sport!
he's pleased, and smiles to see me Rage the more! But he
shall find no Fiend in Hell can match the fury of a dis∣appointed
Woman! Scorned! slighted! dismissed with∣out
a parting Pang! Oh torturing thought! May all the
Racks Mankind e'er gave our easie Sex, Neglected Love,
Decaying Beauty, and hot Raging Lust light on me, if
e're I cease to be the Eternal Plague of his remaining Life,
nay, after Death:
 VVhen his, his black Soul lies howling in despair,
I'd plunge to Hell, and be his Torment there.




Sure Sir Novelty, you never loved this La∣dy,
if you are so indifferent at parting.




Why Faith Tom, to tell you the Truth, her
Jealousie has been so very troublesome and expensive to
me of late, that I have these Three Months sought an op∣portunity
to leave her; but Faith I had always more re∣spect
to my Life, than to let her know it before.



Methinks, Sir Novelty, you had very little re∣spect
to her Life, when you drew upon her.




Why what wou'd you have had me done, Ma∣dam?
Complemented her with my naked Bosom! No!
No! look ye, Madam, if she had made any Advances▪
  72
I cou'd have disarm'd her in Second at the very first Pass
 But come, Ladies, as we walk, I'll beg your Judg∣ments
in a particular nice Fancy, that I intend to appear
in, the very first Week the Court is quite out of Mour∣ning.



With all my heart, Sir Novelty. Come
Ladies, considering how little rest you'll have to morrow
night, I think 'twere Charity not to keep you up any
longer.



Nay as for that matter, the night before a
Wedding is as unfit to sleep in, as the Night following:
Imagination's a very troublesome Bedfellow: Your
Pardon, Ladies, I only speak for my self.



See the Coaches ready at St. Iames's Gate





Come, come, make hast; is the Supper, and
the Musick ready?



It is, It is: Well! is he come?



Ay, Ay, I came before to tell my Lady the
News; That Rogue Sly manag'd him rarely, he has been
this half hour pretending to pick the Lock of the Gar∣den-door:
Well poor Lady! I wish her good Luck with
him: For she's certainly the best Mistress living. Heark
ye, is the Wine strong, as she order'd it? Be sure you
ply him home: for he must have two or three Bumpers
to qualifie him for her Design. See here he comes: A∣way
to your Post.






Where the Devil will this Fellow lead me 
Nothing but Silence, and Darkness! sure the House is
haunted, and he has brought me to face the Spirit at his
wonted hour!



There, there, in, in, Slip on your Night-Gown,
and refresh your self; in the mean time I'll acquaint my
Lady, that you are here.








Ay, Ay, Sir, I'll warrant you.





a Night Gown, and a Perriwig lying by. They
Re-enter


Ha! what sweet Lodgings are here? where
can this end?



I gad, Sir, I long to know Pray Heaven we
are not deluded hither to be stan'd Methinks I wish I
had brought the Remnants of my Dinner with me.



Heark! I hear some body coming! Hide your
self▪ Rascal;
I wou'd not have you seen.



Well Sir, I'll line this Trench in case of your
being in danger.




Ha! This Night-Gown and Peruke don't lye
here for nothing. I'll make my self agreeable. I have
baulk't many a Woman in my time, for want of a lean
Shirt. 





Ha! a Supper! Heaven send it be no Vision!
If the Meat be real, I shall believe the Lady may prove
Flesh and Bloud. Now am I damnably puzled to
know whether this be she, or no• Madam 




Sir, my Lady begs your pardon for a moment.



Humh! her Lady! Good. 



She's unfortunately detained by some Female Vi∣sitors, which she will dispatch with all the hast imagina∣ble;
in the mean time, be pleased to refresh you self
with what the House affords. Pray Sir sit down.



Not alone; Madam, you must bear me Com∣pany.



To oblige you, Sir, I'll exceed my Commission.



(Vnder the Table.) Was there ever so unfortunate
a Dog! What the Devil put it in my head to hide my self
before Supper; why this is worse than being lock'd into
a Closet, while another Man's a Bed with my Wife! I
suppose my Master will take as much care of me too, as I
shou'd of him, if I were in his Place.



Sir, my humble Service to you.




Madam, your humble Servant: I'll pledge you.
Snap, when there's any danger I'll call you; in the mean
time lye still, d' hear.





Igad I'll shift for my self then: (snatches a Flask
unseen) so, now I am arm'd, defiance to all Danger.



Madam, your Lady's Health.



Ay, Ay, let it go round, I say.




Well really Sir my Lady's very happy, that she
has got loose from her Relations: for they were always
teizing her about you: But she defies 'em all now. 
Come Sir, Success to both your Wishes.




Give me a Glass; methinks this Health inspires
me My Heart grows lighter for the Weight of Wine;
 Here, Madam, Prosperity to the Man, that ventures
most to please her.



What think you of a Song to support this Gaity?



With all my Heart.




You have oblig'd me, Madam; Igad I like this
Girl! she takes off her Glass so feelingly, I am half per∣swaded
she's of a thirsty Love: If her Lady don't make
a little hast, I find I shall present my humble Service to
her.




Sir I ask your Pardon, my Lady has some Com∣mands
for me, I will return immediately.



Your Servant. Methinks this is a very new
Method of Intriguing!



Pray Heaven it be N•w! for the Old way com∣monly
  75
ended in a good beating! But a Pox of Danger I
say, and so here's good Luck to you, Sir.



Take heed, Rogue, you don't get drunk, and dis∣cover
your self.



It must be with a fresh Flask then; for this is ex∣pired
Supernatulum.



Lie close, you Dog; I hear somebody coming▪
I am impatient till I see this Creature. This Wine has
armed me against all thoughts of danger! Pray Heaven
she be young, for then she can't want Beauty. Ha! here
she comes! Now! never-falling Impudence assist me.




Where's my Love? O, let me fly into his Arms,
and live for ever there.



My Life, my Soul! (runs and embraces her.) by
Heaven a tempting Creature! Melting, soft, and warm, 
as my desire Oh, that I cou'd hide my face for ever thus,
that undiscovered I might reap the Harvest of a Ripe de∣sire,
without the lingring pains of growing Love.




Look up, my Lord, and bless me with a tender
look, and let my talking Eyes inform thee how I have
languish'd for thy absence.



Let's retire, and chase away our fleeting Cares
with the Raptures of untir'd Love.



Bless me! your Voice is strangely alter'd! Ha!
defend me! who's this? help! help! within there?



So! I am discover'd! A Pox on my tatling! that
I cou'd not hold my Tongue till I got to her Bed-Chamber.




Did your Ladyship call help, Madam, what's the
matter?



Villain! Slave! who's this? what Ruffian have
you brought me here Dog, I'll have you murder'd!





Bless me! O Lord! dear Madam, I beg your Par∣don;
as I hope to be saved, Madam, 'tis a mistake, I took
him for Mr. 



Be dumb! Eternal Block head here! Take this
Fellow, toss him in a Blanket, and let him be turn'd out
of my doors immediately.



O Pray! Dear Madam, for Heavens sake, I am a
ruin'd Man 



Ah! Snap, what will become of thee? Thou art
fall'n into the hands of a Tygress that has lost her Whelp;
I have no hopes, but in my Master's Impudence! Hea∣ven
strengthen it!



I'll hear no more! away with him!



Now, Sir, for you▪ I expected 


A Man, Madam, did you not?



Not a Stranger, Sir; But one that has a Right
and Title to that welcome, which by mistake has been
given to you.



Not an Husband, I presume he wou'd not have
been so privately conducted to your Chamber, and in the
dark too!



Whoever it was, Sir, is not your business to Ex∣amine:
But if you wou'd have Civil Usage, pray be gone.



To be used Civilly, I must stay, Madam: There
can be no danger with so fair a Creature.



I doubt you are mad, Sir.



While my Senses, have such luscious Food before
'em, no wonder if they are in some Confusion, each stri∣ving
to be foremost at the Banquet, and sure my greedy,
Eyes will starve the rest.




Pray, Sir, keep your distance, lest your feeling too
be gratified.



O Lord! wou'd I were 100 Leagues off at Sea!



Then briefly thus, Madam, know I like and love
you: Now if you have so much Generosity as to let me
know, what Title my pretended Rival has to your Person,
or your Inclinations: Perhaps the little hopes I then may
have of supplanting him, may make me leave your House.
If not, my Love shall still pursue you, tho' to the hazard
of my Life, which I shall not easily resigh, while this
Sword can guard it, Madam.



Oh, were this Courage shown but in a better Cause,
how worthy were the Man that own'd it! (Aside.) What
is it, Sir, that you propose by this unnecessary Trifling?
Know then, that I did expect a Lover, a Man perhaps more
brave than you: One, that if present, wou'd have given
you a shorter Answer to your Question.



I am glad to hear he's brave, however; it betrays
no weakness in your Choice: But if you'd still preserve,
or raise the Joys of Love, remove him from your thoughts
a moment, and in his room receive a warmer Heart, a
Heart that must admire you more than he, because my
Passion's of a fresher Date.



What de'e take me for?



A Woman, and the most Charming of your Sex;
one whose pointed Eyes declare you form'd for Love, and
tho' your words are flinty; your every look and motion all
confess there's a secret Fire within you, which must spar∣kle,
when the Steel of Love provokes it. Come, now pull
away your hand, and make me hold it faster.



Nay, now you are rude, Sir.



If Love be Rudeness, let me be Impudent▪ When
we are Familiar, Rudeness will be Love. No Woman ever
thought a Lover Rude after she had once granted him the
Favour.







How can I? when my desire's so violent: Oh, let
me snatch the Rosie Dew from those distilling Lips, and
as you see your power to Charm, so chide me with your
Pity. Why do you thus cruelly turn away your Face? I
own the Blessing's worth an Ages Expectation, but if re∣fused
till merited, 'tis esteemed a Debt. Wou'd you ob∣lige
your Lover, let loose your early Kindness.



I shall not take your Counsel, Sir, while I know a
Woman's early Kindness is as little sign of her Generosity,
as her Generosity is a sign of her Discretion: Nor wou'd
I have you believe I am so ill provided for, that I need listen
to any Man's first Addresses.



Why, Madam, wou'd not you drink the first time
you had a Thirst?



Yes; but not before I had.



If you can't drink, yet you may kiss the Cup, and
that may give you inclination.



Your Pardon, Sir, I drink out of no body's Glass
but my own; as the Man I love confines himself to me, so
my Inclination keeps me true to him.



That's a Cheat imposed upon you, by your own
Vanity; For, when your back's turn'd, your very Cham∣ber-Maid
sips of your leavings, and becomes your Rival.
Constancy in Love is all a Cheat, Women of your Under∣standing
know it: The Joys of Love are only Great when
they are new, and to make 'em lasting, we must often change.



Suppose 'twere a fresh Lover I now expected.



Why then, Madam, your Expectation's answer'd;
For, I must confess I don't take you for an Old Acquain∣tance,
tho' somewhere I have seen a Face not much unlike
you. Come, your Arguments are vain; for they are so
Charmingly delivered, they but inspire me the more, as
blows in Battel raise the brave Man's Courage. Come, every
thing pleads for me, Your Beauty, Wit, Time, Place, Op∣portunity,
and my own Excess of Raging Passion.



Stand off: distant as the Globes of Heaven and
Earth, that like a falling Star I may shoot with greater force
into your Arms, and think it Heaven to lye Expiring there.




Ah! ah! ah! Rogue, the day's our own.



Thou sweetest, softest Creature Heav'n e'er form'd;
Thus let me twine my self about thy beauteous Limbs, till
struggling with the Pangs of painful Bliss, motionless and
mute we yield to Conquering Love, both Vanquish'd, and
both Victors.



Can all this heat be real? Oh, why has hateful Vice
such power to Charm? while poor abandon'd Vertue lies
neglected.




Come, let us Surfeit on our new-born Raptures,
let's waken sleeping Nature with Delight, till we may
justly say, now! now! we live!



Come on, let's indulge the Transports of our pre∣sent
  79
Bliss, and bid defiance to our future change of Fate.
Who waits there?




Bring me word immediately if my Apartment's
ready, as I order'd it. O, I am charm'd, I have found the
Man to please me now: One that can, and dares maintain
the Noble Rapture of a Lawless Love: I own my self a
Libertine, a Mortal Foe to that dull thing call'd Vertue,
that meer Disease of sickly Nature. Pleasure's the end of
Life, and while I'm Mistress of my self, and Fortune, I will
enjoy it to the height. Speak freely then, (not that I love
like other women the nauseous Pleasure of a little Flattery)
but answer me like a Man that scorns a Lye: Does my Face
invite you, Sir? May I from what you see of me, propose
a Pleasure to my self in pleasing you?



By Heaven you may; I have seen all Beauties that
the Sun shines on, but never saw the Sun out-shin'd before:
I have measur'd half the world in search of Pleasure: But
not returning home, had ne'er been happy.



Spoken like the Man I wish might love me Pray
Heaven his words prove true. (Aside.) Be sure you ne∣ver
flatter me, and when my Person tires you, confess it
freely: For change when e'er you will, I'll change as soon:
But while we chance to meet still let it be with Raging
Fire: No matter how soon it dies, provided the small time
it lasts, it burn the fiercer.



O! wou'd the blinded world, like us, agree to change,
how lasting might the Joys of Love be? For thus Beauty,
tho' stale to one, might somewhere else be new; and while
this Man were blest in leaving what he loath'd, another
were new-Ravish'd in receiving what he ne'er enjoy'd.




Madam, every thing is according to your Order.



Oh! lead me to the Scene of unsupportable Delight,
Rack me with Pleasures never known before, till I lye ga∣sping
with Convulsive Passion: This Night let us be lavish
to our unbounded wishes.
Give all our Stock at once to raise the Fire,
And Revel to the height of loose Desire.




Ah! what an happy Creature's my Lady now!
There's many an unsatisfied Wife about Town, wou'd be
glad to have her Husband as wicked as my Master, upon
the same Terms my Lady has him▪ Few Women I'm a∣fraid
wou'd grudge an Husband the laying out his stock of
Love, that cou'd receive such considerable Interest for it!
Well Now shan't I take one wink of sleep for thinking
how they'll employ their time to Night Faith, I must
listen if I were to be hang'd for't.




So! my Master's provided for, therefore 'tis time
for me to take care of my self: I have no mind to be
lock'd out of my Lodging: I fancy there•s room for two
in the Maid's bed, as well as my Lady's This same
Flask was plaguy strong Wine I find I shall storm, if
she don't surrender fairly. By your leave, Damsel.



Bless me! who's this? O Lord! what wou'd you
have? who are you?



One that has a Right and Title to your body, my
Master having already taken Possession of your Lady's.



Let me go, or I'll cry out.



Ye Lye, ye dare not disturb your Lady: but the
better to secure you, Thus I stop your mouth.




Humh! Lord bless me, is the Devil in you,
tearing ones things!



Then show me your Bed-Chamber.



The Devil shall have you first.



A shall have us both together then: Here will I
fix, (takes her about the Neck) just in this posture till to
Morrow Morning: In the mean time when you find your
Inclination stirring, prithee give me a call, for at present
I am very sleepy.




Foh! how he stinks. (He belches.) Ah! what a
whiff was there the Rogue's as drunk as a Saylor with
a Twelve Months Arrears in his Pocket; or a Iacobite upon
a day of ill News. I'll ha nothing to say to him let me
see, how shall I get rid of him O! I have it! I'll soon
make him sober I'll warrant him: So ho! Mr. What de'e
call'um, where do you intend to lye to Night?



Humh! why, where you lay last Night, unless
you change you Lodging.



Well, for once I'll take Pity of you make no
noise, but put out the Candles, and follow me softly, for
fear of disturbing my Lady.



I'll warrant ye! there's no fear of spoyling her
Musick, while we are playing the same Tune.






Where are you? lend me your hand.



Here! Here! make hast, my dear Concupiscence.



Hold! stand there a little, while I open the Door
gently without waking the Footmen.




Come along softly this way!



Where abouts are you?



Here, here, come strait forward.




O Lord! O Lord! I have broke my Neck.



I am glad to hear him say so, however I shou'd
be loath to be hang'd for him. How de'e, Sir?



De'e, Sir! I am a League under Ground.



Where abouts are you?



In Hell, I think.



No! No! you are but in the Road to it, I dare
say: Ah dear! why will you follow lewd Women at this
rate, when they lead you to the very Gulph of Destruction?
I knew you wou'd be swallow'd up at last. Ha! ha! ha! ha!



Ah, ye sneering Whore!



Shall I fetch you a Prayer-Book, Sir? to Arm
you against the Temptations of the Flesh!



No! you need but show your own damn'd ugly
Face to do that Heark ye, either help me out, or I'll
Hang my self, and swear your Murder'd me.



Nay, if you are so bloody-minded, Good Night to
ye, Sir.


he catches hold on her.


Ah! Ah! Ah! have I caught you! Igad we'll
Pig together now.



O Lord! Pray let me go, and I'll do any thing.



And so you shall before I part with you, (Pulls
her in to him.) And now, Master, my Humble Service to
you.









ARE the Ladies ready?



Hillaria is just gone up to hasten
her Cousin, and Sir William will be here immediately.



But heark you, Brother! I have consider'd of
it, and pray let me oblige you not to pursue your design
upon his Five thousand Pound: For in short, 'tis no bet∣ter
than a Cheat, and what a Gentleman shou'd scorn to
be guilty of. Is not it sufficient that I consent to your
wronging him of his Daughter?



Your Pardon, Brother, I can't allow that a wrong:
For his Daughter loves me, her Fortune, you know, he
has nothing to do with; and it's a hard case a Young Wo∣man
shall not have the disposal of her Heart. Love's a
Fever of the Mind, which nothing but our own wishes
can asswage, and I don't Question but we shall find Mar∣riage
a very cooling Cordial. And as to the Five Thou∣sand
Pound, 'tis no more than what he has endeavour'd to
cheat his Niece of.



What de'e mean, I take him for an Honest
Man!



Oh! Very honest! As honest as an Old Agent
to a New-Rais'd Regiment No Faith, I'll say that for
him, he will not do an ill thing unless he gets by it. In
a word, this so very honest Sir VVilliam, as you take him
to be, has offer'd me the refusal of your Mistress; and
  83
upon Condition I will secure him Five Thousand Pound
upon my day of Marriage with her, he will secure me
her Person, and Ten Thousand Pound, the remaining part
of her Fortune! There's a Guardian for ye! What think
ye now, Sir?



Why I think he deserves to be serv'd in the same
kind! I find Age, and Avarice are inseparable! there∣fore
ev'n make what you can of him, and I will stand
by you. But heark you, Mr. Forge, are you sure it will
stand good in Law if Sir William signs the Bond?



In any Court in England, Sir.



Then there's your Fifty Pieces, and if it succeeds,
here are as many more in the same Pocket to answer 'em:
But Mum here comes Sir William and the Ladies.





Good morrow Gentlemen! Mr. Worthy,
give you Joy! od so! If my heels were as light as my
Heart, I shou'd ha' much adoe to forbear dancing Here,
here, take her, Man, (gives him Narcissa's hand) she's
yours, and so is her Thousand pound a year, and my
Five Thousand pound shall be yours too.



You must ask me leave first.




Odso! is the Lawyer come?



He is, and all the Writings are ready, Sir.



Come, Come, let's see, Man! What's this!
Odd! this Law is a plaguy troublesome thing; for now
adays it won't let a Man give away his own, without
repeating the Particulars 500 times over: When in for∣mer
times a Man might have held his Title to Twenty
thousand pound a year, in the compass of an Horn-Book.



That is, Sir, Because there are more Knaves now
adays, and this Age is more Treacherous and Distrustful
than heretofore.



That is, Sir, because there are more Law∣yers
than heretofore: But come, what's this, prithee?



These are the Old Writings of your Daughter's
Fortune; this is Mr. VVorthy's Settlement upon her, 
and this, Sir, is your Bond for Five thousand pound to
  84
him: There wants nothing but filling up the Blanks with
the Party's Names; if you please, Sir, I'll do't immedi∣ately.







May I crave your Daughter's Christian Name,
the rest I know, Sir.



Narcissa! prithee make hast 



You know your Business 




I'll warrant you, Sir.




Mr. VVorthy, methinks your Brother does
not relish your Happiness as he shou'd do: Poor Man!
I'll warrant he wishes himself in his Brother's condition!



Not I, I'll assure you, Sir.



Niece! Niece! have you no Pity? Prithee
look upon him a little! Odd! he's a pretty young Fel∣low
 I am sure he loves you, or he wou'd not have fre∣quented
my House so often! De'e think his Brother cou'd
not tell my Daughter his own Story without his Assi∣stance!
Pshaw! waw! I tell you, you were the Beauty
that made him so assiduous: Come, come, give him your
Hand, and he'll soon creep into your Heart, I'll warrant
you: Come, say the word, and make him happy.



What, to make my self miserable, Sir, Marry a
Man without an Estate?



Hang an Estate! True Love's beyond all
Riches! 'Tis all dirt meer dirt! beside han't you Fif∣teen
Thousand Pound to your Portion?



I doubt, Sir, you wou'd be loath to give him your
Daughter, tho' her Fortune's larger.



Odd, if he loved her but half so well, as he
loves you, he shou'd have her for a word speaking.



But, Sir, this asks some Consideration 



You see, Mr. VVorthy, what an extraordinary
Kindness my Father has for you!



Ay, Madam, and for your Cousin too: But
I hope with a little of your Assistance we shall be both able
very shortly to return it.



Nay, I was always ready to serve Hillaria; for
  85
Heaven knows I only Marry to Revenge her Quarrel to
my Father: I cannot forgive his off'ring to sell her.



O, you need not take such pains, Madam, to con∣ceal
your Passion for me; you may own it without a blush
upon your Wedding-day.



My Passion! When did you hear me acknowledge
any? If I thought you cou'd believe me guilty of such a
Weakness, tho' after I had marry'd you, I wou'd never
look you in the Face.



A very pretty Humour, this faith! (Aside.)
What a world of unnecessary Sins have we two to Answer
for? For she has told more Lyes to conceal her Love, than
I have sworn false Oaths to promote it. Well, Madam,
at present I'll content my self with your giving me leave
to Love.



Which if I don't give, you'll take I suppose.



Well, Uncle, I won't Promise you, but I'll go to
Church and see them marry'd; when we come back 'tis
ten to one but I surprize you where you least think on.



Why, that's well said! Mr. VVorthy, now!
now's your time; Odd! I have so fir'd her, 'tis not in her
power to deny you, Man To her! to her! I warrant
her thy own, Boy! You'll keep your word, Five Thou∣sand
Pound upon the day of Marriage.



I'll give you my Bond upon demand, Sir.



O! I dare take your Word, Sir. Come,
Lawyer, have you done? Is all ready?



All, Sir! This is your Bond to Mr. VVorthy: Will
you be pleased to Sign that first, Sir?



Ay, ay; let's see! The Condition of this Obli∣gation
(Reads.) Hum um Come, lend me the Pen. 
There Mr. VVorthy, I deliver this as my Act and Deed
to you, and Heaven send you a good Bargain Niece, will
you Witness it? (which she does) Come, Lawyer, your
Fist too.




Now, Sir, if you please to Sign the Joynture.



Come on Sir VVilliam, I deliver this to you
for the use of your Daughter. Madam, will you give your
  86
self the trouble once move? (Hill. sets her Hand.) Come,
Sir  (the Lawyer does the same.) So, now let a Coach be
called as soon as you please, Sir.



You may save that Charge, I saw your own
at the Door.



Your Pardon, Sir, that wou'd make our busi∣ness
too Publick: For which Reason, Sir VVilliam, I hope
you will excuse our not taking you along with us.




Ay, ay, with all my heart, the more Privacy
the less Expence. But pray, what time may I expect you
back again? For Amanda has sent to me for the Writings
of her Husband's Estate: I suppose she intends to Re∣deem
the Mortgage, and I am afraid she will keep me there
till Dinner-time.



Why, about that time she has obliged me to
bring some of her nearest Friends to be Witnesses of her
good or evil Fortune with her Husband: Methinks I long
to know her Success; if you please, Sir VVilliam, we'll meet
you there.



With all my heart  (Enter a Servant.) Well!
is the Coach come?



It is at the Door, Sir.



Come, Gentlemen, no Ceremony; your time's
short.



Your Servant, Sir VVilliam.




So! here's Five Thousand Pounds got with a
wet finger! This 'tis to read Mankind! I knew a Young
Lover wou'd never think he gave too much for his Mistress!
VVell! if I don't suddenly meet with some misfortune, I
shall never be able to bear this Tranquillity of Mind.








Thus far my hopes have all been answer'd, and my
disguise of Vicious Love has charm'd him ev'n to a Mad∣ness
of Impure Desire: But now I tremble to pull off the
Mask, lest bare fac'd Vertue shou'd fright him from my
  87
Arms for ever. Yet sure there are Charms in Vertue, nay,
stronger, and more pleasing far, than hateful Vice can boast
of! Else why have Holy Martyrs perish'd for its sake?
While Lewdness ever gives severe Repentance, and unwil∣ling
Death. Good Heaven inspire my heart, and hang
upon my Tongue the force of Truth and Eloquence, that I
may lure this wandring Falcon back to Love and Vertue 
He comes, and now my dreaded Task begins!




How fare you, Sir? De'e not already think your
self confin'd? Are you not tired with my easie Love?



O! never! never! you have so fill'd my thoughts
with Pleasures past, that but to reflect on 'em is still new
Rapture to my Soul, and the Bliss must last while I have
Life or Memory.



No Flattery, Sir! I lov'd you for your plain-dealing;
and to preserve my good Opinion, tell me, what think you
of the Grapes persuading Juice! Come, speak freely, wou'd
not the next Tavern-Bush put all this out of your head?



Faith, Madam, to be free with you, I am apt to
think you are in the right on't: For tho' Love and Wine
are two very fine Tunes, yet they make no Musick, if you
play them both together, separately they Ravish us: Thus
the Mistress ought to make room for the Bottle, the Bottle
for the Mistress, and both to wait the call of Inclination.



That's Generously spoken I have observ'd, Sir,
in all your Discourse you confess something of a Man, that
has throughly known the world! Pray give me leave to
ask you, of what Condition you are, and whence you came?



Why, in the first place, Madam, by Birth I am a
Gentleman; by ill Friends, good Wine, and false Dice, al∣most
a Beggar: But by your Servants mistaking me, the
happiest Man, that ever Love and Beauty smil'd on.



One thing more, Sir! Are you married? Now




I was, but very Young.



What was your Wife?



A foolish loving thing, that built Castles in the
  88
Air, and thought it impossible for a Man to forswear
himself when he made Love.



Was she not Vertuous?



Uumh! Yes faith, I believe she might, I was ne'er
Jealous of her.



Did you ne'er love her?



Ah! most damnably at first, for she was within two
Women of my Maidenhead.



What's become of her?



Why, after I had been from her beyond Sea, about
Seven or Eight Years, like a very Loving Fool she died of
the Pip, and civilly left me the world free to Range in.



Why did you leave her?



Because she grew stale, and I cou'd not Whore
in quiet for her: Besides she was always exclaiming a∣gainst
my Extravagancies, particularly my Gaming;
which she so violently oppos'd, that I fancy'd a Pleasure
in it, which since I never found; for in one Month I lost
between Eight and Ten Thousand Pound, which I had
just before call'd in to pay my Debts. This Misfortune
made my Creditors come so thick upon me, that I was
forc'd to Mortgage the remaining part of my Estate to
Purchase new Pleasure, which I knew I cou'd not do on
this side the Water, amidst the Clamours of insatiate
Duns, and the more hateful Noise of a Complaining
Wife.



Don't you wish you had taken her Counsel tho'?



Not I, faith, Madam.







Because 'tis to no purpose: I am Master of more
Philosophy, than to be concern'd at what I can't help 
But now, Madam, Pray give me leave to inform my
self as far in your Condition.



In a word, Sir, till you know me throughly, I
must own my self a perfect Riddle to you.



Nay, nay, I know you are a Woman: But in
what Circumstances! Wife, or Widdow.



A Wife, Sir; a True, a Faithful, and a Vertuous Wife.



Humb! truly, Madam, your Story begins something
like a Riddle! a Vertuous Wife say you! what, and was you
never false to your Husband!



I never was by Heav'n! for Him, and only Him I still
love above the World.



Good agen! pray, Madam, don't your Memory fail
you sometimes? because I fancy you don't remember what you
do over night!



I told you, Sir, I shou'd appear a Riddle to you: But if
my Heart will give me leave, I'le now unloose your fetter'd Ap∣prehension But I must first amaze you more Pray, Sir,
satisfy me in one particular 'tis this What are your un∣dissembled
thoughts of Vertue? Now, if you can, shake off
your loose Unthinking Part, and summon all your force of
manly Reason to resolve me.



Faith, Madam, methinks this is a very odd Question
for a Woman of your Character. I must confess you have
amazed me.



It ought not to amaze you! why shou'd you think I
make a mock of Virtue? But last night you allow'd my un∣derstanding
greater then is usual in our Sex: if so, can you
believe I have no farther sense of Happiness than what this
Empty, Dark and Barren World can yield me! No, I have
yet a prospect of a sublimer Bliss, an Hope, that carries me to
the bright Regions of Eternal Day.



Humh! I thought her last nights humour was too
good to hold. I suppose by and by she will ask me to go to
Church with her Faith, Madam, in my mind this discourse
is a little out of the way. You told me I shou'd be acquainted
with your condition, and at present that's what I had rather be
inform'd of.



Sir, you shall: But first, this Question must be answer'd;
your thoughts of Virtue, Sir? By all my Hopes of Bliss
hereafter, your answering this pronounces half my Good, or
Evil fate for ever: But on my knees I beg you do not speak
till you have weigh'd it well Answer me with •he same
Truth, and sincerity, as you wou'd answer Heav'n at your la∣test
hour.



Your words confound me, Madam; some wondrous
Secret sure lies ripened in your Breast, and seems to struggle
for its fatal birth! What is it I must answer you?



Give me your real thoughts of Virtue, Sir; can you
belive there ever was a Woman truly Mistress of it, or is it
only Notion?



Let me consider, Madam, (Aside) What can this
mean? Why is she so earnest in her demands, and begs me to
be serious, as if her Life depended on my Answer I will
resolve her, as I ought, as Truth, and Reason, and the strange
occasion seems to press me. Most of your Sex confound the
very Name of Virtue; for they wou'd seem to live without
desires, which cou'd they doe, that were not Virtue but the
defect of unperforming Nature, and no praise to them: For
who can boast a Victory when they have no Foe to Conquer?
Now she alone gives the fairest proofs of Virtue, whose Con∣science
and whose force of Reason can curb her warm Desires,
when Opportunity wou'd raise 'em: That such a Woman may
be found I dare believe.



May I believe that from your Soul you speak this un∣dissembled
truth?



Madam, you may. But still you rack me with amaze∣ment! why am I ask't so strange a Question?



I'le give you ease immediately. Since then you have
allow'd a Woman may be Virtuous How will you excuse
the Man who leaves the Bosome of a Wife, so qualified, for
the abandon'd pleasures of deceitfull Prostitutes! Ruines her
Fortune! contemns her Counsel! loaths her Bed, and leaves
her to the lingring miseries of Despair and Love: while in re∣turn
of all these wrongs, she his poor forsaken Wife meditates
no Revenge, but what her piercing Tears, and secret Vows to
Heav'n for his Conversion yield her: yet still loves on, is con∣stant
and unshaken to the last! Can you believe, that such a
Man can live without the stings of Conscience, and yet be ma∣ster
of his Senses! Conscience! did you ne'er feel the Checks of
it! did it never, never tell you of your broken Vows?



That you shou'd ask me this, confounds my Reason 
And yet your words are utter'd with such a powerfull Accent,
  91
they have awak'd my Soul, and strike my thoughts with hor∣rour
and remorse. 

(Stands in a fixt posture.)


Then let me strike you nearer, deeper yet: 
But arm your mind with gentle pity first, or I am lost for
ever.



I am all Pity, all Faith, Expectation, and confused
Amazement: Be kind, be quick, and ease my wonder.



Look on me well: Revive your dead remembrance:
And oh! for pity's sake (Kneels) hate me not for loving long,
faithfully forgive this innocent attempt of a despairing passion,
and I shall die in quiet.








I wonot be! The word's too weighty for my fault∣ring
Tongue, and my Soul sinks beneath the fatal Bur∣then.
Oh!

(Falls on the Ground.)


Ha! she faints! look up fair Creature! Behold a
Heart that bleeds for your distress, and fain wou'd share the
weight of your oppressing sorrows! Oh! thou hast rais'd a
thought within me, that shocks my Soul.



'Tis done! (rising) the Conflict's past, and Heav'n
bids me speak undaunted. Know then, ev'n all the boasted
Raptures of your last Nights Love you found in your Amanda's
Arms I am your Wife.







For ever blest or miserable, as your next breath shall
sentence me.



My Wife! impossible! is she not dead! How shall I
believe thee?



How Time and my Afflictions may have alter'd me I
know not: But here's an Indelible Confirmation (bares her Arm.)
These speaking Characters, which in their cheerfull bloom our
Early Passions mutually recorded.



Hah! 'tis here 'tis no Illusion, but my real Name;
which seems to upbraid me as a witness of my Perjur'd Love 
Oh I am confounded with my Guilt, and tremble to behold
thee Pray give me leave to think.




I will. (kneels.) But you must look upon me. For
only Eyes can hear the Language of the Eyes, and mine have
  92
sure the Tenderest tale of Love to tell, that ever Misery, at the
dawn of Rising-Hope cou'd utter.



I have wrong'd you. Oh! rise! basely wrong'd you!
and can I see your Face?



One kind, one pitying look cancels those wrongs
for ever: and oh! forgive my fond presuming passion; for
from my Soul I pardon and forgive you all: all, all but this,
the greatest, your unkind Delay of Love.



Oh! seal my pardon with thy trembling Lips, while
with this tender Grasp of fond reviving Love I seize my Bliss
and stifle all thy wrongs for ever.




No more; I'le wash away their memory in tears of
flowing Joy.



Oh thou hast rouz'd me from my deep Lethargy of
Vice! For hitherto my Soul has been enslav'd to loose Desires,
to vain deluding Follies, and shadows of substantial bliss: but
now I wake with joy to find my Rapture Real. Thus let me
kneel and pay my thanks to her, whose conquering Virtue has
at last subdu'd me. Here will I fix, thus prostrate sigh my
shame, and wash my Crimes in never ceasing tears of Peni∣tence.



O rise! this posture heaps new guilt on me! now
you over-pay me.



Have I not used thee like a Villain! For almost ten
long years depriv'd thee of my Love, and ruin'd all thy For∣tune!
But I will labour, dig, beg or starve, to give new
proofs of my unfeign'd Affection.



Forbear this tenderness, least I repent of having mov'd
your Soul so far: you shall not need to beg. Heav'n has pro∣vided
for us beyond its common care. 'Tis now near two
years since my Uncle Sir William Wealthy sent you the news
of my pretended death, knowing the Extravagance of your
Temper he thought it fit you shou'd believe no other of me;
and about a month after he had sent you that advice, poor man,
he dyed, and left me in the full possession of two thousand
pounds a year, which I now cannot offer as a Gift, because my
Duty, and your lawfull Right, makes you the undisputed Ma∣ster
of it.



How have I labour'd for my own Undoing, while in
despite of all my Follies, kind Heav'n resolv'd my Happiness.





Madam, Sir William Wisewoud has sent your Ladiship
the Writings you desired him, and says he'll wait upon you
immediately.



Now Sir, if you please to withdraw awhile, you may
inform your self how fair a Fortune you are Master of.



None, none that can outweigh a Virtuous Mind, while
in my Arms I thus can circle thee, I grasp more Treasure, than
in a Day the posting Sun can travail o're. Oh! why have I
so long been blind to the Perfections of thy Mind and Person!
Not knowing thee a Wife, I found thee Charming beyond the
wishes of Luxurious Love. Is it then a Name, a Word, shall
rob thee of thy Worth? Can Fancy be a surer Guide to Happi∣ness
than Reason? Oh! I have wander'd like a benighted
wretch, and lost my self in Lifes Unpleasing Journey.
'Twas heedless Fancy first, that made me stray,
But Reason now breaks forth, and lights me on my way.







Prithee Tom make hast below there; my Lady has
order'd Dinner at half an hour after one precisely: look out
some of the Red that came in last.

Two of the Servants hawl Snap and Amanda's
Woman out of the Cellar.


Come Sir, come out here, and show your face.
Wom. Oh I am undone; ruin'd!



Pray Sir, who are you, and what was your Busi∣ness,
and how in the Devil's Name came you in Here?



Why truly, Sir, the Flesh led me to the Cellar-Door;
but I believe the Devil push't me in that Gentlewoman can
inform you better.




Pray Mrs. Anne how came you two together in the
Cellar?



Why he he pu pu pull'd me in.




But how the Devil came he in?



He fe fe fe fel in.



How came he into the House?



I don do don't know.



Ah! you are a Crocodile; I thought what was
the reason I cou'd never get a good word from you! What, in
a Cellar too! But come, Sir, we will take care of you how∣ever.
Bring him along, we will first carry him before my La∣dy;
and then Toss him in a Blanket.



Nay but Gentlemen! dear Gentlemen.






This is indeed a joyfull Day, we must all Congratu∣late
your Happiness.



Which while our lives permit us to enjoy, we must
still reflect with Gratitude on the generous Author of it: Sir,
we owe you more than words can pay you.



Words are indeed too weak; therefore let my Grati∣tude
be Dumb till it can speak in Actions.



The success of the Design I thought on, sufficiently re∣wards
me.



When I reflect upon Amanda's past Afflictions, I cou'd
almost weep to think of his unexpected Change of Fortune.



Methinks her fair Example shou'd perswade all con∣stant
Wives ne'er to Repine at unrewarded Virtue. Nay ev'n
my Brother being the first promoter of it, has atton'd for all
the looseness of his Character.



I never can return his kindness.



In a short time Sir, I suppose you'll meet with an Op∣portunity,
if you can find a Receipt to preserve Love after his
Honey-Moon's over.



The Receipt is easily found, Madam; Love's a tender
Plant, which cann't live out of a warm Bed: you must take
care with undissembled Kindness to keep him from the Nor∣thern
Blast of Jealousie.



But I have heard your Experienced Lovers make use
of Coldness, and that's more Agreeable to my Inclination.



Coldness, Madam, before Marriage, like throwing a
little Water upon a clear Fire, makes it burn the fiercer: but
after Marriage you must still take care to lay on fresh Fuel.



Oh▪ fie, Sir! how many Examples have we of Mens
hating their Wives for being too fond of 'em?



No wonder Madam: you may stifle a Flame by heap∣ing
on too great a Load.



Nay Sir, if there be no other way of destroying his
Passion; for me he may love till Doomsday.



Humph! don't you smell Powder, Gentlemen? Sir
Novelty is not far of.



What not our Fellow Collegian, I hope, that was ex∣pell'd
the University for Beating the Proctor.







Does that Weed grow still?



Ay faith, and as rank as ever, as you shall see, for
here he comes.





Ladies your humble Servant; Dear Loveless let me
Embrace thee, I am o'er-joy'd at thy good Fortune: stop my
Vitals the whole Town rings of it already my Lady Tat∣tletongue
has tired a Pair of Horses in spreading the News about.
Hearing Gentlemen that you were all met upon an Extraordi∣nary
good Occasion, I cou'd not resist this opportunity of joyn∣ing
my Joy with yours: for you must know I am 







To my Liberty, Madam, I am just parted from my
Mistress.



And pray Sir, how do you find your self after it?



Th ehappiest Man alive, Madam, Pleasant! Easie!
Gay! Light! and Free as Air: hah; (Capers) I beg your La∣dyship's
Pardon, Madam, but upon my Soul I cannot confine
my Rapture.



Are you so indifferent Sir?



Oh! Madam she's engaged already to a Temple
Beau! I saw 'em in a Coach together so fond! and bore it
with as unmov'd a Countenance as Tom Worthy does a thun∣dering
Jest in a Comedy when the whole House roars at it.



Pray Sir, what occasion'd your Seperation?



Why this Sir, you must know she being still
possest with a Brace of Implacable Devils, call'd Revenge and
Jealousie, dogg'd me this Morning to the Chocolate-house,
where I was oblig'd to leave a Letter for a young foolish Girl,
that (you will excuse me Sir) which I had no sooner delive∣red
to the Maid of the House; but whip! she snatches it out of
her hand, flew at her like a Dragon, tore off her Head-Close,
flung down three or four Setts of Lemonade-Glasses, Dasht my
Lord Whiffles Chocolate in his Face, Cut him over the Nose,
And had like to have strangled me in my own Steinkirk.



Pray Sir, how did this end?



Comically, stop my Vitals! for in the Cloud of
Powder, that she had batter'd out of the Beaux Periwigs I stole
away: After which I sent a Friend to her, with an Offer, which
she readily accepted: Three hundred pound a year during life,
provided she wou'd renounce all claims to me, and resign my
Person to my own disposal.



Methinks, Sir Novelty, you were a little too extra∣vagant
in your Settlement, considering how the price of Wo∣men
is fallen.



Therefore I did it to be the first man shou'd raise
their price: For the Devil take me, but the Women of the
Town now come down so low, that my very Footman, while
he kept my Place t'other day at the Playhouse, carry'd a Mask
out of the Side-Box with him, and stop my Vitals, the Rogue
is now taking Physick for't.





Come bring him along there.



How now! hah! Snap in hold: Pray let's know the
business; Release him Gentlemen.



Why, an't please you, Sir, this Fellow was taken in
the Cellar with my Lady's Woman! she says he kept her in
by force, and was rude to her: she stands crying here with∣out,
and begs her Ladyship to do her Justice.



Mr. Loveless, we are both the occasion of this Mis∣fortune,
and for the poor Girl's Reputation-sake, something
shou'd be done.



Snap, answer me directly, have you lain with this
poor Girl?



Why, truly Sir, Imagining you were doing little less
with my Lady, I must confess, I did commit Familiarity
with her, or so Sir!



Then you shall marry her, Sir! no reply unless it be
your Promise.



Marry her, O Lord, Sir! after I have lain with her?
why, Sir! how the Devil can you think a Man can have any
Stomach to his Dinner, after he has had three or four Slices off
of the Spit?



Well Sirrah! to renew your Appetite, and because thou
hast been my old Acquaintance, I'll give thee an 100 l. with
her, and thirty Pound a Year during life, to set you up in some
honest Imployment.



Ah! Sir, now I understand you, Heav'n reward
you! Well Sir, I partly find that the gentile Scenes of our
lives are pretty well over; and I thank Heav'n, that I have so
much Grace left, that I can repent, when I have no more Op∣portunities
of being wicked, come Spouse! (She Enters)
here's my hand, the rest of my Body shall be forth-coming, ah!
little did my Master and I think last night that we were rob∣bing
our own Orchards!




Brother, stand upon your Guard! here comes Sir
William.





Joy, joy to you all! Madam, I Congratulate your
good Fortune. Well, my dear Rogue must not I give thee
Joy too? ha!



If you please, Sir: but I confess, I have more than I
deserve already.



And art thou marry'd?



Yes Sir, I am marry'd!



Odso, I am glad on't: I dare swear, thou dost not
grudge me the 5000 l.



Not I really Sir: you have given me all my Soul
cou'd wish for, but the Addition of a Fathers Blessing.




Humh! what dost thou mean? I am none of thy
Father.



This Lady is your Daughter, Sir, I hope.



Prithee get up! prithee get up! thou art stark mad!
true, I believe she may be my Daughter: well, and so Sir!



If she be not, I'm certain she's my Wife, Sir.



Humh! Mr. Worthy, pray Sir do me the favour to
help me to understand your Brother a little do you know
any thing of his being married?



Then without any abuse, Sir William, he married
your Daughter this very Morning, not an hour ago, Sir.



Pray Sir whose consent had you, who advis'd you
to it?



Our mutual Love and your consent Sir, which these
Writings, entituling her to a thousand Pound a year, and this
Bond, whereby you have oblig'd your self to pay me five
thousand Pound upon our day of Marriage, are sufficient
proofs of.



He, he! I gave your Brother such a Bond, Sir.



You did so! but the obligation is to me; look there
Sir.



Very good! this is my hand, I must confess Sir:
and what then?



Why then I expect my five thousand Pound, Sir:
pray Sir, do you know my Name?



I am not drunk Sir, I am sure it was Worthy, and
Iack, or Tom, or Dick, or something.



No Sir, I'll show you 'tis William, look you there
Sir: you shou'd have taken more care of the Lawyer Sir,
that fill'd up the Blank.



So now his Eyes are open!



And have you married my Daughter against my
Consent, and trickt me out of 5000 l. Sir?



His Brother, Sir, has married me too with my Con∣sent,
and I am Not trickt out of 5000 l.



Insulting Witch! look ye Sir! I never had a sub∣stantial
Cause to be angry in my life before: but now I have
reason on my side, I will indulge my Indignation most im∣moderately:
I must confess, I have not patience to wait the
slow redress of a Tedious Law-Suit! therefore am resolv'd to
right my self the nearest way draw, draw Sir, you must
not enjoy my five thousand Pound, tho' I fling as much more
after it in procuring a Pardon for killing you. (They hold him.)
Let me come at him, I'll murder him! I'll cut him! I'll tear
him! I'll Broil him! and eat him! a Rogue! a Dog! a Cur∣sed
Dog! a Cut-throat, murdering Dog!



O fie, Sir William, how monstrous is this Passion?



You have disarm'd me, but I shall find a time to poi∣son
him.



Think better on't Sir William, your Daughter has
married a Gentleman; and one whose Love entitles him to
her Person.



Ay, but the 5000 l. Sir! why, the very report of his
having such a Fortune, will ruin him, I warrant you, within
this week he will have more Duns at his Chamber in a Morn∣ing,
than a gaming Lord after a good Night at the Groom
Porters, or a Poet upon the fourth day of his New Play. I
shall never be pleased with paying it against my own Consent,
Sir.



Yet you wou'd have had me done it Sir William: but
however I heartily wish you wou'd as freely forgive Mr. Wor∣thy,
as I do you Sir.



I must confess this Girls good Nature makes me a∣shamed
of what I have offer'd: But Mr. Worthy I did not ex∣pect
such Usage from a man of your Character: I always took
you for a Gentleman.



You shall find me no other, Sir: Brother a word
with you!



Sir William, I have some Obligations to this Gentle∣man,
and have so great a confidence in your Daughter's Me∣rit,
and his Love; that I here promise to return you your
5000 l. if after the Expiration of one year, you are then dis∣satisfied
in his being your Son in Law.



But see Brother, he has forestall'd your purpose.



Mr. Loveless, you have been before-hand with me,
but you must give me leave to offer Sir William my joint-security
for what you have promised him.



With all my Heart Sir! Dare you take our Bonds,
Sir William?



Hold Gentlemen! I shou'd blush to be oblig'd to that
degree: therefore Sir William, as the first proof of that re∣spect
and duty I owe a Father, I here unaskt return your
Bond, and will henceforth expect nothing from you, but as
my Conduct shall deserve it.



This is indeed a generous Act, methinks 'twere Pity it
shou'd go unrewarded.



Nay, now you vanquish me! after this I can't sus∣pect
your future Conduct: there Sir! 'tis yours, I acknow∣ledge
the Bond, and wish you all the Happiness of a Bridal
Bed. Heav'ns Blessing on you both, now rise my Boy! and
let the world know 'twas I set you upon your Legs again.



I'll study to deserve your Bounty, Sir.



Now Sir William; You have shown your self a
Father. This prudent Action has secured your Daughter
from the usual consequence of a stol'n Marriage; a Parents
Curse. Now she must be happy in her Love, while you have
such a tender Care on't.



This is indeed a happy Meeting, we all of us have
drawn our several Prizes in the Lottery of Human life: There∣fore
I beg our Joys may be united: not one of us must
  101
part this day. The Ladies I'll intreat my Guests.



The rest are mine, and I hope will often be so.



Tis yet too soon to dine: therefore to divert us in the
mean time, what think you of a little Musick, the Subject per∣haps
not improper to this Occasion!



'Twill oblige us, Madam, we are all Lovers of it.




Love Seated on a Throne, attended with
a CHORUS.


HAil! hail! Victorious Love!
To whom all Hearts below,
With no less Pleasure bow,
Than to the Thundring Jove,

The Happy Souls above.










Cease, cease fond Fools your Empty Noise,
And follow not such Ioys,
Love gives you but a short-liv'd Bliss,
But I bestow immortal Happiness.



Rebellious Reason, talk no more,
Of all my Slaves, I thee abhor:
But thou, alas! dost strive in vain
To free the Lover from a pleasing Chain,
In Spight of Reason, Love shall live and reign.







  102A Martial Symphony.




What Wretch wou'd follow Loves alarms.
When Honors Trumpet sounds to Arms:
Hark! how the Warlike Notes inspire
In ev'ry Breast a glowing Fire.



Hark how it swells with Love and soft Desire.



Behold, behold the married State
By thee too soon betray'd,
Repenting now too late.




O! tell me cruel God of Love,
Why didst thou my thoughts possess
With an Eternal Round of Happiness,
And yet alas! I lead a wretched Life,
Doom'd to this Galling Yoke the Emblem of a Wife.



Vngratefull Wretch! how dar'st thou Love upbraid?
I gave thee Raptures in the Bridal-Bed.



Long since alas! the airy Vision's fled,
And I with wandring Flames my Passion feed.
O! tell me pow'rfull God
Where I shall find
My former Peace of Mind!



Where first I promis'd thee a happy Life,
There thou shalt find it in a Vertuous Wife.


  103Love, & Fame.
Go home unhappy Wretch, and mourn
For all thy Guilty Passion past,
There thou shalt those Ioys return,
Which shall for ever, ever last.

End with the First Chorus.





'Twas generously design'd, and all my Life to come
shall show how I approve the Moral. Oh! Amanda! once
more receive me to thy Arms; and while I am there, let all
the World confess my Happiness. By my Example taught let
every man, whose Fate has bound him to a married Life, be∣ware
of letting loose his wild desires: for if Experience may be
allow'd to judge, I must proclaim the folly of a wandring
Passion: the greatest Happiness we can hope on Earth,
And sure the nearest to the Ioys above,
Is the chast Rapture of a Vertuous Love.

