A noyse within, Trumpets, Drums, Pistols,
Shot, Swords clash, &c.




LOst By heavens all lost,
All our hopes blasted
By Jove, without hope of recovery.
O gods, commiserate our despicable estate.
A noise within as before,
Exit hastily. Enters again.
Oh heavens! this day were we at push of pike
For our publike liberty Now we are at our wits end
For our private safety. 
A noyse within cry, they fly, they fly.
Harke, what a hideous noyse this fatal day
Hath cancell'd all our former victories,
Never to be remembred in this hour.
Our ancient splendour suffers sad ecclipse.
 They fly They fly Oh what a dismal word!
How unaccustom'd Siennois to fly;
True Siennois such as had vowed their lives.
A victime for their publike liberty,


To fly, like dust before mechanick slaves;
Such as while now never knew other armes,
Then forks or shovels Do the gods intend
To revel in our miseries! and prove
Strange paradoxes to the credulous world!
That abject, base, unmannag'd Varlets thus
Should overcome the Cavalry of Siena:

A thing unheard of! O! accursed wretches,
Whose too politick pates first hatcht these wartes;
You are least sharers here. My Prince and I
Must suffer this reproach I slight my wounds;
 But O! my honour lost. I'le bear it stoutly:
 Up then my spirits, be not you dejected;
There's something yet to care for there's no time
Now to complain: heavens know what just designes
We undertook; though with unequal success.
Wee've done what lay in humane power Pistoia

Bear witness, where so many insolent rebells
Have found this day their sepulchre: thy fields
Can testifie how dear some sold their lives.
And thou, the Ensigne of all noble souls
Make affidavit of this dayes behaviour.
Holds up his sword.
 Now to my generous Prince, whom cruel fates
Have levell'd with my self Him will I search,
That if my fates require my quick departure
For Stygian lakes: as in my life I've been
Eminent in his service, I may now,
Dying couragiously in his presence, have
His royal Pass-port and Testificate,
To raise my honour, and condole my fate.





Enter Borasco with Souldiers.


SO now the day's our own but yet the Duke
Escap'd Marciano not prisoner!
The victory is not such as I expected.
But come, my Mirmydons, wee'l not give over;
Let's, with a party of our choicest horse,
Make narrow search for Marciano:

For, if we find him not, we must not think
To gain the Generals favour. Come, my Boyes,
He hath attempted oft to strip the Senate
Of their new power, and so destroy us all;
Whose hopes are nourished by the present wars:
So that if you shall catch him, you may sure
Expect a great reward: his excellency,
The brave Lord Barbaro will hugg you for it.








O Florence! don't insult at this dayes success,
This unnatural victory over thy lawfull Prince
Will quickly make thee sensible of unnatural
And intolerable Tyranny: that Ichneumon,

Who now tickles thee in all thy desires
Will stop thy breath at length, whilst thy good Prince,
Whom thou can blame for nothing but misfortune,
Shall yet be more unfortunate in seeing
Thee too unfortunate. But, I perceive
The main designe of this preposterous war,
Love and ambition muzles humane souls;


So that when private Subjects covet honour
And power, their lawfull Prince must quit his Throne,
No matter for what reason, since they mean
Some reformation; as if private preferment
Were inconsistent with all Monarchy.
 But what! 'tis unseasonable for me t'expostulate.
My noble Prince (goodness protect him still)
Is gone for Savoy; I am here commanded
To rally those few forces I can find,
With slender hopes but yet I'le do my best
To prosecute his Royal orders so,
Good Subjects votes assist me 'tis resolv'd,
For while Dame nature does allow me breath,
I'le serve my Prince nought shall excuse but death.









O! Leonardo How dost do Boy?



Cassio thou art the man I was seek∣ing,
welcome effaith, and how Prethee? Cass Well.



As well as the Ladies will permit thee? ha.



Yes indeed but how goes all with you what news
do'st hear.



Bad news effaith, all our hopes are now perished, it is for
certain that the Duke is beat at Pistoia; whether he hath escaped
or not himself, is not yet known.



Sad trust me 'tis most sad, but, prethee, who
shall be Duke now do'st think, when they have rejected him, who
by law of inheritance was their lawfull Prince.



Why thou, if thou bee'st weary of thy life;
for a Prince now a dayes must raign no longer, then his Subjects
please his government men now begin to act real Trage∣dies.



Good; but how does thy learned cocks-comb judge of
the event of all our present broyls?



Why, just as a sober Drawer does of a company of young
gulls inflaming the reckoning beyond the faculties of their pockets:
 they will look pittifully, when the bill is produc'd for
they must pay for all.



How! • do'st think our state-mountebanks will not agree?



Yes, for a while they may, like heissers in the yoke, but
when once got loose, they'll push at one another.



Well no more of that string; these distracted
times, I fear, will afford such discourses every day how
does thy Mistress, the Lady you know of, ha?



 Why, faith as unreasonable as ever.







Yes unreasonable, she will admit of no tearms
whatsoever, so that I fear I shall be forc'd to storm her: 'slid,
I can have scarce liberty to survey her very parapet and out-works,
for fear of a thing (I do not know what they mean now a dayes)
suspicion, I think she calls it; and for thee, I beleeve thou art in
no better condition, for her Sister, thy Mistress (otherwayes in my
opinion plyable) is rul'd by her, and both by an old urinal-peeping,
onyon-breath'd hag, whom they call the Countesse of Saromanca
forsooth, so that now she is impregnable.



A devil she is, 'slid, I think it is become an epidemical dis∣ease
amongst that sexe, they intend, I think, to imitate the times,
and erect a new Commonwealth of themselves, excluding all mascu∣line
society, and so be call'd the new assembly of zeal-copyholders.



Yes, yes, for now they hold it a cryme to court.



Since Monarchy fell, that trade is totally decayed, thou
must now either Marry at first sight or else march off; as if
who should throw the Dye for a maydenhead, Boy.



Goodness, I think, by and by, we shall be constrained to
make love to one another, and so thou shalt be my Mistress, Cassio;
for our modern Criticks will not allow us womens flesh, even upon
holy-dayes.



True for all the Ladies in Florence have a spice of
this disease is there no remedy for't, do'st think?



None but patience, stay while Fortune turn up her wheel
again, and then the Ladyes may turn up.







No I have not sayd that yet, I mean may smile upon
us more then they do: for now wee must not so much as see
any Lady.



No why I hope they will yet admit of a visit in
civility?



No by no means, Cassio, thou must not name such a he∣resie
as a visit, for thou may'st hinder other suitors: Remember that,
Boy.



You say right But who comes here?



I think they are women.



and Marionetta. usher'd by Panta∣loni,
at sight of Cass.
and Leon. they pull
down their vailes, traverse, &c.


Or else two things shufled in the forme
of women: dost know 'em Leonarde?



Know 'em, why, who can know them
thus, such masquerades under their vailes are like
nuns at the grate, they may see us, but wee cannot see them.




True, for there is no way else to discover them, but by
smelling; and what smell women have now a dayes, faith, I cannot
tell.



Smell, say'st thou; they have a most acute smell, a wo∣man
can now a dayes smell a mans love to her, before ever possibly
he be in love with any; I was rejected by a lady last day, before
ever I knew her well; yet such was the imagination that she had of
my respects, that she entertained her companions with the relation of
my adventures for her you will think that strange.



 Strange! No faith, I hope, by progresse of time, they
will conceive by the meer wind of report, and so wee shall have a
hopefull race of young Florentine-jennets, as light-heel'd as those
of Spain, I warrand yow: but, prethee, what was that Lady, you
talk'd of?



Why, the little handsome Donazella, what do you call
her, on the other syde of the river?



Ho Ho I know her, a noble Lady effaith, but I am
sorry, that she is infected with that disease, she seemes to have a
spark of wit.



Tush, 'tis become a plague, Cassio, a very plague; do'st
not know the gentelman, who was rejected of a Lady, having no
other evidence of his affection then the carrying of a letter from one
of her friends to her, wherein he was recommended to her acquain∣tance,
which as a trophee of her conquests she did impar to her
hearts-conquerour and yet a Lady of admirable qualities. Men
now a dayes breed their female children, as the Chineses do their
wives, or the Grand-signior his concubines, close at home.



But, prethee, did'st know that same peece of foppery, who at∣tended
them who by his garbe would seeme to challenge the title of
a man?



Know him, why, who does not know him; 'tis Signior Pan∣taloni,
the rich city-gull, whose golden fleece dazles the eyes of
all the Ladyes in Toun, to whose chamber he is almost as wel∣come
as a young batchelour of Divinity, who hath lately past his
tryalls, is to a zealous widow of ten months standing, that would
faine repeat her former allegiance, and taste the game again But
come, you shall go along with me to the Lady Chrysolina,
there I hope wee shall have some favour, if wee get accesse, I mean.



 I, with all my heart, but that's the question.









I take it so indeed, Ladies, you must excuse me if I do you
the honour to visit you sometimes; for my mother
sayes, Son, saith she, it is high time you were married I hope you
know my meaning.



Sir, you shall be welcome.



I hope so indeed: For, I vow I would never desire
a handsomer wife then you are. I protest, Mistress, you are
very handsome, though I say it that should not say it.



You flatter highly, Sir.







Well, Sir, as for your visit, I shall admit it; but for
marriage you know 



Ho I know well enough, you are governed by your
friends; but I shall tickle them I warrand you, let me alone for
that.



It is the safest way, Sir.



So then forsooth, since I know the way to your
Chamber, I will come and see you every day; now because my mo∣ther
is sick and taking physick, I must go home and keep company
with her, else I'l assure you, I would not leave you thus farewell.
Exit.



You see them Gentlemen, Cassio and Leonardo, as we
passed along, Sister?



But I hope they did not know us, Sister, 'tis not fit we
entertain them, they are not matches for us.



But I warrand you, they'l render us a visit shortly.



I should rather wish they would abstain, Sister, you
know our friends will not rellish it well; I should be very well con∣tent
of this Signior Pantaloni for my husband; I hope no body
hears us.



True, for although the others may be Gentelmen of good
parts, yet I know wee are design'd for them Signiors; so the Lady
Saromanca told me last day.



And wee must follow their advice you know Sister.



Yes indeed, and reason for it.




Hum etiam confabulantes inveni? I have it in my
pocket, that will afford them new cogitations,



Mr. Manduco, you are welcome, pray, how does my
aunt?



I have a little negotiation with you in private; for I am le∣gate
from Signior Becabunga, (my sometimes pupill) as more amp∣ly
shall breifly appear. And how think
you marry thus, here's a letter for you  takes out a Let∣ter
out of a to∣bacco-box.



I hope he is in good health, Sir.



O! yes, he is valetudinary, herein he presents (as I co•∣jecture)
  9
his amorous servitude to you both; he will be in Town
next week, for I'l assure you he flagitates to see you: I hope you
will afford him gracious entertainment hum hum 



He shall be welcome, Sir.



I will assure you, Ladies, he is an adolescent of eximious
candor and egregious integrity: I have been at much pains and la∣bour
in educating him, I may say, ever since his pubertie: but
now that he is come to the years of intelligency, I have given him
over 



He will make us in love with him e're we see him.



But, for your further satisfaction, I shall, paucissimis, insi∣nuate
to you the method of his education. Primo, then, when
he came under my gubernation, which was about the year of his
age, Anno Domini, (let me see) mill•simo, sexcente simo, quadra∣gesimo
sexto, it being then Leap year; he was, inquam, a very per∣verse
youth, vitiat in his behaviour, knowing nothing but what he
had learned amongst the ancilla's (what d'you call 'em) Chamber∣maids.



Now, Sister, you shall have him anatomized to you.



But, so soon as I took him in hand, I did so belabour his
na•es with my ferula, that profecto I have whipped him, whip'd
him thus for half an hour together, untill his abundant lachry∣mation
had mov'd compassion: but, I knew that was the only way
to discipl••ate him 







 So, I say, having taught him his Orthographia, Etymo∣logia
and Prosodia, having alwayes a fellicitous eye over his beha∣viour:
I did learn him to make his 〈◊〉, not as your Monfieurs
do, but more gravely, 〈…〉 how to 〈◊〉, &c.
take a Lady by the hand•; do 〈◊〉 how to kiss, in
this fashion 







I gave 〈…〉 caution, in∣structions,
and now and 〈…〉Primo,
Not to 〈…〉Vir sap••, qui〈…〉 you are alwayes wisest when you hold your pe••
And then with what gesture to discourse, gravely; 〈…〉  10
and like a School-man; (for, I have been sometimes Hypodidasea∣lus
in the great School of Florence, im• Hypodidasculus, Ladies)
but, as I said, I learned him to be concinne aud terse in his habit,
with hair in the same longitude, as you see mine. Secundo, How
to keep a clean m•ndified nose, not with his sleeve, but with his su∣darium,
or handkercher 



He intends to weary us I think.



Tertio, As I said (hoc agatur serio) tertio, as I
said, tertio, inquam, to eat his meat with a great deal of circum∣spection
and neatly; that is to say, with one finger and his thumb
 thus Quarto, To contain himself à capite scalpendo; from
scratching of his head, (give ear I beseech you, Ladies, for it con∣cernes
you.)



He thinks we are his Schollars.



Peace, Sister, let us hear him out.



Quarto, As I said, (take heed) Quinto, I say, and
maximè à crepitando & eructando; that is, from emitting ven∣tosities
or flatuosities from his concavities: with several other ad∣monitions,
according to the dictates of Joannes Sulpitius, and Gui∣li•lmus
Lillius, my two very good and learned friends 



Will he never make an end?



But, above, all, Ladies, for respect to his friends (because
I am incarcerate with obligations to all his paternal Relatiosn) I did
alwayes exhort him to abstain from tripudiation or danncing, gla∣diation
or fencing, lusitation or gaming, equitation or riding, & sic
de caeteris; So that now he is one of the best educate youths in Flo∣rence,
else Ego operam & oleam perdi•i.



He is very much obliged to you, Sir.



Now, I will not molest you with a more ample relation
of his good qualifications; but, he is a friend to modesty and chasti∣ty,
an enemy to superbity, in potu moderatus; but, not andum he
is most locuplete both in argentary and frumentary rents not
given to luxury or venery •o, not at all to venery 



What a tedious •arangue for nothing.



But, (to conclude, because now the time is gone) as I said
before, as I say now, and I hope your intelligence does comprehend
when he comes into Town, I shall concomitate him to your domi∣cile,
  11
diversory, chamber, cubicular, or what you please, and so
farewell.
Exit.



What a meer Bedant!



As ever liv'd, Sister, I cannot love him.



Peace, Sister, let us appear civil before him; for, he is
imployed by that Gentleman B••ab••g•'s friends, to sound our
humours I warrand you 
And what our friends have ordain'd, we will do,
What e're it be, there's reason for it too.





Enter Arabella so•a, as at Sie••, having got intelligences
of the Robels victory.


TOo true I fear'd it alwayes; now frail woman,
Has thou no eyes? Art thou not sensible
Already of our slavery? Barbare,

A Florentine, a profess'd enemy
To all Siennois, will become our Master.
 But hold imagine 〈◊〉Marciano,

As gods know, and I fear, a 〈◊〉,
Consequently thy heart in 〈◊〉 with him,
 Pray, what wouldst do? Resolve, poor Arabella,

Would'st not go search him? or would'st rather stay
Thou at Siena here, he, God knows where.
Love prompts the first, honour pers•des the last,
This fear advises that hope strongly presses;
Fear tests me, I should erre; for, may be he
Whom in pr••perity, I did 〈◊〉 esteem,
May now forget me too, (a 〈◊〉 our Sex
Oftimes commit more through infirmity
Then malice• yet, were I assur'd he were
Prisoner in Florence, I'd no more debate,
But search and find him, at whatever rate.







 THis Inn is good now late I might have here
Convenient lodging, if I durst but stay 
 Sirrah, go see my horses 
Exit Boy.
A chair set out.
Good gods! is't come to this? must we behold
Rebellion in it• full Epitasis?

No antidote to save th'empoysoned State? 
 Those forces, I had rallyed, now undone,
Routed, quite routed what shall I resolve 
I've overcome a tedious voyage O!
If I could now have but one half hours rest,
That with good news from my Prince would refresh
Both body and soul But yet how can my eyes
Receive their lawfull tribute, when my heart
Is tos'd 'twixt hope and love? hope bids me live
To see a blessed Catastrophe yet to all
Our present tumults love perswades me rather
To dye, then see the vertuous Arabella,

(Although unkind to me, as yet despising
My ardent suit) become a prey to such
As know no love, but in their tyranny.
O heavenly, divine creature would thou know sits down

My present flames wer't possible those sig•hs
My troubled heart sends forth, might be condens'd
Into one body: sure they could inform
Those very stones with breath, those stones should move:
Those stones should speak; and as they are become
The only witnesses of my complaint,
So be the true Embassadours of my sorrow;


To show the vertuous Arabella that 
Thus for her love  takes a nap.


My Lord the enemy the enemy Fly Fly Fly.
Exit boy running.

Marciano bolts out of his chair.
Fly! Fly! avaunt with that base cowardly gibbrish;
That Algebra of honour; which had never
Been nam'd, if all had equal courage what?
I fly! Poor rogue, had as good bid me dye. draws

I'le force my way, or make a noble end,
Valour does sometimes humane wit transcend.





This way 'tis he take quarter.



Quarter! no slaves I'le see your entrails first.
Thus Dogs 
fight, Sould. falls back,
Marciano pursues.
Enter again hastily.
The hounds are now at a bay 
 No way t'escape fortune, if not me,
Commiserate at least my Prince I prize not
My life, if I must dye, transform my soul
Into some loyal breast, I dye contented.
Enter Soul, as before.
There again villains, are you so bold
 This Sword shall tame you 

falls back as before,
Marciano pursues.
A noyse within. Enter Borasco, Souldiers with them,
Marciano prisoner,


Sir, your noble courage hath oblidged our care,
The tearms of your surrender shall be observed
Faithfully now to horse 



I do obey, Sir, for with such as you
A word does more▪ then oaths with cowards do.





Enter Manduco, with Signior Becabunga, knock at the door, &c.



HO who is within there?








Is the Lady Marionetta within?



Yes Sir, Pray what are you, who demands?



Why, here is Signior Becabunga newly come to town But
heark you, is she occupyed?







Profane Fellow I mean, is she not busie that is to
say, at leasure?



O, yes please you walk in.



Yes yes heus ingrediamur.






Please you to walk here a little, while I go can the
Ladies




Remember now, when you are in private to propone
matrimony with a great deal of ceremony, and for your comple∣ments,
you may call her the Lady that triumphs in the Coach-box
of your affections, a bewitching Syren, a beautifull Tha•, and so
forth, as occasion offers. Praise her hair, her eyes, her ears, her
breasts, &c. There is abundance of choice epithetes to be had; you
may say her face is like a Print-book of divers characters, that puzles
the reader, her nose like the style of a Dyal, her eyes like Stars, her
hair like Gold, her teeth like Ivory, her veins like silk, and her breasts
like milk, and so forth, as I said before: you'l remember on
this now.



Yes, yes, I warrand you, I shall remember let me see
now, her breasts, her shoulders, her toes, her fingers, her nayls
and her nose But hark you, must I say nothing of her
cloaths?



How come you to 〈…〉




Why? her nose makes me remember on it.



 So so come, fall upon the
Ladyes go I say.







Ladyes, I am indeed glad to see you now.



Ladyes, I am your devotionated devotionary.



You are welcome to Town Sir.



Protest, Ladyes, I am your humble servant.








As before, nam •oelum non ani••um mutas.




As before, nam coelos non animus mutat.



You are wrong Say I did long vehemently to see you
 as one in child-bed.



I did long vehemently to see you in child-bed.



A meer brutum animall.•




What's the matter, Sir, did not I say
very well now.







No it was altogether sinistruous, I have effo•iate
the treasure of my brain in educating you, and yet for all that
you are a meer ignoramus.



O I will do well enough yet Pray, tell me what I
should say, for the Ladyes are waitting upon me.



No I will complement them my self speak not you
 ne vel unum gru.
Ladyes, This gentelman is newly arrived at Florence the desuetude
of amorous conversation, with the assnetude of rurall exercises
have so, as I may say, confounded his intellectuals, that if he hesi∣tate
in the pronunciation, he hopes you will meerly attribute it to
his campestriall, trimestriall perigri•ation.



We not only excuse you, Sir, but likewise account our
selves honoured by your visit Pray sit down Sir.



Yes, yes, without ceremony.



Why I think, you are silent, Madam.

Bec. sits down by
M•• Man sits be∣twixt
the Ladyes.


I love not to prate Sir.







Nay so long as he was under 〈◊〉 I did labour to
coerce in him that loquacious verbosity, o• rather ve• bosious lo∣quacity,
  16
with which most part of the perverse temporary adoles∣cency
is contaminate, for I hate garrulity, as I am facundious,
I do.



I vow, Madam, you are very bony, since I
see you last  
Man. takes a
pype of tobacco. O, I have had rare pastime in the

couotry this harvest, brave hunting, and hawking of hares; and
but the last day comming in to the Town, I tooke a couple of them
by the way. O, Madam, you will not beleeve what brave sport
wee have now. I wonder why you have stay'd in city all this
while?



What should we have done in the country, Sir, hunted,
and hawked as you doe?



I hope this does not offend you, Madam. Chrys. Not
at all, Sir.



Smoakes in Chrys. face
Smoakes in Mar. face.
I should be loath to offend any
man, but I am without ceremony.



Use your own liberty, Sir.



Nay, I do it to draw down reuthm from my brain, with
which my lungs are much infested: for, d'you see, 'tis a very salu∣tiferous
herbe: it disposes the minde for study, and moves in seve∣rall
places; I will show you what by it's help I made last night;
marry a sonnet upon a Lady, whose beauty had almost tempted me
to affect her. She walk'd•sings. N•y; hold, I have a good
voice for writing, but not for reading. I will read then.
SonnetShe walk'd along with such a grace,
And such a catching eye.
That, had her Masque not hid her face
Then certainly 
In some degree,
I had become a lover certainly.
I had become
Both blind, and dumb,
For Cupids thundring dart
Had peirc'd my heart.
It had by my facunditie.


But I more prudent was then so
Assoon as she drew nigh
I turn'd my back to her, and lo
She glyded by.
Immediatly.
Then I began to ruminate, and say,
Whit is wo man?
Even no man.
Why then should wee love her,
Seing we are above her,
And she, at best, mans hacqueney?


 But heark you, Madam▪ I beleeve 'tis now time wee should
leave them to their private confaabulation.



Yes Sir, with all my heart.



One word then with this Gentelman, and I am gone Heus,
be attentious and circumspectious in your be aviour, remem∣ber
on those elegantes •hrases I taught you when you came in: so
I will retire, and 〈◊〉 you for a space.




Now wee 〈…〉 Madam, I hope you know my errand.







I am sure, my Father 〈…〉 the Lady Saromanca
speak to you, or else I am 〈…〉



But you had 〈…〉 my Uncle, Sir; I am at his
disposall.



You are very modest.
Offers •o kisse, she refuses.



And I hope that is a virtue 〈…〉 maid, Sir▪



As I am a virgin, it is; I love you •ll the better for it:
and I'le assure you so long as you are modest, you can never be im∣pudent.



Madam, Signior Pantal••• is below; shall I tell him you are
within?



Yes, yes, by all 〈◊〉, you must not deny us to such a
Gentleman of quality as he is.



Signor Pantaloni, say you, my old comrade, I would be
very glad to see him.



He is in suite of my Sister, a Gentelman of a great estate,
I am much for the match; I'le go cause my Sister come hither.

At the other end enter Signior Pantaloni▪ Bec. salutes him.






Signior Becabunga welcome to Town in good faith. Yow
are very gallant.
Surveyes Bec. cloaths.



 It is my winter suite, Sir, it cost my Father a good
deal of money, more then the price of ten bolls of wheat, or barley,
I warrand you.



I am sure, you have had brave sport in the country all
this while.



O yes; you know my dog Springo?



Yes, and Gasto, gray bitcho, brounhoundo, and all the tribe
of them: I knew them all since they were puppets, and your
self too.



Why, I will let him loose with any his match in
Tuscany.



O what a fool was I, might not I have been with you
all this while, if it had not been for this baggagely Mistris of mine,
Madam Chrysolina, call you her, whom my Mother will have me
to woo whether I will or not, I may say; I had been in the coun∣try
all this harvest. But, what shall I tell you, have not I learn'd
since I see you to dance forsooth frisks about that's a coupee that's
a circumflex pas: that's a transverse pas &c.








I, but I can fence too zeest zeest zeest
Thrusts at Bec.



Ladyes, I hope I have not com'd in into you
as I may say intrusiously, or intrusively.





Not at all Sir, you are very welcome, pray how does your
Lady mother, and your Sisters?



All in good health, Madam, at your service Signior
Manduco, you are welcome to Town.



Signior Pantaloni, I am yours integrally, and quasi exul∣to
in the prosperity of this our congression.



Madam, the two Gentelmen you call Casio and Leonardo desire
•o see you.



Go tell them we are not within.



Tell them we are not at leasure, Sirrah.








Ranting, young blades, like the times, I warrand you,
two fellows, that have frequented all your Stage-playes in Italy,
and I heard our Chaplain say; and my Sister too (which is more)
that Playes were very unlawfull and impious. 



Playes are indeed profane, scelerate, abominable, yea,
abominably abominable which I will maintain multis argu∣mentis.



Besides, they are great mockers of such Gentlemen as
us, who are better then themselves.



Are they of the Dukes party?



Yes, I warrand you.



Hoc satis est odi totam gentem: Ladies, you do well
not to converse with them but no more of them: Ladies, what
would you think of a perambulation in this calid, aestivous sea∣son?



But whether shall we walk, Sir?



Any where, Madam▪ I shall wait upon you.



And, I shall stick close to my Lady, forsooth.



Wee'l have a coach then.



By all means call a Coach.





Let us then passe the Pomeridian hours in obambulation:
for I am defatigate with session.





Enter Borasco with Arabella prisoner.


GOod my Lord, for the respect to honour,
Prove courteous to a poor distressed Lady,
And now your prisoner 



My prisoner Not, by this hand, so much,
As I am yours.
kisses her hand.



I should belye my passion, Sir, if I,
Next to the publike destiny of my Country,
Did not resent my own calamity;
But yet your undeserved clemency
Does moderate my misfortunes 



How! undeserved when even Cannibals,

Tam'd by the aspect of your radiant eye,
Would quit their barb'rous, superstitious rites,
And offer, what their gods usurp, to you.



Sir, I owe much, I must confess, to nature,
But your applause inflames the bill more high,
'Tis now our common fate to be imprison'd,
But not so common to be thus respected.



Lady, what the Lord Barbaro hath 〈…〉

I hold it alwayes justice but because
Your face does speak you one, whom all should honour,
That e're have known what love is, I regrate
This your confinement; the causes of which
Are only known to his excellency,
Enter Iaylor.
Time will discover all but here he comes
Who must be your guardian Sirrah 



Your pleasure, my Lord?



By order from the Senate, you'r commanded
To take this Lady in your custody 
See you respect her, Sirrah, let her not


Be us'd, as other ordinary prisoners.
Mark what I say, you varlet serve her well.



I shall, forsooth, my Lord, she shall be as well us'd as
any Lady can be in prison.



Madam, I'le visit you sometimes, and see
You treated, like an honourable Lady.
This Fellow shall have special care of you,
Command him at all times; and for my service,
Pray spare it not farewell she is my prisoner,
aside.
I shall have fit time yet t'impart my flames.




Now, forsooth, Madam, will you be pleased to walk I'le
conduct you to as neat, a wel-swipp'd, wel-trimm'd Room,
as you can have in many parts of Florence: My Lord Borasco,
is a very obliging Gentleman, and I'le assure you, he loves to be
courteous; I will have a care of you for his sake; my Wife, and
I (I must have you acquaint with her, Madam) for she is one of the
loving'st, dutifull, old Sluts, that you have known 



Come then, let's go 



 My Wife and I, I say, Madam, shall serve you to a
hair, for she loves to be courteous, as well as my self,



Where are my Countrymen lodg'd? I rather
Be with them, as elsewhere 









There are many 〈◊〉 Nobles in my custody.



The Lord Marciano: since 'tis my misfortune
To be his Fellow-prisoner.



Madam, you shall see him, for I love to be courteous,
especially to strangers, Madam▪





Enter Chrysolina, Marionetta, as in their Chamber.


How did you like our last entertainment, Sister?



Indifferently well; I love that same Gen∣tleman,
Signior Besabunga: he is none of your ranting young
Gallants, but a sober youth as is in all Florence.



'Tis true, but yet 



 What don't you love him, Sister? you are a
fool if you let such a fair occasion slip such a fine Woodcock is
not start every day: he hath a great Estate, Sister, remem∣ber
that.



'Tis all true 



I, and he will not readily spend it; his Tutor, Man∣duco,
hath bred him very sparingly honest man, I protest he is
an honest man: yea, a very honest man.



He is indeed 



And then, Sister, you may have a very contented life
with him; he is a good-natur'd, sweet youth, he will give you
all your will, and I'l assure you that is a great property in a man.



 And what think you of your own Suitor, Pantaloni,
all this while?



Why I know not what I shall
say of him yet.









Goodness! how came they here?



Nay, my pretty Daph•e, fly not my
embraces, I know we have surprised you now.






What pretty intrigue of love was the object of your dis∣course,
pray let us be sharers with you in your entertainment.



My life for't, you were devising some stratagem, how to
crosse the designs of some affectionat Votary: you have no pity
on our Sex now a dayes, Ladies.



None, indeed, if you were not visible in this age, then we
should not love: but, when we once conceive flames of affection
  23
for you, in lieu of fomenting us in our delights, you make love a
disease to us by your unmercifull nicety, which deprives us al∣together
of your conversation: this is sad, Ladies; trust me 'tis
sad.



You wrong our Sex, Sir.



But, d'you hear, Sir, seriously I intreat you would for∣bear
such visits; for, you will but give people occasion to talk of
what we never thought on.



And besides, Sir, those who challenge power over us will
be offended at this entertainment: we intreat you then, Gentlemen,
to leave us.




to Mar. Farewell then, cruel beauty, but do not ima∣gine
such a harsh repulse will stop the current of my
boundless love; absence shall never prove so fatal: but
while my breath shall demonstrate that I live, this
heart, this speech and this hand shall demonstrate that
I love you. Farewell bright star of my fancy.





to Chrys. Such a fair Lady cannot be so cruel, I will not
take this answer as a repulse, but rather construe it the
most favourable way. Farewell, time, I hope, shall
melt the severity of your resolutions.




Farewell my ranting gamsters, we are not meat for your
mouths. What foolish people have we in our house, Sister, to
admit them Gentlemen? why, they came in upon us while we
were serious.



Yes, Sister, and if one of us had been commenting on the
Piss-pot, it had been all one to them, when doors are left open.



And knowing that our friends cannot endure them, they
should, at least, in conscience, have denied them access. O! how I
shall baffle them same wenches that did not look to our Chamber
door better.



I protest, Sister, we must marry quickly, otherwayes we
shall be constantly infested with such importunate Suitors; and
that, in my opinion, is no great pleasure to a woman, it distracts
their spirits, me thinks.



You say right, Sister, wee shall never be well, untill
we be even well marryed.





Enter Borasco, with Arabella in prison.


LAdy, I have at length obtain'd that favour
Of the Lord Barbaro, you may go abroad
To any part o'th citty that you please.
Providing you return hither at night 



My Lord, I thank you kindly, I find you 〈◊〉

Exceeded in your favours, since I came
Into this prison: you have (without flattery)
Even overacted courtesie to me 



I plead not so for every one, but you
May challenge my respects: the power 〈…〉

As captain of the Guards, shall be employed
To serve you, Madam, as you please command me.



Then 'pray, my Lord, 'mongst others, grant me this,
To see the Lord Marciano.




Madam, I shall conduct you to his Chamber▪
Or, if you please, he shall come hither to you.



No, I will go to him.





At the other end enter Marciano, with him the Jaylor,



A Lady, say'st thou?



Yes, my Lord, a young Lady.



A Lady, and a Siennois, strange!


Who can this be! but now I have a thought,
Yet I dare not expresse it can it be!
No, sure impossible prethee begone,
And leave me to my self 



She will be here by and by, my Lord.





Well, who this Lady is, I cannot think,
But in a dreame: O, may I yet imagine,
'Tis she Nay, hold my hope cannot support
Such a strong thought of blesse! I shall offend
Enter Arabella
quietly.
Even in thinking 
Marciano discovers her.
 A cheat a meer cheat eyes do not gull me.
The Lady Arrabella! No, unlesse
I heare her talk, I'l think it still a phantasme
 Speak fair ghost is it thee?






Marciano, it is I, the unfortunat Arabella.




Then it is no more I O how I am
Embraces her.
Transported! how that divine voyce hath ravished
My duller senses! is't possible, you weep
In sympathy with my afflictions?







Good gods! it is she O does Arabella▪

Who, while I was in full prosperity,
Embraces
again.
Did frown upon my Passions: stoop so low,
As see me now in misery unlesse
She mean, as children, with their hobby-horses,
T'unravell me, that she may thereby see
What stuff I do contain: dare I presume
To think that love to me hath brought you hither?



Most true nought else 



Fair innocence, whose presence does revive
My spirits in this agony of sorrowes,
While I am coop'd up, as a parrot, here,
Expecting every day, when Atropos

Shall cut my threed of life; that you should daigne
To visit me! had your fair hand dispatch'd
One word in post, it had been too great honour.


But thus to be thy own Embassadour,

•Tis a bewitching happinesse; no tongue
Can well expresse my passion good, my stars
Preserve me from an extasie! 



You wrong me, Marciano, I left Siena,

Hearing of your bad successe; thence I came
To Luca; there not finding you, to Florence,

To see if I could purchase your enlargement,
Either by art, or favour: but no sooner
Was I come hither, when I was suspected
As one, who keep't secret intelligence
With the Dukes party here, and so committed 



Committed how! committd heathnish wretches!
Barbarous Rebells! to imprison one,
Whom Indians had spar'd, By Mar; unheard of
Even amongst Turks, and Tartars!





I am not so unfortunate, as you think,
The Senate meaning thus to punish me
Have rather cherish'd me: your company
May well allay my griefs.



By this and this 
Kisses her hand.
You honour me too much, but which is sad,
I never shall be able to repay
That love to you, which I owe, seing every hour
I doe expect my sentence 



Alas! harsh fates! O frail reward of courage!




Madam, my duty bears me to conduct you to your
Chamber, it is now high time.



My Lord, adieu, I shall see you to morrow.





Farewell, my souls delight, O unkind Stars!
A fit theatre for such entertainement!
An embleme of our love! But I exclaim
Unseasonably. O how prettily
Fortune hath tyed me, as a Shrove-tide bird,
While Saturne, Mars and Cupid levell at me:


 A fig for all her tricks I scorn her frown,
She can win nothing, while my hearts my own.





Enter Strenuo with the Jaylor.



IS he sentenced already?



No, not yet; but he must die.



Well let him go, 'twill learn others to be wise, friend▪
for, Souldiers have but shrewd arrears paid them now for their
service.



I am really sorry for him; as I am true Florentine he is
a noble Genteman, and loves to be courteous 



But, d'you hear, Mr. Jaylor, shall we have t'other cup
the night?



I at the Siena Tavern, Signior Strenuo, where we
may have a cup of good Canary; I am for you there, Signior Stre∣nuo,
and will spend my checquin most heartily, Signior; for, I love
to be frolique as well as courteous, especially with strangers, Signior.



 Come then, brave old Boy, we'll have a cup o'th best
on't. Will you go along now and I'l give you your morning
draught?



No not now; I must wait upon my Lord Borasco,
he sent word that he would be here by and by.



Farewell then at night old Hary at night.





Yes, yes, I shall not fail you Signior, I warrand you. This
same Strenuo is a notable fellow, as ever I knew of a Siennois: he
loves to be courteous, effaith.




See it be done, I say, the Senate means
To whip most of your stubborn Siennois,

By his example sirrah, Jaylor.







My Lord Marciano is condemn'd to die 



The time, my Lord 



Within six dayes, no more respite 
Here are the Generals orders for it.
 Sirrah, look to your prisoner, watch him well.
I'l double all the ordinary guards
About the prison; place my Sentinels
In every corner 



I shall watch him, my Lord, I'l assure you,



As you will answer us: now he shall die.
Although he hath escap'd sometimes before,
His worship shall play fast and loose no more.





Enter Chrysolina, Marionetta, as in their Chamber.


I Profess ingenuously, Sister, I am ashamed of it.



And I likewise; for people give easily credit to
any report now a dayes.



Let's rather be uncivil as admit them next time, Sister:
I love no such company, I'l assure you.





Ladies, I am come to wait upon you again according
to my duty as in duty I am bound to undertake.



Sir, you are very welcome, I hope your mother is well.



Yes, forsooth, Madam, how does your self?



In very good health, Sir, I thank you.



I am very glad But, hark you, Madam one word
in private with you 

to Mar. This by your leave Mi∣stris.
leads her aside.
Ha•k you me now my mother and I were sitting by the
fire-side last night, as it is our custom, you know, in the winter-nights
after supper; and I do not know what we were talking
of: but, amongst the rest I remember, if I have not forgot, that
she said she said, sayes she Now whether this
  29
be true or not, I cannot tell; you know best your self: but, I am
sure she said it.







Now I vow if it were true, I would be as glad of
it, as ever I was of my break-fast in a cold day: for, I protest
ingenuously, I am sure you know, I love to be serious.



Pray what's the matter, Sir?



Why I vow I know you would blush now, else I
would tell you it.



I beseech you resolve me, Sir.



I vow, I can hardly do it now, I am so stupi∣fied with
the rarity of the object of your person.
Kisses her
hand.



I can have no longer patience 



 Nay, hold here's it now I hope you will not
tell it again; for it was told me as a great secret why sayes
she but, as I told you, I know not surely if it be true or not:
but, shall I tell you what I answered Marry, Lady mother,
sayes I I fear you are but scorning me.



But, what was it that she said, Sir?



Why I vow she even said that you loved
me and O but I was blyth 



Hum and is that all? keep such a long discourse for
nothing.



O! I hope you are not angry.







Why you might have said all that in three words,
Sir.



Nay but prethee tell me if it be true: for, 〈◊〉 it be not,
I shall win two Ryals from my mother: for, she and I •a•d a wager
upon it, and I am come here for nothing else but to be resolved of it.



Well then, you have win, Sir.



Nay do not mock me now; I profess, I had rather
lose a dozen of Ryals before she should not love me: for, I am
sure as sure as this glove is upon my hand I love her.




Madam, dinner is ready.



We come. Signior, will you dine with us, and after∣wards
we shall talk of that at more leasure.



With all my heart, fair Ladyes, If you please, I will
sup with you, and lye with you too I love your company so
well.






Arabella sola appears sitting at a table
as in her Chamber, &c.


LOaden with cares: o'rewhelmed with misfortunes!
Can female shoulders bear my heavie crosses 
I left my native country of Siena.

To find out Marciano here at Florence:

Now have I found him: but O! how, God knowes,
And I too well percieve: unhumane fates,
Whether, ah! whether will you hurrie me?
No end to your severity: Ay me!
What have I done? pray let me know my crime:
As yet I plead strong innocence: unlesse
It be a crime to love: pray show my faults,
Or else suspend my paines 
Now (which is sad) I can scarce have repose
For sighs and cares: and when I once awake▪

Borasco, therein my true Jaylor, waits me,
With fresh sollicitations: thus my heart
Is rent in peeces; th'one half sorrow claimes,
The other love Ay me! what shall I do?
weeps





Shee's discontent already: but those newes
I bring, will make her sadder: I dare scarce
Declare them, least she swoon Madam.



Welcome, dear Strenuo, pray how does thy Lord?



Well, Madam, but e're long, if fates prevent not 



How that again, me thinks, thou looks not chearfull
As thou were wont, how does my Lord, I say?



(If I dare tell you) he's condemn'd to dye.



 To dye! Ay me be mercifull, and kill me
Good Strenuo, honest friend prethee dispatch 



Stay Madam, you are mad 



 Condemn'd to dye 
O how my heart strings, by that pin of grief,
As by an unexpert musicians hand,
Who strives to raise his Lute to highest notes,
Tun'd up above the nick begin to crack.



Forbear, fair, Lady, 'tis no time to weep,
Now wee must do; now wee must muster all
Our wits to plot his escape 



As how Alas fond Strenuo: escape!
Dream not on that, rather invent some meanes,
How wee may dye together, like true lovers.



Madam, you wrong your self, I'le undertake.
By your assistance, to effect my purpose.



By my assistance, prethee doubt not that,
What will I not do, if I can, to save him?



Then, Madam, here is aquafortis for you.
Look this will do it, Lady, this applyed
To th'iron grate o'th window, will consume it
In a short space; then in the silent night
By help of a small rope he may escape.



'Tis well, but all depends on th'aquafortis,

I cannot safely carry it to his chamber;
That Cerberus, that ugly cat-e'yd Jaylor

Will sure discover me 



Nay, as for him,
I'le keep the villain tipling all the while
He never shall suspect you; I've provided
A souldiers habit for my Lord, in which garb
The devill himself shall never smell him out.
I'le so disguise him: go good Madam, go
Tender my love to him, and presse him by
All meanes to use it quickly I'le wait on him


At th'hour appointed 



I go, pray heavens, it may succeed.













SO you intend thither again, Leonardo, you were high∣ly
entertained, Boy.



And I believe, Cassio, you had but small encouragment.



Small encouragement indeed; but you must know, love is
never in it's height, so long as limitate within the sphere of reason:
I love her so much the more that she appears unreasonable, as you
call it.



But, aside, here comes Don Quixot
and Sancho Pancho.





'Slid, let's accost them.



No, let's first observe their behaviour.



Say you so: O! I long furiously to travel.



I mar'le you delay so long.



Why, I vow my trunk hath been twice a ship-board for
Marsei••es, and my self at Ligorn, but, I vow my mother weep'd
so, that I could not find in my heart to leave her.



And it may be the Lady Chrysolina would not permit you.



O no; I know she would wait upon me some half
year, or so yet while I saw France and came back again; although
I vow, shee's a pretty, pretty, pretty Gentlewoman, as I know be∣twixt
me and her.



You will have her yet, I warrand you.



I hope so; for I am sure she loves me, or else I have no
skill.



Does she so, and that is some encouragment though.



Prethee let's interrupt them, enough of such discourse in
all conscience.



Yes, now we will accost them Gentlemen, the
  33
general character of you in this City, hath rendred us ambitious of
your acquaintance.



Signior Becabunga, you are most auspiciously returned to
the City.



Your humble servant, Sir; your extollation of me is un∣deserved.




Sir, I do but what all ingenuous persons

should do, no question you are conscious of your
own merits.






Sir, the faculty of my expression is not capable to
entertain as I may say or express the motion of my af∣fection,
to uphold as I may say, acquaintance, familiarity with
you I hope you understand me, Sir.



Yes, and admires your wit too, Sir.



Sir, I am your very humble servant; I hope I need not
back it with an oath; nam, nemo tenetur (you know) jurare in
suum detrimentum.



Good, and what said they?



Why, they said you were a couple of idle youths.



How! Cass. Prethee let me hear out this discourse.



 Ho, ho, very true, I protest I think they wrong'd
you: for, for my own part, as I am Gentleman, I think you are
very civil, although I say it in your face.



Good, and no more prethee?



Nay, now I have not leasure, Manduco will be seeking me
through all the Town; O he will chide me, if he find me not.



Hang him a Loggar-head.



A Loggar-head, I would not for never so much he heard
you say that; he thinks himself no small man I'l assure you.



Sir Pantaloni, will you go?




Annon, Sir Gentlemen, I shall be very willing and
desirous that we may entertain our present conversation willingly:
and, for my part, I have the honour to drink one cup of wine with
you. I will wait upon you at any time or place convenient, if there be
no lawfull impediment why these parties may not be joyn'd Oh,
I crave you pardon, Gentlemen, Lapsus linguae non est atra∣mentum.
Farewell.




Now, go thy wayes, Signior Pantaloni, thou art this day
as compleat a gull as lives in Florence, without disparagement of
any Gentleman whatsoever.



He hath discovered all to me, Leonardo, I never read of
such humourous Ladies.



And they will be so always, while we can render them
gulls despicable in their sight.



Let's think then how to affront them.



I'l rack my invention, but I will set them by the ears to∣gether.



That were good, if you can do it handsomly.



I'l do my best; come let's go consult upon it.









PErswade me not, I cannot but abhor
Such a preposterous attempt 







Dear soul of sweetness, do not torture me
With fruitless plots within four dayes I die 
Should I escape and leave you prisoner 
 Think, think on that 



You may escape, my Lord;
I have brought hither t'you, some aquafortis

Which your friend Strenuo gave me this morning;
You may apply it to the grate o'th'window 



And what then 



Your friend assures me 'hath a Souldiers habit
In readiness for you. This same aquafortis

Will do the business quick, apply it quickly 
Look to your self, now it grows late, my Lord.



May I trust this 



You may, indeed, 'tis true.


Now, now, or never, you must soon apply it 
This night you may as easily escape.



I'le try this trick for once 



Fear not the Jaylor; he is fox'd already,
So Strenuo did assure me 
Apply it then, and if you don't escape 



I'le undertake it then leave this with me,
I'le go about it presently mean time,
I'le cause put all in order you must return
Within an hour hence: and cause Strenuo

Be ready at the window 











May my choycest prayers assist you.




And if this fail, what can a womans wit
Invent, that will succeed? Alas, I fear,
Still, still, I fear, while he be safely hence.
I have us'd all means, nothing left untry'd
For his enlargement; yet could not prevail.
 O love! who can define thee hopes and cares,
In constant ballance; hov'ring up and down 
Here's a poor heart, within this troubled breast;
That like a malefactor at the bar,
Trembles at this design: O powerfull love 
What hast thou not perswaded me to do 
Sings behind the arras.
 But heark, a song, I will give ear to it,
I know Borasco hath ordain'd it for me 



Lo Lillies fade, before the Roses show
Themselves in bow-dye, summers-livery.
Feasting the curious eye,
With choyce variety,





Narcissus in his prime.
Now Roses do delyte
The nycer appetite:
Such is the vast disparity of time.



One woman fades, before another know
What 'tis to be in love; but in a trice
All men do sacrifice
To th'latter, and despise
Her, whom before
They did adore
Like Lillies in their prime.

Since now her sparkling eyes
Are darkned in disguise:
Such is the sad disparity of time.





A proper simile now I see in what
Article his pulse beats: no Syren shall
Bewitch my soul to love: O Marciano,

How I lament thy fate: heavens lend me tears,
Since by my prodigal expence of sorrow,
I'me become banquerout: or else I beg
A period to my dayes: since certainly,
Life without love, is but calamity.









CAn he not speak for himself, Sir? he must court by
his embassadours, forsooth.



The reason is, in promptu, Madam; for the youth is
endued with pudicity: he cannot be his own buccinator, or Trum∣petter
  37
of his own fame; but he bid me assure you that he 〈◊〉
vehemently, imo toto corde affect you. And so it may appear by
his own manuscripts; as, exempli gratia, read the 3, page, 〈◊〉
line of that luculent Epistle of his to you, dated, 1. Cal. Mart•▪
You wil•▪ find that a man cannot expresse himself more lovingly: 〈◊〉
calls you, enim, the prototype of all beauty, the Archetipe of mo∣desty,
the source from whence all other rivolets of chastity d•
Scaturiat, &c. Is not that amantissimum?



No, 'tis not enough Sir.



No why he told me, that you would not permit oscu∣lation,
and what else can he do when he is in privat with you, for
I taught him not to be loquacious 



Be merry, Sister, you are happy, you
are a Lady, Sister 





A Lady! quid sibi vult, to whom is she desponsat,
Madam?



The businesse is now at a close, Sister, Cassio may go
to his travells now, he dare trouble you no more, Sister.



What d'you mean? shall I be married, and not know
to whom?



Yes, Sicuti nunc mos est, you may be colloc•te
in nuptialls, before you know cui, quando, & quomodo. a
est, to whom, how, or when.
Aside.



Don't you know, Sister, Signior Becabunga?



Is he the man? 



 Who else d'you think?



Ho now omnia recte again Lady, I congratulat
the immense, ineffable felicity and secundity of your sagacious
election 



Hath not he been wooing you all this while? who else
should be your husband but he, pray? Man. Hum 



Well I am content. Man. Recte 



Content, marry I should willingly change conditions
with you. Man. Bene habet.



He is a good match, I'le assure you.



I can add a jurament to that.



Mr. Manduco, she owes much to you for it.



To me, Madam: O I am obligate to your ingenuity.



She does indeed, Sir: Come, Sister, let's in, and de∣vise
what rare fancies wee must have against the wedding, wee'll
send to the Mercers presently, and have the best Sattins, taffatas,
ribbons and such other toyes, that can be had for money, come,
come, Farewell good Sir honest friend Manduco,
farewell.



Well, he may be a good husband yet for all that 
Exeunt.
Manduco solus

Friend Manduco, saith she, notatu dignum: now am I their
friend, their amicall relation: so, this matrimony is, I may say,
now almost, very high, altogether consummate: for which I
expect a large honorary from both parties: O the pregnant wit of
an intelligent Scholastick! now if I can effectuat the like for Sig∣nior
Pantaloni, I shall have likewise aliquid amplius: so that I
must at length provide for a matrimoniall relation to my self: for,
although, I be quinquagenarius, or fifty years of age, yet what
Virgin in Florence will respuat me when I abound in riches, and
shall be Dives agris, dives, positis in foenore nummis.









NOw, Madam, since I have got you all
alone, I protest, I must make a little bold
with you  Embraces
her.







In civility only, I mean in civility, Madam, for I would
only ask you one question, and that's not two, videlicet, whe∣ther
or no, that is, when we may be Joyn'd in the lawfull band
of matrimony, betwixt these parties following, to wit▪ for you see
Becabunga has not been long a doing, he has taken your Sister to be
his lawfull spo•se already, I hear, although he has been but a fort∣night
a wooing of her, and yet I have been woing you one time
with another these three moneths, I wot well, and I am sure that
you love me Chrys. Are you sure, Sir?



Yes indeed, and I think there is as much reason for the
one as for the other: and to be free with you, a my conscience I
might have had a bony Gentlewoman (just such another as your
self) with twelve thousand Duckats in portion, a moneth since,
had it not been for you: consider, pray you, what you promised to
my mother last night.



You will allow me a time to consult with my self, Sir,
will you not? 



That's a strange consulting! what have you been doing
ever since I see you first? I am sure you have had time enough to
consult all this while: and I'l tell you now, when your friends and
mine have agreed, there's no time to consult, but presently to be
matrimonyed; you know that as well as I now.



You will do well to press me no further at this time, Sir.



I'l let you alone for once then; but, the next time I shall
come to see you, you must not consult any: for, to test you truly,
as I heard my mother say, you may be glad of me for your hus∣band Chrys.
Pray, no more, Sir.



And then, when I have spent so much money in wooing
you, you will yet go, may be, and marry another. •y for shame.



I shall not marry while I give you an answer, Sir.



I, but as my mother sayes, it is good to be sure, if any
other man should beat me out of my st•rrops now: I would come
to a peel'd egg, would not I? Chrys. No more of that, Sir.



I'l refer my self to your own discretion then but,
O! I had almost forgot, I vow, that's very well remembred;
was not I mounted on Peg-a-sus last night? (now this Peg-a-sus
is the muses horse, he has wings and flyes, God bless us) and what
think you I have done? marry you shall hear what rare Verses I
have made. O! Madam, are you there? you are
come in very good time; I was just a going to read


my Verses, but you shall hear an Anagram first It
is a pretty thing, Madam; you can read and
Takes out his
Verses, &c.

write I warrand you; see you there your own name 
reads.
You see, 




You're even like a cherry.

  40I'l be judg'd if that be not pretty now: for, d'you see, I have on∣ly
borrowed some four letters, or so▪ out of, Madam, your Sisters
name, here, because she is a nigh relation and may spare them; and
I have added two (I think) out of the quickness of my self.



Excellent indeed, Sir. Mar. Good, upon my word.



I, but you have not seen all yet; here are brave Verses
upon your name, Madam Chrysolina.







I, I, an accurstick, the same. And thus it is take
notice now. reads.
there's the C. now.
Canst thou not see, Pantaloni,

How thy Mistris is so bony?
Now I am speaking to my self, as't were.

Revera, she is even such,
You cannot match her, and that's much.
Now there is C. H. R. Y. that is Chry.

She is handsom, neat and fine,
O, now if she were but thine.
There's S. O. now that's Chryso: now I am speaking to my self
you must understand all this while.
Live then in hopes, and know it is constantly thy duty,
Is alwayes, everlastingly, to extoll and upbraid her beauty.
But, now take heed, here comes the tongue of the trump 
Nar•issus, Roses, and every flower,
All must yield to her fair, rare, bright, sparkling colour.
That's Chry-so-li-na: Now, is not that right now? say any of
you, if you dare, if these Verses be not as good as any you have seen.



Mar. They are extream good, Sir.




So, so, tell him I come: Ladies, I must leave you,
but I will not go home yet: Becabunga hath sent for me to a
collation; we'l drink both your healths e're we go to bed yet, and
to morrow I shall see you e're you can get on your petticoats, Ma∣dam
Chrysolina: for, I must be more familiar with you, since I have
got such a good commodity of frequenting you I shall show
my mother all that has past betwixt us, Madam; So farewell.




How d'you like him, Sister?



As formerly, I find him a very discreet Gentleman.



I would you had him for your husband.



I should wish that same, in a fair way, Sister.



Considering especially, 'tis best to marry while you are
now in your prime.



Right for old maids are meer dogs-meat, they spoil
the trade of wooing Go by go by.









'Tis true, my Lord; yet, I don't much approve
Your Dukes severe proceedings; Florence will not
Endure the lash of Monarchy, like France

Or Spain: No, they must be their own carvers.
 I hope the Lord Barbaro, who is now
President of the Senate, will reform
Many of our abuses Marc. Well, you will
Come all to taste of your own vintage yet;
So I believe: for, never yet, rebellion
Escap'd unpunished: But, you remember
You promis'd that the Lady Arabella

Might see me e're I dye. Bor. She shall, my Lord;
 So by this hand, a plot, in going •ff.

A very plot: he is my Rival sure 
But shortly, Signior, you shall carry your head
Upon a Seaffold; and then, who dares
Claim her, besides my self.






When men begin to quarrel with their Prince,
No wonder if they crush their fellow Subjects.
We are eye-sores to th'State: their black designes
Are cross'd by us; and therefore we march off. 




Am I not yet sufficiently plagued
With crosses: but you must add one, which is
Heaviest of all, why weeping prethee cease
To vex thy self: I am all resolution,
And long to show my courage: since my stars
Have ordain'd my departure: rest contented.



Alas and is my plot thus come to nought 



Peace, prethee, for although I am not able
To pay what your perfections claim, yet sure
All generous souls (my true executors)

Shall pay my debt, fair Nymph.




My Lord, your death can be no more couragiously
Endur'd by you, then deplor'd by me 



Tush, as for death, I fear the varlet not,
I've often stare'd him out of countenance:
I have considered, that love to my Prince,
Should over-sway all others: have chosen
Rather t'endure one stroke, and dye, then live,
And undergo the censure (of all crymes,
The most detestable) Disloyalty.




Ay me! incensed heavens, can nothing else,
Appease your wrath but such an offering?
O, cannot I, (speak) I, although a woman,
Supply his place: I'le be an Amazon,

Expose my naked breast to steel, and show
All women are not fetter'd to the distaffe.



Be not so cruel: all good things forbid,
The world should see such a fair soul expire,
And not dissolve it self: thou cannot dye,
(Although thou wouldst) and Marciano live,
No, no more then a watch can move, if once
The cord be broke; can I live after thee▪



Alas, Alas, unheard of tyranny!
Unjust, even in injustice: thus to be
So cruell, as to murder him, and yet
Spare me; as much as if I should becom
My own soul murderer; villains, how unjust!


 But here's my passing bell.
A bell rings within.
I must away farewell Oh, oh, my heart,
My heart dissolves, my Lord, I must away.



Away farewell bright love 
embraces.



Farewell, my Lord 



Farewell now all good things preserve thee here,
The gods hereafter: thus and thus I leave 
kisses, &c.

My heart in legacy: thus, I take my last
Morsel of pleasure: never shall my lips
Kiss any thing hereafter, save the block 



So, thus and thus, I willingly resign
All, what is yours, this heart: and so farewell.
Farewell for ever oh Farewell, my Lord.
Exit.




 So, down goes dust and ashes, powers and honours,
Riches and joyes, the smoak of our desires,
With all we can call ours: our youth, our strength,
Fly like the sullen clouds, when Boreas swells
Their entrails with his breath: we, suddenly,
Like wilde-fire, disappear, and streight another
Steps in our place; and so we are no more 
 Then heart, as thou hast still afford me courage,
Inspire me now, that I may valiantly
Act the last part of this my Tragedy.







WHere is this same unhappy Boy? this Signior Becabunga
I have been making investigation, scrutination, explorati¦on,
and speculation for him this hour, and yet I cannot find this in
dividuum vagum, as I may say so, what are (Enter Cass. Leon
you, boni viri, I know, you have hurryed this Gentleman for who•
I search to some compotation, or else ad lupanar; yea, I am sure o
  44〈◊〉 how sad it is to see young men, even, impuberes adolescentes,•ndulge venery, and ebriety so much, & quid Venus ebria curat?•s a friend of mine sayes.



The fellow's drunk, sure 



 Drunk! O pervicacem hominis indolem! accusing
•ne of ebriety, when I am, even in sana mente constitutus, con∣stitute
in san•ty of mind: 'tis true, indeed, I have been drinking;
out it was with some of my brethren, imo fratres fraterrimi.







Why, there was Light-body, Laurie, Latie, Cheisly
quo{que} Brounie, Bowi{que} Hi enim sunt Tuscanii gloria summa
soli: besides our hospes, what d'you call him, Architabernarius,
or Arch-taverner, who is one of the commissioners for administra∣tion
of drink to the people of Tuscania.



Don't you enquire for Signior Becabunga, Sir.



Yes, the very same, where is he? ubinam est?



You will find him at the Verona•tavern, hard by, with
some of his comrades.



Say you so, I will go find him then, profecto I think
I could scarce abstaine from vapulating him for this his con∣tumacy.




Now Leonardo, 'tis time we were stirring, if we do not,
this match will go on.



Nay, I'l do any thing for thee, e're thou lose her, Cassio,




Come then; I have almost gull'd Pantaloni into a
belief, that Becabunga wrongs him, for which he swears he will
be revenged: now, if you can do the same with the other, our de∣sign
may succeed yet.



Well, go you about your business then, fear not me.




Now, wit and art assist us both, I'l search my gamester
and accomplish the trick.





Enter Arabella, with the Jaylor.



MAdam, I will conduct you to him once again, but you
must be very secret, for I hazard my life and reputa∣tion,
if my Lord Borasco have intelligence of this, for he gave me
strict command this morning, that I should admit none to him but
his confessor.



I shall be very secret, I warrand you.



Come then, soft Madam, soft.



For heavens sake good my Lord,
Exeunt, she enters
again with Marciano.

Vpon my knees I beg it 



This is impossible; I cannot do it;
Prove not a sweet Remora any more,
I'me now resolv'd: look to thy self, fair gemme.



Cannot the tears of innocence prevaile.
Where is your courage now? what? are you cool?
Is all that noble blood, that formerly
Run in your veines exhausted? must a woman
Become your Trumpeter, and stirr your spirits
Since 'tis but death at all hands 




I would most willingly (as what man will doubt)
Procure my liberty by what ever meanes
But O here lyes my fear, thou, thou bright love,
May come to suffer by it 




Consider pray' that I have liberty
To go abroad at pleasure: I have gain'd
The Lord Borasco's favour: he will grant me
That which some dare not ask, nay must not think on.
I'le follow you without the least suspition.
Consider that Strenuo hath promised
To entertaine the Jaylor in his cups,
While you be safely escap'd.




Bright angel of my fancy, see you follow


Immediatly, for e're you should endure
The rebells censure, I would rather forfait
A thousand lives.



Doubt not of that, my Lord.



Then once for all O my good stars direct me.



Farewell, my Lord, goodnesse protect you still



Farewell pure quintessence of my affection
Embraces.
Farewell, pray heavens grant us a joyfull meeting.




Now, now at length, I hope he shall escape;
O supreme powers, assist him now, or never,
And ease my soul of its long burning fever.









SIr, (as your friend, I speak it) Leonardo and he have
joyn'd their wits together to affront you; and you will
not beleeve what impression their false suggestions of you have
taken upon the Lady Chrysolina.



I! So I thought, when she told me last day that she
would consult forsooth: A pox take all your consulting tricks,
say I, for I never knew any good come of womens consultations
yet.



Right Sir, you might easily smell Leonardo's plot in that
same word, for he intends that Becabunga shall have Marionetta,
and he himself Chrysolina: for which Becabunga does sollicite
your Mistris all this while: if you look not to your self quickly
you are undone, Sir.



I, so I guessed alwayes, for, d'you see, some women,
are the most humourous little creatures, a man shall not know
when he is in their favour, and when not: but as for Beca∣bunga I'le
say no more at this time: but I vow I'le cudgell
him to death so soon as I can see him.



And please but command me, you shall not want my as∣sistance,
I'le assure you.



No• Sir, I shall not need your help to beat such a puppet
  47
as he is: what would you think to write a challenge to him,
Sir?



So you know, I advis'd you at first, when I sent for you
to the Taberna del. Reina, while you beleeved that Becabunga
had sent for you.



Hang him, I will hear no more of him: I will write a
challenge to him presently.



And if you'll please to take my advice in pe•ning on't, I will
so terrifie him.



With all my heart, Sir, for I would have it such language
as might make him hang himself for fear: and for Leonardo, after
I have discussed Becabunga then have at him.



If you please to employ me to carry it to him?



Yes Sir, you shall go along with me, and help me to
write it, for the truth is I am not much us'd with such challenges,
and my mother bid me allwayes have a care of quarrelling, but an
she were burn'd I'le fight with that rascall, who has affronted
me so.



A most generous resolution.



Come with me Sir.



Now, Leonardo, play thy game, or never.






Enter Marciano solus, disguis'd as having escap'd

 THanks to my stars! as yet unknown
I have cheat all the sentinells; and now
I suck free aire again: you powers above
Direct my suddain course: and save my love.
Exit quietly





Ho, wher's the pisse-pot there.



Sirrah drawer, 'tother quart of sack, you raggamuffin
you.

Courtain drawn appear Str. and the Jaylor,
drinking.


You shall do me reason Signior Strenuo: 'tis my noble
  48
Generals health, Signior Strenuo Ho, where's the piss-pot
there? you shall drink it, Signior 



Come then, we'll drink his good health, although he has but
two dayes to live.
drinks.



No matter for that, I love to be courteous to the last
breath, Signior; come, give me the cup: drinks. Sack, good

Sack, Signiordrinks again. O brave Sack; come, lets have






Come then Here's a health to the pretty little thing,
With the bony, bony radiant eyes,
And the bony, bony, plump, round thighs;
Let us sing let us sing 
drinks.



Let us sing, let us sing O brave Strenuo, here's a cup
to thee for thy catch. drinks.









'Tis good, no more, silence I command
you.



He waits for you.



Plague on you, no more I say.



My Lord is escap'd I say.



Pox take you, hold your peace, or you'l spoil all I say.



Come young-man, how does my noble General? you are
his servant, I know here's to him, a brimmer of Sack.
drinks.



Drink and be gone, you cocks-comb you 



You shall pledge me neighbour.








My Lord has ordained me to present his love and respects
to all friends at my return to Siena get you gone whoreson,
get you gone, or you'l spoil all.





Well, he's a noble Gentleman, Signior, although I dare
not say it: but, no more of him, this cup is yours, Signior, we'll
have t'other fl•ggon of Sack e•re we part; for I love to be merry
as well as courteous, especially amongst strangers, Signior Ho,
drawer, Sirrah, Loggar-head, the piss-pot,

Bastard, shall a man spoil his breeches, you son of a whore you.
Courtain drawes.





You puppet you, could not you hold your peace when I
bid you come, where is my Lord?



At the Colonna in the Strada del Popolo, there he lurks
quietly while you come to him.



Let the rogue the Jaysor slip then, and we'll bid adieu to
Florence; come, come quickly.





Enter Arabella sola, traverse quietly.

 SO, now he's gone: O! how my heart does leap,
My pulse begins to move, since now I know
He's past the rebels reach, before this time.
All's well: this day, by order of the Senate,
Am I to be enlarg'd: had Marciano,

Whose understanding soul, div'd in the deepest
Gulfs of suspition, even but conjectur'd,
How e're they could accuse me for his flight.
Had rather died, e're he had condescended
To any such attempt but now he's safe,
I'l follow close my self: So hope assist me.


A noise within of many voices, crying confusedly,
Souldiers searching for Marciano.
Enter Jaylor, weeping and railing.


A pox on all your Stennois tricks, say I, plague on that
villain Strenuo: my noble General's gone, fled, gone: what shall
I do? How the devil came I to be gull'd by that •ame Strenuo!
The last night while he and I were deep in our cups, my noble Ge∣neral
breaks the prison and escapes. O! plague on his crazy
cocks-comb, I could have trusted him assoon as any in Florence, and
yet he hath played me such a trick as may bring
me to a ropes end yet 




Harke my Lord Borasco searching me, I shall be hang'd
without doom or sentence 




Where is this villain?



Here am I my Lord.



You ugly scarabe, what do you deserve?


Sirrah, you shall be hang'd.




I was deceived, grossly cheated, gull'd,
Fox'd and what not, by Signior Strenuo;

A plague on him, may I say 




My Lord Barbaro will cause punish you
For your neglect, For he had ne're escap'd
Had he not bryb'd you 



I never see his coyn.



Good gods! this day was he to be beheaded,
Now none knows where he is this Siennois Lady
Will be examin'd: for she seem'd to carry
A great respect to him: and (this I know)
aside.
The Senate will suspect her accessory,
No doubt: So she shall be condemn'd to die:
But I'l prevent their severe resolutions
By all means possible Come, you Scoundrel, come
You may be hang'd yet, Sirrah, e're all be done.



O! no more of that word hanging, my neck itches already.









CAn you desire any more? look you, Sir, a direct challenge.



I know not what belongs to your challenges;
but I am sure, as you say, he has affronted me.



Sir, the very words of this challenge would encourage
one; considering especially, that he is the basest coward that ever
breath'd for all this.







Yes indeed, Sir, I warrand you he dare never appear in
field against you: he is but a bragging fellow.



Nay, if I thought he would not appear, I might say some∣thing.



Trust me, Sir, he dares not.



I, but d'you hear, Sir, if we can be handsomly reconciled,
what needs fighting?



Fy, Sir, you cannot honourably refuse, when he has writ
a challenge to you.



Not, Sir, why cannot I write another to him, and cal
him a coward, a rascal, a slave, a villain, and what not, and still pre∣serve
my honour, as you call it?



Alas! good Sir, there's no time now to talk, now you
must fight, and I will assist you.



I, if you will hold him to me while I beat him, there may
be something on't too.



Doubt not, Sir; but, as I told you, he dares not appear,
you have no more to do, but come arm'd to the fields, and if you
find him not, brandish your Rapier in the air thrice, proclaim him
a coward, and so return.



With my honour, Sir?



Yes, Sir, with your honour entire.




Well, I see I must fight; but if he doth not appear
now, I shall be in a brave condition: for, then I will swear,
rant and domineer, by my word of honour, as my fathers
foot-groom does. But will he not come, think you?



My life for't, he dares not appear; courage, we will out-dare
both him and Cassio.



Well, but when all's done, Sir, betwixt you and me, were
I at home in the Country again, all your honour, and honour above
honour, should not cause me fight: for, Pantaloni has learn'd to
fence, Sir, and I know not what belongs to fencing, not I.



Tush, fear not him, I tell you, he dares not appear, and if
he does, I'l fight him my self.



Will you do so, Sir, and I will be your tres humble ser∣viteur
Monsieur: for, d'you see, Sir, I am to be married shortly,
now if I should chance to be kill'd, (as who knowes but I may)
you know then, Sir, I cannot be marryed; why? because I shall
be dead, that's a good reason, Sir.




Plague on him for a coward, how he talks; I shall
have more ado to allure him to this duel, then a crack'd
Courtier has to perswade an Usurer to become surety for
him.



And then you know, Sir, Pantaloni is to marry the one
Sister, and I the other: now it is not fit that we should fight to∣gether,
who are to be brethren shortly, for I know not what.



Why, Sir, you must resolve to fight: go along with me
  52
to the field: and if he offer to thrust at you, I'le step in be∣twixt,
and save you both.



Will you be as good as your word, Sir? Leon. I will
indeed.



Then have at him But harke you, Sir, you must
have a speciall care he touch not my face, for so he may put
but my eye (God blesse us) and then where is your honour
forsooth?



He shall not touch you Sir, come, delay is dange∣rous.






You may stand by, and see fair play, Sir, I shall beat
him to some purpose: Cass. As you think fit, Sir.



Come on then O Becabunga! thou knowes not how
nigh thy fatall hour approaches for I am sure he dares not ap∣pear.





Enter Arabella sola in Prison, more closely confin'd, then formerly
upon the report that she was to be beheaded.


O gods! is this the height of all your wrath:
May I expect a requiem in this stroak?
Yes sure then graciously be pleas'd to hear
My ardent votes: O may my blood appease
Your incens'd mindes: restore my lawfull Prince:
Let Marciano live: Let nothing hurt him:
O hear him, hear him, if there be a faith
Able to reach your mercy, let him have it.
I plead none for my self: O love assist me,
Courage, beyond the ordinar of my sex,
Support my spirits in this agony:
Death's but the thaw of all our vanity.
weeps,




Nay now my soul dissolve: 'tis but a trouble
To keep thy quarter in this perplexed body.
O unkind Se•ate! eyes have not seen a fairer
Modell of beauty Sure, no hatchet dares
Be horse-leech to her veines: or if it does,
All iron shall be quite accurs'd hereafter.
 No, ther's an angell keeps that paradice
A fiery angell guards her: Vertue, vertue,
Ever, and endlesse vertue! O rare beauty!
The neerest to her maker, and the purest,
That ever dull flesh shew'd us: such another
Could make attonement for half her sex.
 See how she weeps 





 So, now my torturer comes 



Now all good angells blesse thee, fairest, truest
Heart-ravishing beauty: cruell, yet lovely tyrant.
Why still in sorrow? shall I never have
One gracious smile A las, how willingly
To save thy precious life would I submitt
My neck to cruelty by this hand, I would 
Kisses her hand.



Since it is ordain'd, Sir, I'le not endeavour
To prove a male-content. Sir, I have done
What I intended; shee's a cowardly Girle,
Who cann't endure one stroke for him, whose safety
Is so dear to his prince and country, vex not
Your self for my misfortunes: nothing can
Affright my resolutions 



Strange love! not to be parallel'd?



Pish I contemn the fury of your base,
Malicious senate: reason does disdain
To dwell with such, whose souls are stiffled with rage,
They sentence, whom they will, no matter why,
Since innocent, or guilty, we must dye.



Madam, you shall not dye I will sollicit
The Senate for you: if I cannot prevaile
As I expect, before it come to th'worst


I'le set you free, although their fury reach

In going off. My person for it who does enterprise
To serve his fancy, must all feares despise.




Ah vain fomenter of vain, fruitlesse hopes,
Thy windmill-thoughts will break their axel-tree:
Go foolish enterpriser: hope no favour
From one, who e're she suffered thy embraces,
Would rather undergo a thousand tortures.
 No, if e're woman was, or may be found,
That for fair fame, unspotted memory,
For vertues sake, and only for it's sake
Dares challenge room in history: O love
Let me be only Martyr in the case.
O Marciano, were it not thy safety
That did support my soul, I should prevent
The executioner: but since thou art
Free from the rav'nous clutches of the rebells,
Poor Arabella from that spark alone
Derives her present courage 
 Then blessed hour approach, I'le boldly show
That for his life, I can endure one blow.





Enter Cassio, Pantaloni. Swords drawn,


THis is the place, this is the hour appointed.



Yes, Sir, but, you see, he has not appear'd, may not
I put up my rapier now, and go home again with my honour, may
I not?



Not Sir: you must have a little patience.



Ho, Ho, that's very true, I must proclaime Leonardo and
him both cowards Oyes Oyes 
One coughs, and whispers within.
But (a pox) I hear them comming hither. Come, Signior
Cassio, wee have tarried too long, we will now return.



No, no, stay a little yet.



I see this fellow has a mind I should be kill'd: would
I had that unlucky challenge in my pocket again.



'Slid, here they come; to your po∣sture,
Sir.





O! look you there's Pantaloni, Sir, and Cassio too, you
said he durst not appear.



Nay faith, now I see 'tis no more jesting, there they come
both with their Rapiers drawn.







What shall I do now, Sir?







We'll fight all four at once.



Yes, yes, by all means:



Have at thee then, villain, Leonardo.












Not I, Sir; as I am honest I will fight none at this time:
for I have some business to do in the City, Sir.



What, you sneaking gull, will you not fight for your
Mistris, Sirrah.



No, Sir, I will fight for no Mistris at this time; I must
go about business of more importance, Sir  aside. O! if he had





Not for the Lady Marionetta, Sir?



No, Sir, I will renounce all the right I have to her, before
I fight, at this time at least.



I like that well.



'Slid, shall we come to the fields with you, and return thus
affronted? fight it out bravely, or by this hand I'l run you both
thorough.



Nay, it shall not be so, Sir, you see we cannot fight at
this time: for, the truth is, (now when I remember) I have an
appointment too, within less then a minute of an hour hence, with
some Ladies of my acquaintance.



That's all one to us, Sir.



I see I must do it, there is no way else to escape 
aside.
Gentlemen, I know what will please you: because we have brought
you into the fields, that you may not be angry, as Becabunga sayes,
I will renounce all the right I can have or claim in the Lady Chry∣solina.







For, d'you see, Sir, I care no more for her, then a Roarer
does for his old Punk.







I protest to you, Sir, I think they are fools that fight
for women, let them fight for themselves a Gods name, it is suffi∣cient
we love them.







So I say too Sir, and if you have wrong'd me, I here free∣ly
forgive you.



Sir, that's not enough, you shall both seal this paper, that
we may testifie to other Gentlemen, how we were ready to fight.







No matter for that, Sir, you shall both seal it, or by these
hilts 



Nay hold, good Sir, I shall seal it what terrible oaths
these fellowes use.
Pant. seals.




Come, you must seal too.









Now get you gone both of you for a brace of infamous
puppets, cowardly cocks-combs, you arrogant, empty-skull'd wittals,
not worthy of the least favourable smile from any Lady: you have
resign'd your interests in two honourable Ladies, and therefore de∣serve
no less then to be kick'd thus to be kick'd 
kicks him.



What d'you mean, Sir?



Thus to kick you, you brace of bastardly Baboons 



And so we leave you as we found you, a pair of impudent
filchers of reputation, not worthy the name of Gentlemen.



Farewell my Cob-webs 



Farewell good Spanniels, farewell 




Marry pox take you both, what notorious rascals are they.



Come, come, we must be friends again; let them go hang
themselves if they please.



If I had them in another place 



But harke you, what if they show the Ladies that we have
renounc'd our interest in them? what will you say then? think
you that ever the Lady Chrysolina will look upon you again.



I should have made them both black and blew.



Will you let's go and prevent them, I say.



By all means this trick shall do Leonardo no good,
what a fool was I to believe Cassio?



So I say alwayes: but come, quick he that speaks first
is alwayes best heard.



I'l to them yet, for all this, he has not beat me out as I
thinks.






Enter Marciano solus, having got intelligence that
Arabella was to die.

 HEart! art thou thunder-proof? can nothing break 〈◊〉

Shall Arabella die, and tho •still live?
 Burst stubborn peece of flesh O! heavens forbid,
Those eyes may live to see the world without her.
 The Senate hath condemn'd her O! base wre••

Unhumane Tyrants; Monsters of this age;
O! barbarous villany; what bloody thoughts?
It is not because she was accessory
To my escape: No sure, but 'cause I love her,
That she must die; as if those hell-hounds mean'd
To strike the Stars, and all good things above,
Regardless of her deity: no devil
Could be more cruel But, hold, Marciano,

Thou ar't the executioner: thou alone.
Say, wretched man, was thou affraid to die?
Could fear prevail so far? Alas! thy fame
Has lost it's right wing by thy too rash flight,
Leaving so rare an hostage in thy place.
Yet, who had said, or who had ever thought,
A thing so closely carryed could have ever
Thus come to light. She was to be enlarg'd
That very day: for so she did assure me,
Else had my wearied soul resign'd it's casket,
And I, by this time, sleep'd with blessed shades
Of my Ancestors, maugre all her tears.
 But what, I dream, I must do something more
Then only mourn for her: if art assist,

  •l study to preserve her; either return,
Submit my self to mercy of the Rebels,

•f otherwayes those goblins cann't be conjur'd,
Or else by open force, or private means.
What e're be th'event, I'l procure her freedom:
May be the gods are more propitious
Then I imagine. Come it is resolv'd

in going off. She shall not die fools are amaz'd at fate,
Griefs but conceal'd are never desperate.







NAy hold, my spleen; do not burst yet 
How this same Lady hath abus'd my favour,
Escap'd, no man knows how; gone, God knows whether.
If I fly not, I shall supply her place,
That is resolv'd I know Fortune, you shall not
Play upon me; although you now begin
To frown upon most of our Senators:
For, since the brave Lord Barbaro is dead,
All such as were his creatures are discarded;
Amongst whom, I am one a plague on all
Your base seditious cocks-combs: your proceedings
Will strengthen Cleons interest. Hell-hounds, Tygars,
Adieu base Elves: I'l post to Venice straight,
And there evite the ruine of your State.










TUsh, these are all but stories, Madam, I was but jesti•
with them when I did it.



Sir, I will hear no excuse.



I vow 'tis true, Madam



Nay, but harke you, Madam Chrysolina, if you come to
that with it, I can make you love me yet, whether you will or no.



Will you, Sir? Chrys. Pray, how do you that, Sir?



Why, thus I instruct it, Madam; I can show you se∣veral
Letters under your own hand and seal, day and date, &c.
that you are my humble servant, which you dare not for your ears
deny, dare you? Chrys. You had best be silent.



Nay more, I know you love me yet, because the last time
I was with you, you gave me a knot of Ribbons, which my mother
keeps well lock'd up in her Cabinet yet, as a love-token: and more∣over,
when I said I will come and see you again to morrow, you
said, sayes you, you shall be welcom.



This will not do it, Sir, you have renounced us, and
therefore 
sh• offers to remove.



Nay hold, Madam, we were but in jest.



And then they forced us to do it.



I, and if we had not done it, they swore (God blesse us)
that they would kill us.



And then, you know, it was better to seal a peece of
paper then to be kill'd.



What strong arguments they use.



Sister, we must shake e'm off now or never.



And then, Madam, if we had been kill'd 



Yes, if we had been kill'd, it had been small advantage
for you.



aside. I, and then, Madam and then, I say, Oh! if
Manduco were here to plead for me now.



Nay, if you will not hear us, take your pleasure.



No more, Sir, get you gone, henceforth I disclaim you.



And I you too, d'you see; I care no more for you, Mi∣ris,
then you do for me: I am as good a Gentleman as your self;
•nd if you were not a woman I would tell you more of my mind.



I knew it would alwayes come to this at length, I vow;
think you Gentle women do nothing but entertain us with vain
•opes for a while, and then cast us off.



M•stris, shall I tell you, there are more Ladies in Florence•he• you that will be blyth of me yet; and so long as I have
•oney in store, I am sure to have Mistresses in store.



Are you so, Sir?



I that I am; but I will complain to your Uncle, to the
Lady Saromanca, and to all your kindred, that you have cheat me,
for all your fair promises.



You are a prating fool.



I am no more prating then your self, Mistris; but if
there be justice to be had of you, I'l have it.



Come, let us leave them, Sister, else they'll both fall a
weeping.



For whom, for you, Mistris? I'l let you know we are
no such children.



No, but, I protest, I cannot but weep though.



Mar. Farewell, farewell, march to your travels my
Gamesters, farewell.




Peugh Farewell; I believe you are the greatest fool
of the two, Madam Chrysolina, call they you.



I protest, Pantaloni, I am very sorry for the loss of this
bony Lady though. O! how my father will chide me now: for
he had given Manduco orders to provide my Wedding-cloaths,
and now all's blown up.



Come, come, we know the worst on't: let them go, we will
never want great matches yet; let us think now to be revenged
on them villains, Cassio and Leonardo: the first time I meet any
of them, I will cut the tongue out of their heads that they shall
never talk more.



I, so will I too: but we must have Manduco with us
then, for he will make them stand in awe of him.





Enter Marciano solus, as at Pisa.


THat she's escap'd, that, I know certainly,
So letters from Siena have inform'd me.
But by what means, or where she is, I know not.
Never remembers him, who, if he should
Forget her but one hour, would think he had
Offended highly, yet she's silent still.
If I receive no letters from her, shortly,
I'le become jealous of her, sure; that she,
Who was all love, is now so quickly cold
In her affections. But what! I blaspheme
The vertuous Arabella, she's all vertue,
And cannot prove unconstant 
Now let me meditate on what my Prince
Hath order'd me to do: He's still the same,
And bears a mind, that floats above the waves
Of all adversities, as who should say,
Fortune, even do thy worst. His Counsellours,
Like to wise Marriners, affray'd to stretch
The top sayles of their courage in this tempest,
Least both they, and their Prince should suffer shipwrack.
Only was I commanded some years since
Upon an expedition to Siena,

Encourag'd by th'affectionate expressions,
And actions of the valiant Cassanaeo,

And others of our loyal country-men.
But fortune crush'd our enterprises, so
I did return to Savoy, where my Prince
Did then reside: and now, I am commanded


To second here an enterprise at Pisa,

Which whether it succeed or not; my duty
Is yet at least to prosecute it 
A post-horn sounds within.
How's this a post-horn: good 




All's well, my Lord, now do our joyes begin.
To flourish after such a tedious winter.
The Duk's restor'd, and now intends at Florence.

Here, here's a letter for it, from himself.



Restor'd! Nay hold my heart I'l read this letter.
reads
 True, True: O fortune how I hugge thee now.
And thou my good friend Strenuo 
embraces him.



Brave dayes, my Lord; the Court does fill apace,
The Ladies croud in throngs: the glory of
Her sex, your darling, the fair Arabella,

Since clouds of melancholly are overblown,
Does now appear in loves full horizon.



O how propitious! lend me moderation,
Reins to my joy, as well as to my sorrow,
Else, I shall quickly burst to death: this bless'd,
And unexpected Tarantula: of news
So ticles all my senses: joyfull tidings!
My Prince restor'd! my dearest Arabella

At Court I now my felicity lacks nothing
But sight to be compleat: that my eyes may
Perswade my yet almost incredulous soul,
To what my fancy never durst have prompted
 To horse To horse, I'le post to Florence quickly.





Enter Pantaloni, Becabunga, and Manduco
with swords by their sides.


O Tempora! O mores! O the effraenate, licentious per∣versity
of untamed adolescency! what a villanous,
scelerate attempt to entice two young Gentlemen to a Duel: who
besides, that they are both innocent Boyes, why, their very
Uncles and other friends, are employed in serious negotiations of
the Senate. Prob Deum, atque hominum fidem! Is all my in∣dustry
in sollicitation, my immense study and lucrubrations for
framing familiar epistles, my oratory in private commendations and
exhortations for both these Gentlemen come to nought! Proh
facinus ingens!



Peace, Mr. Manduco: you must not only teach us how
to beat, but likewise assist us in beating these dissolute fellows; for
I have sworn, Sir, and that is enough 



I, so I say too, for, you know we wear our swords here for
no other end; look you, are not my hilts very handsome, O now,
I will swear, By these hilts, as well as Leonardo himself.



And for that effect, I have got my sword too: I am lenis
in puniendo: but when I am provoked, invenient me ••onem, they
shall find me a very Lyon: my schollars at Santo Burgo, where I
was sometimes ludimagister, can yet testifie that: and for my seve∣rity
in castigando Probatum est.



Although Leonardo has got my Mistris, yet I'le have
about with him, albeit he be a Senatours son in law, with a mis∣chief
to his heart, when such Gentlemen of estates as I, am shak'd
off.



And for me, since Cassio has got my Mistris: let him
keep her: I must look out for some other great match in time; for
they say, Manduco, that now since the •uk's restor'd, they who
were active in the late rebellion, must be forfeit of their estates: and
  64
what will become of my Patrimony then: for you know my fa∣ther
has been a great man all this while, (I fear he never be so
again) now, you know, if I loss my Estate, how shall I have a wife
then? what think you, Pantaloni?
Pant, draws.




Nay, I can think on nothing now, but how to thrust at
Leonardo.



So, I will draw too, if you come to that with it.
Bec. draws.




And for me I love no dimi∣cation but
when I am provoked, I
will assist you Et sic arma amens ca∣pio,
nec sat rationis in armis.


Man. puts the hilts of
his sword betwixt his
feet, and tuggs at it vi∣olently.






Madam, my resolution was alwayes unfeigned
to serve you: your coy refusal diminished nothing of
my affection, but did rather incite me the more to love
you.



I did alwayes esteem my self honoured
in your love, S•r, though the capricious humors
of my self-seeking friends did countermand my
desires,




retire to a corner
of the Theatre.




Nay then, unspotted beauty, answer those
gracious obligations your self: it passes the activity of
my invention. I have been alwayes your devout ad∣mirer;
but now I am so much bound to love you, that
although my affection should super-erogat, yet I can
plead no merits.



Sir, your merits have made conquest of my affections 



Prethee, Leonardo, would'st see
good sport 







Nay, you must stay, I will not
fight alone.




loose, Man. solus to
Cass. and Leon.



Fy, not before women, Sir, that were unhandsom 




Keep off, boni viri; for, if you approach, you shall find
the vinegar of my wrath. I have chastised many such in my time,
I'l make you know what it is rem habere cum Professore, to bell
the cat with one to whom you owe respect.


Leon. takes hold on Man.



Thou slovenly, greazy Pedant, glass-gazing, superfi•ial
affected peece of ignorance, get you gone, speak no more ill of Gen∣tlemen;
or if you do, you may come to carry your joynts in a
box yet 



 Never again, Sir  lets fall his sword.



If you do Man. Ita me Deus amet, never, Sir.



We'll put you to the stripado, if you don't behave your
self more civily.



Never again, as I am erudit• So help me, God never.




Poor fellow, he must have his humour.



If he could hold his peace sometimes, he is a good ho∣nest
fellow; but he can speak good of no man, but those of his
own profession.



We have punished him sufficiently, let's think no more
upon him.



Nor upon our quondam Rivals either. Come, we'll
continue our progress to Court.





A joyfull noise within, Trumpets, Ketle-drums, H•-boyes,
with all sort of musick.
Enter the Duke, Marciano, with others of the Nobi∣lity,
Courtiers and Attendants, at his entry.
Song.NOw breaks our day,
Fairies away,
Pack hence, I say,
Your power's undone.
Room for Jov's progeny,
Full of divinity.

  66Cleon, brave Cleon, natures Paragon,
Rebellion breathless lyes,
Hell sings her obsequ••s,
Vsurping Traytors quick be gone.
Now, Cleon, divine Cleon mounts His Throne,
Room room room room for Him alone.



Heavens yet are just: they now have paid us home
Our former losses with large interest 
 A good while lost is never known to many,
An ill while feel'd is scarcely known to any:
For men, like butter-flyes, rush on the candle
Of war at all occasions, untill some
Are burn'd to ashes: others hurt their wings;
Then they recoil amaz'd, and not while then,
They blame the projects of their troubled brain.
 Now (gods assume our thanks) we, who before,
Were toss'd in waves of war, are so no more 
 Florence, take heed, jest not with supreme Powers,
'Tis hard to thrive, when heavens do countermand
Thy foul designs: But wisely learn to know
Thy former errors, and commit no moe.



 A Prince's word is good divinity 



 While Subjects oaths are down-right perjury,
And serve for nothing but to feed Rebellion.



How! Marciano, you seem discontent,
What sullen cloud amid'st this calm of joyes
O'•casts you noble soul? Marc. Not I, dear Prince,
I am not discontent.



Come, Marciano, you shall feast your senses
On what we know your soul entirely loves.
 Now let us in, 'tis time we were at counsell.


Within, musick as before.
Song.Dull man, do'st not see in his countenance
Such rare becoming grace,


As one might freely say he did enhaunce,
Majesty in his face.
Why art become
So grossly dumb?
Cannot thy tongue pay tribute to his praise?
Harke how all Florence sing,
In such a cheerfull spring,
And every one their voices raise.
Why silent then, when after all our tears,
Clouds which did shroud the light, our Sun appears?
Appears Appears
Dissolving all our jealousies and fears.







ALl now rejoyce, but I: my former griefs
Still dwell with me, untill the noble, constant,
Generous Marciano doth appear 
 Goodness! 'tis he O!
how my heart begins,
Enter Marciano discoursing quie•∣ly
with a Courtier. Exit Court.
Even as a murder'd carcasse, to distill
Gross drams of blood at sight o'th murderer.





 Cold vertue guard me if I dream not 'tis she.
 Mercifull heavens, can Marciano see
His very soul? yet not in extasie.
 O! Arabella, fairest, ever worthy,
embraces her.
I offer thus my heart thus thus and thus 
O! art assist me suddain joy had never
Suddain expression 



Sure, my Lord, you cannot
Be more surprised then I am; pray imagine
A heart abstract from cares, and hois'd in high
Raptures of joy; even such you may define,
Mine-thine thine-mine the gods could ne'r have been


More gracious then now 

embraces. Then, thus, my Lord, pray let me evidence
The temper of my heart, since you went hence.



O! thou, the loadstone of my else-wandring fancy,
That keeps my soul still fix'd what can I render
Conform to thy fair merits 




 Love, love I say, I cannot ask for more.
Next, if you will oblige me, prethee honour
Our friend Falasse, one deserves your favour.
 He entertain'd me kindly in your absence,
During your long exile.



Heavens thank him for it,
I shall esteem him highly, and recommend
Him to the Duke But now, my heart's in flames 

aside. Never was man more happy in his choyce
Then I in mine Such Mistrisses are rare 
You were my fellow-sufferer; sprightly Nymph,
If love connive, would you not willingly
Be sharer with me in my prosperity?



Those, who know all things, know my great ambition.



No more no more we wrong our joyes to stay
On such discourse 'tis time we supplicate
The gentle Hymen, he shall us unite,
That Florence may behold our joyes compleat.





Enter two of the guard with Partuysans,


COme, Come, all things will now resume their anci∣ent
splendour.



Yes, yes, now we begin, like Marriners after a tempest,
to suck our bottles at ease again.



O brave dayes! who would have dream'd on this
suddain revolution some years since.



No more of that discourse, look to the Court-gates,
for there shall be such a crowd of Gallants with their Ladies,
Apprentises with their Wenches, Citizens with their Wives, and
all the confused rabble, by and by, that we shall have a great labour
on't to keep the half on'em out.



Right, for the Lord Marciano is to be marryed to
night, and we shall have a Masque, I warrand you.



I beleeve we shall have a merry night on't.



You are welcome, my masters, walk
towards the further corner, pray you, there
you shall have best room.






The Duke will be here by and by. 1. Part. We expect
so Sir,



Come then, wee'l aside, Cassio.


A flourish within, Musick, &c.
Enter moe Partuysans.


Clear the way, the Dukes a coming.






 Remember no more, fair Lady,
O• by gone miseries 

Cass. Leon. Chrys. Mar.
kiss the Duk•s hand, &c.
Enter Marciano with Strenuo, presents him to
the Duke, &c.



May it please your Highness 
This was my friend, my very trusty friend
In all my exigencies, very kind
To both me and the Lady Arabella.

Here only, I present him to your Highness 




Whatever favours were bestow'd on you,
We do account them done to our selves 
 You are his friend, so, Signior, you are ours.





May all the blessings of the heavens combine
To raise your highness to a pitch divine 



My Lord Marciano, we have alwayes had
A narrow eye over all your proceedings,


Wee've found you loyall, without spot or blemish,
Val•ant, at all adventures, ever faithfull,
And therefore after mature deliberation,
We here entrust the Government of Siena,

Your native country, to your managing 


a Patent. Here's our Commission take it, and remember
Our honour, and the humours of Siena.




Great Prince, whose daring eye strikes traytors dumb,
Revives all loyal souls: disperses all
Rebellions foggy mists: you have this day
Conferr'd such honour on your highness servant,
As were I a base Infidel, yow'd perswade
My heart to faith, my tongue to oratory 
 Thus thus, dear Prince, I tender solemnly,
All homage to your highness, while I dye.



Arise, enjoy those honours, and approve
Your self a pattern of both fear and love.






 Sere••ssime, Augustissime dux



 Remove, remove that fellow.



 Come come S•rrah, you think
you are in your school. Man. Dux 



severally to kisse the
Dukes hand. Man.
harangues.






Princeps Tus Tus caniae.






What an impudent rogue is this?



 As for this Lady, whom thy gentler fates
Have still reserved for your chast embraces,
We still will honour her, as having seen
Evident signs of her affection,
And loyalty to us 



And still shall be,
Dear Prince, so much as in a Woman lyes,
I'le offer prayers and tears, and sacrifice,
The first fruits of my wishes; I'le implore
Such blessings, as the gods have heap'd in store,
May rain upon your royal highness head,
That in your eyes heavens favours may be read 



May forrein Princes his great power envy 



May he his treacherous enemies plots defye 



May he restore our former happiness 



And Medicis great princely house encrease 



While all his faithfull Subjects long to see
The royal hopes of his posterity 



 Long live our Prince, and may he still appear,
The brightest Star in all our Hemisphaere.
A joyfull noise within, &c.




