
A Dressing-Room in Mrs. HAZARD'S House.

(GATTY preparing the Toylet.)
Enter TOM with Tea Things.


_WELL, I believe we are at present the most melancholy Family in Town, that us'd to be the merriest. Since these Devils, the Muses, (as my Lady calls 'em) have got into the House, they have turn'd her Head, and she distracts every body about her. She really was once a sweettemper'd Woman; but now I can't speak, or stir, but she flies at me, and says I have flurried her out of one of the finest Thoughts! Hang her! I wish her Farce may be hiss'd off the Stage.



That's but a foolish kind of Wish; for if she's so sweet-temper'd now, what do you think she'll be then?



I don't care what she'll be; for I'm determin'd not to stay with her. I am sure she uses me like her Dog.



Does she? Then you are an ungrateful Hussey to complain: for she is fonder of that than ever she was of her Husband. I fancy this Farce of her's is horrid Stuff: for I observe, all her Visitors she reads it to (which is indeed every body that comes to the House) whisper as they come down Stairs, and laugh ready to kill themselves.



Yes, but that's at her Assurance. Why, do you know 'tis none of her own? a Gentleman only lent it her to read; he has been ill a great while at Bath; so she has taken the Advantage of that, made some little Alterations, had it set to Music, and has introduc'd it to the Stage as a Performance of her own.



I hear Mr. Surly, that every body thought she was going to be married to, is so enrag'd at her, that he'll never speak to her, or see her again. One of his Footmen told me of it yesterday, as a great Secret, so I promis'd him never to mention it. Don't you hear her Bell ring?
(Rings.



Hear her! yes, yes, I hear her; but I should have a fine Time on't, if I was to go to her, as often as she takes it in her Head to ring. (Rings again.) Ay, ay, ring away.



Ay, ay, ring away. I'gad here she comes. I with you well off. (Exit.





Why, what is the Meaning I must ring for an Hour, and none of ye will come near me, ye Animals? 



I was coming as fast as I cou'd.



As fast as you could! why, you move like a Snail that has been trod upon, you creeping Creature. Let me die, but she has provok'd me into a fine Simile. Come, get the Things to dress me instantaneously. 
(Tom with Tea and Coffee. She repeats Recitative, Oh, Corydon, &c.) You, Tom, I'm at Home to no human Being this Morning but Mr. Witling. I've promis'd to carry him to the Rehearsal with me. (Repeats Recitative, Gatty waiting with her Cap.)



Madam, will you please to have your Cap on?



No! you Ideot; how durst you interrupt me, when you saw me so engag'd? As I am a Critic, this Creature will distract me! Give me my Bottle of Salts. She has ruin'd one of the finest Conclusions. O Cor. Lord! I can't sing a Note. What are you doing?



Lord, Madam, I can't find them!



Here's a provoking Devil! sees 'em in my Hand, and wou'd not tell me of it! Get out of my Sight. (Repeats Recitative) Why, where are you going? am I to dress myself?









