




UNcivil man begon, before my rage
Increases above my troubled pa∣tience;
And 〈◊〉 for this un•…mely Courtesy.
Make thee to harbinger my Soul, in death,



Alas! My Lord why will you take a∣way
The noblest Life that ever honour'd Pontus?

I pray you think upon't.




Nor 〈◊〉 I live to see Clorina made


A wife to any man besides my self.



Ah! who would not run mad, and tear his haire.
And weep until his eye-ball•… did dissolve,
To see the bravest man of all this Land
So passionate? And for a scornful Lady?



Kill me Phylocles: Thou wilt do a deed
The gods will love thee for; for I am One
Full of those things that virtuous Souls abhorre,
Else sure Clorina would not use me thus.



To my own death to do you real Service
You may command me readily (my Lord):
But to entice me to advance my hand
Against your Life; Great •…ove: and all the gods
(Whom we do reverence and fear) forbid.




Phylocles, dost thou love me?



You know (my Lord) I do above my Life.
In our late wars when we did aid our Friends
The fortunate Roma•…, I attended you
And when your Horse's Fall left you a Prey
Unto the barbarous Cruelty of the 〈◊〉

I, careless of my life, ran to your Aide
And brought you •…ff through many of their death•….
Command me any thing, so you except
Your noble Life, and I will do it freely.



As well except you will not stirre a foot
To do your friend the greatest favour for him;
Which with an ease, so easy as is walking,






What would you have me do?



Begon my Phylocles. Is this a day
For me to honour with my Life, wherein

Clorina sl•…ghting all my years of service
(Which I have paid to her with as great f•…vour
As any of our Priests adore the gods)
Will give away her self unto Bassanes?

Away my Friend, and let me dye.



My Lord I will obey you on condition
That I may find you as I leave you, safe,
And (till I see you next) untouch't, and living.
I have some hope I may bring comfort with me,
Calm all these passions, and create a Joy
That may occasion triumphs in your heart



Go then, my friend, and prosper, but be sure
Thou dost not trisse with me. Thou well know•…▪
The nature of Pyrontus is a verse
To suffering of abuses.




With hope to bring you comfort speedily.
Exit.



False Tyrant Love! I would I had thee here,
With thy own bow Ide shoot such passions in thee
As should be over strong for thee to bear.
Fond Boy! Ide make thee doat on chaste Diana

And pluck thy Golden Feathers from thy Wing•…



To write with them Repentance to the world.
Which of the Fatall Sisters did provoke
Thee ca•…eless of mans happines, to do
Those bloody deeds which thou art famous for?
O that I knew her I And when I am dead
Ide pass the dreadful Waves of Phlegeton

But I would find her, and destroy her too.
Up•…n Ix•…on', wheele Ide torture her
Till with her balefull Cries she did awake
The Porter Corberus from his drowsy den,
Then would I g•…ve her body unto him
And he should eat it▪ and she be forgot.
But, cruel Love, hadst thou bin •…ind to me
And equal sire 〈◊〉 in Clorina's breast,
No•… only in 〈◊〉, but throughout a 〈◊〉Pontus,

I would have raised Altars to thy praise:
Where night and day (whilst 〈◊〉 makes Night, and day)
I would have had such Anthems carrol'd to thee

•…y happy Lovers; that, eternal Iove

Should have wished himself to have been the god of love.
Enter Ovid, Phylocles, and Armelina.



My Lord, the beautious Lady 〈◊〉

Attended by the Poets •…ilory Ovid

By the •…treaty of the excellent Bride,

〈◊〉 come to wo•…e you to your 〈◊〉,



Tis a miraculous kindness, that th•… fair

Clorina on this solemn •…ay affords me,
Had she but pleas•…d t'have been so merciful
In former times. I had not drooped thus
Now all the City Tomos layes aside
Neglected •…are, and puts on Jollity.
Madam! what is the pleasure of my Deity?
And •…hou sull Soul of poetry (sweet Ovid)

What unimmagin'd harmony of Comfort
Bring you unto me?



My Lord! if that my sister
Still doth retain the east of power over you
By me she doth entreat you to continue
Among the living. •…y all the Love you have
Profes'd unto her, she conjures you t'bear
The Chances of this Day worthy your birth,
And all the noble Act•…ons of your Life.



It is an unbeseeming weakness in you

〈◊〉 from the former fulness
O•… all your Honours all your immense know∣ledge
Of sage Philosophy, and of your self

〈◊〉 to captive your Reason, and becom•…

S•…ve to the passions of an heart let loose
To the pursuit of ba•… barous 〈◊〉.



Sweet 〈◊〉! you whose every word
Strikes Musick through my ears unto my Soul;
You in your •…olt language have 〈◊〉

The Commands of my Goddess, must have po•…e.


To make me die continually by living



Assume a better Courage, and contemn
These trifles, which you rashly deem Misfor∣tunes.
My Lord, you are the Glory of this Country▪
The Basis upon which not only Tomos,

But the Nobility of Pontus, build
Their Glories on instructed hitherto
By imitating You their great Example,
A little time may alter your Opinion
Of Beauty; you may chance to see ere long
Another Lady that may please you better:
And then this day you do account so miserable
You in your Kalender will mark a Festival.



Peace gentle Ovid, thi•… is bl•…sphemy
Against the Divinity of her fair soul,
And that rich Heaven of happiness, her body▪

Jove hath no Beauty, like her, on Olympus;

She's nature's Master-peice, and glorisies
This Angle of the world so, that I prize it
Above triumphant Rome, and all the Splen∣dours
The Court of great Tiberius is renowned for:



You shall or•…come Me, so you will Your self:
Say any thing (my Lord) and I will hear you;
Do any thing, and I will honour it;
So you forbear to trespass 'gainst your life.



My Sister doth expect (if you have ev•…

Born reall affection to her) that you should


Return her word by me, that you will loose
This resolution of self-Murther, she will
Love you as far as Honor will give leave,
Entertain welcomly your Company,
And conversation, whilst you prove your self
Delighted with her virtue And she knows
The Lord Bassanes will must joyfully
Continue you within the Catalogue
Of his Friends most belov'd, while you exceed not
The Limits of a canded Amity,
No•… attempt treason to her Nuptials.



I see a Calmness in your looks (my Friend!)
Thanks (gratious Madam) for your pains; And may
Thy Roman Gods reward this kindness (Ovid).

Yet he were savage that had ears so deafe,
And dull an Intellect, as not yeild
To your great Reason, and most eloquent Tongue,



Your partial Love doth too much over∣value
My poor Endeavours. Hark!
Musick 〈◊〉





Invite as in; Pray, Glorify this Ceremony
With your fair presence





〈◊〉 wils (my Lord)
Owe 〈◊◊〉 for it.






Auspicious Torch, and (for a Co•…rtesy
So timely given crown your more happy head
W•…th 〈◊〉 b•…ss above your Hopes.






I 〈◊〉 but collect my self▪ and follow you.



You will oblidge us all.
Armelina.









I am here my Lord. (he•…e!



Oh! how a thousand passions combate
But which of them shall prove predominant
Commands (received from my fair, cruel Mistriss)

〈◊〉 have determind. What strange Miracles,

〈◊〉 Deity of Love, are in thy power!

〈◊〉 prompts me to advance my hand;
And turn the Genial Bed into an Urne.
By setting this Bassanes Soul at Liberty.
But I must needs recal this infant-thought▪
Or an inglorious stain may six upon
My Reputation. He was ever noble
In all his actions to me, and we
Have long ago contracted such a frienship,
That it hath been look't on, as an Example
Worthy an Imitation. Besides, he
Was never made acquainted with my Love.
He then is innocent as any Injury
Committed against me? and doth no more
Then I. The bright 〈◊〉 he •…ffects
An•… so do I, and so must all the world
That are not blind, or sensess when they see


His Starres befriend him: all those Eyes of Heaven
Did look a-squint at my Nativity:
And he hath •…ar more merit to deserve her.
Come Phylocles: she is my only Goddess
And I must quit me of profaness too
What she commands, strike no forbidden Blow.
Exeunt.








Mother! Captain Dacus promis'd me a new Gown against the Masque: and hath not kept his word with me. I desire therefore I may be quit of his Company?



Pritty grumbling Heart! My Tenants are slow in paying their Rents, I else had not faild thee: But you are very fine as you are, Venus be thanked.



That 〈◊〉 cost of yours. I am the more be∣holding to another friend.



To whom? The Brides groom I warrant you Spinella,







The Lord Bassanes was ever her noble Patron.



But I hope she will loose his bounty here∣after, Cypassis.



Your Jealousy prompts you to talk thus.



After honey-moon 〈◊〉 past, he may return to her again.



You shall become more liberaly, or I will shortly 〈◊〉 you from my Acquaintance. What do you think, we venture reputation for nothing but oathes, flattering words, and a little foolish pleasure.



Indeed Son▪ a young Gentle-woman must be maintain'd with other Materials. If she goes not sine, and cleanly, she is not fit for good Company. And if she keeps never so 〈◊〉 a while 〈◊〉, and it comes to be known, she may bid farewell for ever to all her holi∣daies; The Honorable, and Worship•…ul will not care for her Embraces.



Are you against me too, mother? 〈◊〉 thought Madam Cypassis had had a greater kindness for me then so.



Captain Dacus! You know I have much respected you from our first Acquaintance. But you must think of performing better with Spinella for the future. My poor Girle else, will not be able to live decently, in the fashion unless she should live more common then I could wish.



Mother, you shall not need to fear that: for I can be married when I will. And this Wedding of my dear old friend invites me much to ta•…e that Course. Juno direct me
  11
to the best: for Venus (whom I have hither▪ to served •…is but an ill Tutress.



Prithee, sweet Spinella, leave thi•… melan∣cholly Discourse. It sounds too unkindly, especially on a marriage day. We should now talk of Love, Maiden heads, Musick, Banquets, Maskques, and so •…orth.



Captain Dacus I must confess, my Genius is towards mirth indeed: But you must not then give me cause of sorrow.



The 〈◊〉, Captain, you must not be so close handed for the future. The Lord Bassanes being married, peradventure may turn foolishly uxorious: and then you must either get you better Tenants.



Or a new Mistress.



Still in this Key▪



What hath been done yet, hath been kept private. And so it concern'd all our Reputations. But (now I think better on it) it is your best way (Spinella) to take an Husband, if he be worth having.



He can scarce be worse then this servants.



Pretty one, afford me better words: For I dearly love thee. And (though I never made use of my Credit yet in that kind) I will take up a new Gown for thee to mor∣row; on that condition I may take it up as often as I will.



Then you shall have leave to do your best, or worst.




T•…s well ye are come.
Enter Marullus.



He thought Bassanes had forgotten us: but we meant (you see) to come unsent for.



You might have been welcome if you had: I should have got you good place•…. But Bas∣sanes is a Gentleman for his word, and hath sent me to conduct you accordingly.



I thank his Bridegroom-ship.



You are angry (I warrant you, that he's married.



Not I, Venus bear me record: Much good do him with his fresh meat. He will be weary of it no doubt ere long, as he hath been with Others: so you may tell him, 〈◊〉.



And then you op•… for h•…m agai•…?



Juno, and Diana defend. I dare swear she hath no such thoughts.



So durst not I.







I care not what you say, you are both minded to jest with me. But is not the young Phoebianus returned from Rome against these sol•…mnites?



Pyrontus writ for him.



Tis 〈◊〉Bassanes would not stay for his Arrival



No wonder at all: All men so mad of a new face when they can get i•….



Though often they leave a better for it.



Well said, Mother: thou speakest Ora∣cles, old Cypassis!



With some regret. This marriage is not yet digested by them in earnest, I must en∣treat you to beware of your behaviours. You are desired to pretend no Acquaintance to the Bridegroom These slips of youth are sit to be conceal'd



Or Clorina may grow jealous.



Tis good preventing the worst: tis time we walk.
Exeunt Omnes.








Welcom for ever to my hand, Clorina,

Who long hast been the Regent of •…y heart,
This day hath made me Owner of such Riches,
(The Mine of Joys in my delicious Pride)
That I our mightiest 〈◊〉 do not envy
Why do's my dearest blush •…Because thy mo∣desty
Doth s•…e so many beauties here Inferior
To thy supremest one •…ut blush on fairest,
Like to a setting Sun, at the approach
Of this so 〈◊〉 for Night, thats to determine






Now you make me blush
Indeed my Lord.



I wish you (Madam) a Life so circled in
With joy, that you may never breath a sigh:
And (when you shall grow weary of the Earth)
Become Jove's Dotage and be Queen of Heaven.



My Lord Pyrontus. I return you thanks:
And hope th' immortal gods will recompense
This kindness, with an happiness transcending
What ever yet 〈◊〉 could desire.




Propitiously smile on you with all those
Bright eies that do enlighten Night and Day.



I did not think this City could have shown.
A Multitude so gallant of both Sexes.



They come (I thank them) to grace our Nuptials.



They come no doubt to see and to be seen.





Hymen be prais'd, we are come in time




Venus bless mine eyes! what a sine shew is heree?



Indeed (Captain Dacus) you have en∣deared me much
We are beholding to your lusty Shoulders,
That made a Pritty Lane through all the Croud,



My best of strength shall evermore at∣tend.
To do you se•…vice



Here let us keep together
This is the best Room that is le•…t. Pray tell me
How do ye like the 〈◊◊◊〉

Da•…t subtile rayes, such as may 〈◊◊〉

Within the breasts of all mankind▪



I do not know how some may love heart, burning,



It is a Pretty Lady, but I have seen
Some faces that have seemd as w•…ll.



O Envy! Madam Cypassis, where beseech you?



I hope Spinella would be loth enough
To change with her.



I am not yet aweary
Of mine own.




It doth grow late, and time they did begin



They only waited your Commands.



That•…s Publius Ovidius Naso, the Chief Poet
Not only of Rome, but all the mighty Empire.



I know him well enough, and was ac∣quainted


Many years with him, ere I saw this Country.




Some Deities from Olympus▪ top, to grace
This Nig•…it s solemn•…ties. The mask.
The Maskers a•…l attir'd according to the Fancies of the Ancient Poets.
After a slourish of loud Musick Enter Hymen, Cupid, and Venus singing.



I •…nil'd with eies, that darted rayes
Of sweet desire on either's face.



And I such shafts did put in ure
As only they themselves could cure.



And I Loves best Physitian quickly found;
Each others hand might heal each others wound.



May they dissolve in love, yet prove
No Diminution by their love,



May they their fears and pains requite,
And spend (in such revenge) this night.



VVhat ere they do, they may with ardent zeal.
For they have Licence under my great Seal.






Jove hath commanded me to let you know.


You shall not want a grace that Heaven can show.
By virtue therefore of my sacred Wand

Juno, and pallas, hither I command;
That they (with Venus) may again contest,
To whom belongs the Golden Apple best.
And Paris (by my Caduceus Power),
I charge to come from thy Elizium Bower.
Now let thy doom meet the just will of Jove

And thou shalt feast with Deities above,
Forgo thy Solitary shades▪ and sit
A judg upon Olympus for thy wi•….





Wherefore are we thus summond to appeir
To hu•…in view? and to these Mortals here?



I hope Jove now will not disturb our Raign,
And fall in love with women kind again.



Surely long since (Queen of the Dei∣ties)
He did abandon terrene vanities.



Daughter, he swore (by Dis) to me himself, he would for ever leave all amorous stealth: Yet Juno cannat but suspect the worse; He once so long continu'd such a Course.




Pallas hath often blush'd to hear Mars tell▪


Following his Fathers steps he did but well.
My brother was too blame.




Gloried to imitate what Jove h•…d don.
Your sister Venus was an hansome Child.



And Mars (when he was young) was very wild.




Saturnia, needless, I do know your fear;
Had 〈◊〉 meant so▪ heed not have met you here.

Paris is slow in his Approach. Sure some
Fine Dreams have fix'd him in Elizium

Again I must command him to appear.





You need not (Maia's sons) for I am here.
I had not made such stay, but was in talk,
With my fair Queen in a delicious Walk,
Where Agamemnon, and the Spartan King,
And all those many Princes, they did bring
To fight for the Revenge of that fam'd Rape,
Did laugh at our Discourse, not envy at.
Thrice happy are those Shades, where none do bear.
Those Passions that so tyrannize it here.
The Grecian Chie•…ains have a thousand times,

•…urs'd their own rage, that cros'd us in our Crimes:


For when their wiser souls were loosned from
Their Bodies (Porc'd unto Elizium

By voilent deaths) and clearly understood,
Those follies they had sealed with their blood.
Amazement ceas'd upon them all Our 〈◊〉,

(Which that so fatall Quarrell did dostroy•…)
Had slourish'd still in pompe; All they and we
Had liv'd in peace and in Felicity.
And died in our own beds, had they been blest
T'have had those thoughts wherewith •…'are now possest.
We are not jealous in those plains of Bliss:
They so•… fruition care not there, that kiss

Hellen of Greece, and I (with out dispight
To 〈◊〉 self) take what Delight,
Pleaseth 〈◊〉 there the most. Every one there;
Sleights those thing•… most they doted upon here.
Our Bodies being compos'd of Elements
Incline Mankind to seek to please the sense.
But there our Spirits (being confin'd)
Strive at the satisfaction of the mind.
Though Souls embrace, They Organs want, and Places.
To raise a jealousy at their embraces:
We at our old Amours do often laugh.



Then you was in discourse, which I broke off?



No matter (Mercury) 'tis sit I pay
My duty unto Jove, and him obey:


What therefore is his will? that I may soon
Submit to his Inevitable Doom.



You must again an Umpire be, and tell
(In beauty) which of these doth most excell.



My Judgment I have given, once and why
Should that again to my discussion lye?



'Tis▪ Jove's Decree, And he (if you re∣frain)
Will make you Subject unto Pluto's Raign,
From the Elizium Plains, remove you quite,
And cast you into an eternall night,
(Insteed of Helen's voice) where evermore
You shall hear C•…rberus bark, Cocytus rore,
And dreadfull Phlegeton (with horrid Noise)
Torment your ears, as darkness shall your eies▪







Here take this golden Ball▪
And give't her that's hansom'•… of them all.



I shall (in my Opinion) doom aright:
But wish that Jove had chose: some other wight.
But the last time these goddesses employ'd
Me in this kind, it was on Sacred Ide.
Why therefore here, in so remote a Town?
And countries, so far distant from mine own▪



Cast but your eies about this Crouded place,
And you may judge, it is to do a Grace
To some in this fair company.






That generous youthfull Pair became my Prey.



But they had never been your Captives▪ bound,
If I had not compe'd them by a wound.




Jupiter (to do honor to this Night)
Hath summond these t' appear to humain sight:
And hath commanded you (before this Throng)
To give that Apple where't doth most belongs:
Be well advis'd (after exact Survey)
How you dispose the golden Fruit away.



Prime goddesses of the Olympick Court,
That Paris grace again with your Resor.
I on my knees beg leave, that what I d•…th
For One, may not offend the other Two:
Because our Poets have profes'd that we
Have been afflicted for my first decree;
For thence two of you did our foes become,
And hastned-on the Sack of Ilium.

I must obey Imperious Jove's Command,



And we to thy Arbitriment will stand.



I do protest (by all my Rule above)
I'le not be angry how soe're It prove.

Pallas And, Priams son I will be nothing stird
Or discontent, if others be prefer'd.



Having implor'd your Mercies, Now I fall
To look to whom belongs the Golden Ball.

Juno hath sweet black eies, Pallus sine hair,

Venus is just proportion'd wondrous fair.


As I have done before, again I must,



The Ball's thine; And my judgment just.
Gives it to her.



To tax thy Doom, were but a needless shift,



Nor do we envy her the petty gift.



To show there is no falling out Lets all
Fall in, and dance (before this Pair) a Ball.



You and I (Trojan Prince) will lead this sport



You have been famous for, in Priam's Court.



Supremest goddess, you a Grace con∣ferre
Too high, upon your humble Honorer.




Hymen, Cupid, and Maia's son, advance;
Let's show these Mortals an Olympick Dance.
All the Maskers dance,
After a Flourish of Solemn loud Musick, Enter Jupiter.




The King of gods and men! Haile, thundring Jove!




Why hath my Father left his Throne above?



Perceiving Venus, and her wanton Son,
(To do some service) were by Hymen won
From my star-paved Court, and looking down


Upon the world and (in it) on this Town,
I soon espide the business: Therefore straight
Summond you both to meet (this Nuptiall night)
My daughter Venus here, that we might do,
A Grace divine unto these happy two.
How Paris hath bestow'd the Ball, I've seen:
But give it me again (you amorous Queen
Of Cyprus) It hereafter must not be
A Trophy to the Paph•…an Diety.



Great Jupiter, I yield to thy Command



And I thus give it t' a more beauti o•…s hand.
Gives it Clorina▪
Here may you flourish long in bl•…ss, and when
You weary grew of the abodes of men,
I'le fix you both (t'amaze all humane eies,)
A glorious Constellation in the skies.

Pallas and Venus do not take offence,
For she is a superior Excellence,
And frown not Juno; I no more will make
Co•…verse with Mortals, for thy Quiet'•… sake.
Hadst thou thus given the Golden Ball, had
Speaks •…o Paris.
Made thee Companion unto Ganimed.

Take hands, and dance, whilst our attentive eares
Do guide our feet, to musick of the sphears▪
They dance the second Dance,






Blest, and best Pair make hasto to bed,
The Bride still owes her Maiden-head.



There you can only find a Balm,
The festring of my Darts to calm.



And Youth, and Beauty may delight,
In all Joyes of a Nuptiall night.



There when you shall be left alone, and Kiss,
You need not envy to the gods, their Bliss.



'Tis time we leave these to a new De∣light,
And therefore Jove himself doth bid good night.
Exeunt, Maskers



Let us to bed, my Dear: I long to lose,
My self in thy Embraces. Gentle Ovid

The bright Clorina, and my self shall owe,
All power we have to serve you to the utmost:
And may propitious Heaven encline great Caesar,

To look with gratious eies, on your Misfor∣tunes.



You both vouchsafe too much of honour to me,
If you forgive the rudeness of my Muse.



I find my self extreamly ill o'th •…oddain
And must not be so barbarous t'interrupt
(With any sign of sickness) the Felicities
Of this Bles'd Company: Good night to all.
Farewell my Lord, The happiest of mankind:

Clorina too goodnight, you most un∣kind.
Exeunt Bassanes, Ovid, Clori∣na, Armelina.



Captain I do commit to your Conduct
Madam Cypassis, and her pritty daughter.
I must go help the Groom to bed, and see
The Bride to taste her last Virginity posset.
Exit Marullus.



I shall becarefull of my charge. Spinello,

I had rather have spent my time in bed with thee,
Then have been at this Maskque.



So had not I with you.



I know you jest my litle Rogue.




Juno was of a demure look, and had a grave behaviour.




Pallas had a smart cast with her eyes.
I warrant you she beat
Her husband, if she were ever Married,

Spin, Venus indeed was the hansomest of them all.



But you are hansomer then she my pritty One.
Exeunt. Dac. Cyp. Spin.



Tis very late and time to hasten home.


How is it with Noble Lord Pyrontus.




I am undone (my Philocles) for ever.
And have too tamely yielded to this Match.
I should have challenged my friend Bassanes,

If he would not have given up his interest:
And (by his fall) rays'd up my self some hope;
Or lost her bravely with my life together.



My Lord for Heavens sake, cast aside such Thoughts,
And (to your Aide) call generous Patience.



The Cowards virtue! O the Multi∣tude
Of those grand joyes Bassanes〈◊〉 possest of
By this Conjugall knot! And oh the Myriads
Of Miseries, my poor life is to wade through
By her severe Command! were I the mighty

Tiberius, and (or'e the conquer'd world)
Bore Soveraignty, the Empire I should sleight,
And give't Bassanes for his Room to night.
Exeunt Ambo.











FRom Ostia, we have had a voyage hither,
So fraught with Storms, and Tempests that I wonder
The Sea gods



The Sea-Monsters call them rather.



Were not all tired with using so much Rage
On us: And yet you (Beautious Caralinda)

Seem'd fearless of the Furies of the Ocean.
Dreadless of thunder and lightning? whil'st my man
This Rascall Cacala did nothing but shit,
And spew, and pray; when there was such a Noise,
(Betwixt the Mariners voyces, and the Ele∣ments,)
That Neptune could not hear the timorous vil∣lain.



Sir, I did love you well: you have been bountifull
On a 〈◊〉 Occasions to me, I else should never


Have left my Native Country pleasant Italy;

T' have undergone a voluntary Exile.
But had I ever dreamt on such a Passage,
Such Thunders, Whirlewinds, and such horri∣ble Tempests,
I would have taken leave to stay in Rome.




Although Floretta sometimes wept for fear.
She did not baui, and whine like thee.




She do's not know how pretious a Thing life is,



Surely I do; but well enough imagin'd,
That such ungovern'd Out-cries might disturb
The Company, yet not incline the gods
The sooner to deliver us from drowning.



Intruth, Cacala, your fear was often times
So full of noise, the Mariners could not hear,
Their own voyce to attend their necessaries:
But, you perhaps are valianter at Land.



He's every where a Coward Caralinda




I would confute you (Sir,) with all my heart,
If you, and Mistriss Floretta would consent. to't:
Were I in bed with her, Ide prove my self,
As valiant as the proudest Captain living.



How now you, saucy Rogue



He talkes most wickedly.



I had rather do.



You must go look a Mate then.



Where do you mean to lye in Tomos, Captain?
Good Lodgings, here, I think are somewhat rare.



As soon as we came to Town I dispatch'd Cacala.

T' enquire out one Madam Cypassis, A Gentle∣woman,
Of my Acquaintance in my very youth, she was
A servant once unto the Princess Julia.




You rather should say, T' Ovid's fam'd Corinna.




By your fair leave, I know I speak a Truth,
And were not Ovid timerous he'd confess,
He Julia veild under Corinna's Name.

Cacala hath taken me Lodgings at Cypassis;

Where you may hear of your humble servant Hannibal.




And do's Floretta lye there also?









Then you do resolve.
(It see us) to make a wedding on't



By no means; Madam, Neither pretty Floretta.

Nor I, are yet such fools, to flight our Liber∣ties,
Whilst we like one another we'l keep together,


And when we grow a weary we may part.
The world hath other men and women enough
And we are both of us yet ignorant,
How soon we may affect variety.



But, fear you not the gods? Are they well pleas'd,
Think you with such a life?




Fear'd any thing And for Mistriss Floretta

What Man could do to her, she never dreaded:
But how her Courage stands towards the gods,
I cannot say.



You say too much, Cacala: And must learn manners.
Or I must pray the Captain to bestow
A Cudgell on you.



Sure his valour scorns
Such mean employment; He disdains to touch
A weapon that's beneath a sword, or ponyard.
My noble Captain ever was accustom'd,
To give me leave to jest.



But you must know,
Your distance to Floretta,




I know it but too well;
And alwaies am more distant then I would be.



But, Captain ide advise you both to marry,
It is a life thar is more honorable.



You are deceived (Madam Gara∣linda)



Our R•…man Captains think there is more ho∣nour
In keeping wenches▪ then in Marriage.



Out upon Wedlock: I had rather •…ear
Alarums at Midnight then the Multitude
To baul Thalassio,•…t a Nuptials.



Y' are a mad Captain, Hannibal.





And ne're had else been banisht into Pon∣tus.

But where abouts in this town (Caralinda)

Do you intend to make abode



At Publius Ovidius Naso's:

I write to him from Rome, t' entreat that Cour∣tesie.
And he return'd me thither word (by Let∣ter)
I should be welcome▪ I have sent my servants
Thither to prepare for me, and to beg
His company here, that he may be my guide.
Unto his house,



Were Ovid in his Youth
He would be glad of such a Purchase (Lady▪
Y' are of a tempting beauty. He had fam'd you
Equal unto his so renowned Corinna,

Had he been then acquainted with your Ex∣cellencies.



You shame me Captain Hannibal: I am
So conscious of my own deformities,


That I shall (all I may) shun publick view
Besides I know the Noble Poet hath
Subdued his Passions, and is now become,
As rigid in his behaviour, as the gravest
Of all the ancient Philosophers.



These women such Discourse affect as if
They were pure Vesta-Nuns▪ But they that do
Give credit to them, are of a Belief
That is not in my Creed,



You must have leave,
To talk: know likewise Captain!
Enjoy'd the generous Ovid his prime youth,
And Flourished again in his own house,
(Adjoyning unto our triumphant Capitol)
I should choose to live with him, I do prize him
As the supreme wit of the Empire.
Whose Conversation ever was admired.
Besides, I dare presume on my'own Temper▪
I fear not the Temptations of all mankind▪
And such Averseness have to all that Sex;
That here (in presence of the Immortal gods)
I vow (in that kind) never man shall touch me.



For all your Confidence in your own Chastity,
(I speak it with a reverence to your merit▪)
Beware of the old Game, and of the Conse∣quence;
Known commonly by the name, of Great Belly.




My Life (through all my Actions) shall vindicate
My Reputation spot less.



Your Beauties, and unequa'd Qualities are
Too potent charms for frail mankind to know,
And not be conquer'd, by so many wonders.



Besides her Cloathes would set ones teeth on edge.



On Shipbord she went in an homelier habit.



The meanest Cloathes will serve at Sea for women:
Captains in Tyrain dy'd Habiliments.
And with their divers coloured Plumes should flourish,
At all times in all Places to beget
Awe, and Respect, from those they do converse with.



Fair Caralinda, You speak Oracles:
The Hearts of all the Getes here, must do Ho. mage
To your unparallel'd perfections;
They will not only own you for most beauti∣full,
But the chief femal Gallant of the Province.
  32〈1 page duplicate〉  33〈1 page duplicate〉
  34Enter Ovid,



Your Prayses so transcend, they make me blush.



Welcome my sweetest Cosen Caralinda.

May all the gods of Seas and winds be prays'd,
For your Arrivall in this Country safely.



Thanks, generous Ovid, I rejoyce to see
The wonder of the Roman Empire living.



Oh spare to overvalue so your servant,
A serious Adorer of your virtues:
Admire only you have found me breathing,
After so many years here in Exilement.



Madam, because we see you in that Com∣pany
We know you have an honor for, and who will
Conduct you to your Lodgings, we will press
No further on your Privacies; But take
Our leave for this Time. May both gods, and men
Bear Hatred to Tiberius, un till he
Repeal the gentle Ovid. When we next
Do meet, we will converse at large. May Jove


Juno, Pall•…s, and the whole Court of Deities,
Be evermore auspicious to you both.



Also to me. Master; and to Floretta:

What ere we do, I'de have the gods be mercifull.
Exeunt, Han. Flor. Cac.



I need not hope I shall be safe, but be secure I shall be so, while I comtinue in
Your house.



You (Madam) to your self shall pro∣mise
All privacy you can desire: you are
As secret as you were not in the world,
Although your Native City you inhabite,
Your name shall not escape my lips. But why
(if with an offence I may demand it)
Affect you such concealment, now especially
When all your friends would be so proud to see you,
And in this time of publick joy?




At better leasure il'e acquaint you with
My very soul, in all Particulars.



I will await your time. But when you left.
The world's great Head, happy and flourishing Rome,

How was Tiberius mov'd by the Intre aties
Of my dear wife, and some few reall friends,
That my Repeal sollicited?



Your virtuous wife and many constant friends,
Have not evaded any opportunity
In your behalf. And (though they have not yet,
Effected their desires in that Concern)


They do not dispaire of prosperous success



I have two powerfull enemies I believe,
And such who block up (with their imputa∣tions)
All wayes of mercy. And yet they are men,
I cannot accuse my self for ever injuring.



You alwaies was too noble to do wrongs,



Even he that hath that cruelty of heart,
To tempt the wife of a poor banisht-Man,
(Amidst her sighs and tears for my misfor∣tunes)
Makes use of all the mighty Imterest
He hath with Casar, still to fix me here.
Pardon my passion, ye Just gods, if I
Do wish one day you will requite the Mis∣chiefs
Of Cornificius.




Your wife could make good Mirth with his Affection,
Were not her heart so sad for your long Ba∣nishment.



Some of my Griefes I have flung on him under
The counterfeit Name of Ibis.




Those Curses he richly deserves, Our sacred
Empress the sweet condition'd Julia,

Hath from the Island Trimerus, (where she
Hath liv'd confin'd about these twenty years)


Writ to him oft in your Behalf. But she
(Although she brought to him the world in Dowry)
Could not prevaile.



She grac'd too much an Exile.



But had much reason to solicite through∣ly,
She being believ'd to be the fair Corinna,

Whom in your Poems you have celebrated.



I pray you think not so: you wrong her virtues,
Of which I only was a true Adorer.



Though you deny it ne're so much, a Many,
And of the nobler fort, beleive it otherwise
Droop rot best Poet; but Courage.




My hopes sunk with Augustus to the Grave
And here my aged bones must find an Urne,
Will you not see the Bridall house, although
In this disguise, and sure to be unknown?



I all those Inclinations must suppress:
It is the will of Heaven, and not mine own,
Tis time we walk.



I'm ready to attend you.
Exeunt.








This sweet and solitary Grove (ad∣joyning
To your citie's walls) I have made Choice to vent
My sorrows in: This Place that many times

Clorina's smiling eies have graced more,
Then Phoebus with his beams could ever do.
Happy you Trees, whose roots received vigour
From the life-giving virtue of her looks:
And you sweet Birds that choose this shady place,
To warb•…e forth your various notes were blest,
To learn new Aires from bright Clorina's voice:
And all those Beasts are fortunate, that here
Enjoy the cooll shades, and the Crystall springs,
The waters and the grass receiving virtue
(From her rich presence) towards their ease, and nourishment
Even all th'Inhabitants of Tomos choose
This place to recreate their minds withall:

Pan' Faunus, Satyres, and the Dryades

Have not afforded me so good success
Wherefore alas! thus do I vainly taxe


The rurall gods? Clorina is my foe,
Else I had been as happy as Bassanes,

Who is the most blest man of all the Empire,
And that unparallel'd Beauty doth enjoy,
Whose Loss must perpetually lament;
Whose Loss must sit so neer unto my Soul,
The world will want a Cure to make me whole.





Thanks to These Trees auspicious shades▪ whereby
I, undiscover'd, have been made partaker
Of Lord Pyrontus Love unto the Bride▪

I will observe (with all the curious search
I may) what progress he intends to make,
And hope I shall raise motives to withdraw

Bassanes from the dotage on his wife,
And six his heart again upon Spinella.






I have been searching for you long



Tis best I do retire, where unperceiv'd
I their discourse may over hear.




Give such a Liberty to your Melancholy,
Nor take delight in solitary walks.
My Lord Pyrontus in your early youth.


You was instructéd (by the ablest Mastero
That famous Athens or triumphant Rome

Could glory in) in all the Principles
Of grave Philosophy; reflect upon them
And raise your self thence strengh to conquer these
Unruly passions.





Tis very easy for a man to give
That counsell to his friend, he could not fol∣low
Himself, were he in his condition;
I want a Power to preform't The world
Cannot afford me means: I must enjoy

Clorina, or I útterly am lost.
And therefore (though Bassanes is my Friend,)
My Amity cannot enjoyn me silence
I must pursue my suit, and will.





You then will run a course against all Virtue,
Offend the sacred Deities, whom we
Are bound by strictest Obligations,
To observe in all they have commanded us.



But they are mercifull, and will for∣give



But tis inglorious to commit a Crime
Out of presumption of a pardon; and
Your breach of friend-ship, all mankind will censure
An Act degenerating from true Nobility



These Moralls (Philocles) are cast away
On me, who am so overwhelm'd in love,
I have not Reason left to practise them.



But you will have sufficient if you would
Take up a Resolution to withstand
This dangerous passion.



Tis in vain to preach
These things to me: I must enjoy Clorina,

Or leave you friend for ever, I shall dye.



How this untoward Love destroyes your sensel



There is not Oratory enough on earth,
To win me from the Pursuit of my love,
One way or other I must get Clorina:

And to invent a Means to compass her,
Shall be my only study; and if I prove
So fortunate as to accomplish that,
I shall account my self a Favorite▪
The most esteemed of by the Gods.







Then I shall find there is a Fate attends
On Lovers; Harsh Beginnings, happy Ends.
Exit Pyrontus



I will not give him over thus, but fol∣low him
And though I have small Hopes I shall prevaile
Yet I (in Friendship) am obliged to do
My best to stop him in this vitious Course.
O brave Pyrontus! How hath impious Love
Abus'd thy Reason with this mighty Dotage!


He that hath been the Glory of this Province,
Will make himself, this way, the shame and scandall,
Exit Philocles

Cypassis discloseth her self.



is he so hotly set that none beside,
The Bride can satisfy his luxurie!
This shall Bassanes know. Now will I work
With all the treacherous Art I'm Mistris of,
To raise a Discord in their Marriage, she
Is made of Flesh and blood and may prove false,



is resolved to Court her strongly;
A Gillant Gentleman, hansome as any,
Perfect in amorous Complements no doubt.
I wonder how he mist her, if he ever
Made it his business to obtain her favour.
I wish him good Success May this Clorina

Fall into his Embraces: Then my Girle

Spinella it is likely may arise
Into her former Favour with Bassanes.

Hee's rich, and bountifull; And such are wel∣come
Unto young Women? who will loose no time,
And love to live in Flourish of the Fashion,
Enter Bassanes.




I like this marriage well, For now I led


My Life in favour of our best of gods.
I have liv'd loosely long enough, and paid
My services to Venus, and wild Priapus.


Juno will now befriend me, sure, and Hym•…n

Rain blessings on my head, and Family.



Good day, my Lord Bassanes! what alone?
Can you so soon deprive your self of the
Fair Sun-shine of your bright Clorina's eies?
Find in your heart to be out of her Company?



I must not be a shadow to my wife,
Nor she to me: we must not evermore
Follow each other; so our Loves might prove
Troublesome to our selves. But say, Cypassis;

What business brought you hither? Is't for health's sake
That you are come to walk, and take the Aire:
Or out of hope to meet me here, to tell me?
Fictitious stories of Spinella's Love
To me?



I had not any such intention:
Affection to the Groves, and a desire
To exercise my self a while in walking▪
Did bring me hither. But I've lost my labour,
And (•…as you came) was a returning home.



This is a Riddle, Who could hinder
You from walking?




I have been listning to the saddest speech,
That ever yet did pass a Lover's lips.



Prethee Cypassis, Who had the ill For∣tune,
To vent his Sorrows in thy hearing?




Of yours: But 'tis no matter who, you are
In a condition of such Happiness
That it would be an incivility in me,
To cause the least sad thoughts in you. Con∣tinue.
In mirth, and Jollity▪ And so, Farewel.



I pray thee stay a while. I must con∣fess
I have a curiosity to know,
Who this is that you call a friend of mine
Who can be sad now I am grown so happy.



My Lord Bassanes! I must crave your pardon,
Secrets of Love you know should be conceal'd.



I am no Common Brother.



For old Acquaintance sake I cannot choose,
But tell you any thing you shall request.



I thank you. How doth fair Spinella? I
Should have enquired sooner of her health,
But your discourse drew me aside from it.



Oh! how you flatter me. I easily can
Believe you have forgotten her for ever.



You wrong our Friendship: Happiness I wish her,
As much as you and she can both desire.



I'l tell her so, and so again Farewell.



Nay tell me (e're you go) what Friend of mine
Is grown so Amorous, and so passionate.



Since you will have me, think.












It may be so, yet he
Never reveal'd to me he was in love.



At that I make no wonder.




Be so enamour'd of?





Have Beams enough a Province to enflame.











He surely then will stisle
His passion generously, and not attempt
The wife of his approved Friend.



You guess amiss, He is resolv'd to try
Her to the utmost. He's a proper Gentleman,
And (I believe) hath a prevailing language:
You may be civil to him, and be wary.



It is too likely. On our Marriage-night
He so abruptly did depart, he gave us
Not leasure enough to take our leaves; A signe
He wanted patience to look on my Joys.



I thought he somewhat suddenly was gone
But Love's a passion not to be commanded.



What was't he in your hearing said?






Enough: Too much. He doth deserve our pitty,



did surprise him, and did use
His best perswasions to divert him from
So vain, and dangerous an Affection.



Come to particulars, my good Cy∣passis,

Conceal not from me any thing. The gods
Did guide you hither t' over-here him, Why
Stand you in such suspence?



Take heed, my Lord Bassanes! Oh, beware
Of Jealousy, Tis an accursed Fiend,
That otherwise your Quiet will molest,
Involve you in a Perpetuity
Of hideous Chimera's. Fair Clorina

Is innocent, and of a spotless virtue,
She is not accessary to his fault;
If to be beautifull be not a Crime.



I am not jealous; neither will be ever.



A Resolution worthy your great mind,
And worthy the Respects you ought to owe,
And pay, unto the virtues of your Lady.



I know her excellent body is enricht,
With so sublime a spirit, and so pure,
That Vice dares not approach her, thoughts, Be free
Therefore, and tell me all thou know'st.



You may command me; And I will conceal
Nothing from you



Good old Cypassis! thanks.
Exeunt Ambo,








For shame (Pyrontus) cease to pro∣secute
A suit so much beneath your Honour, and
So prejudiciall to my Reputation:
I must not hear you.




To be condemn'd to an eternall penury,
And be forbidden to complain! Fair, cruell



do not so insult. Although
I am most wretched, it's in your power to make me
Happy, when you shall please to be but kind.



I am not of a salvage nature, nei∣ther
Ever rejoyc'd at my bodie's Grief,
I wish you all content, and ever did
A wife superiour unto me in all things.
Sink not beneath this passion of your Love,
You under-valued evermore your merits,


To think of me in that way




The truest affection amorous heart did ever
Pay to his Mistriss, if you think I can
Efface your image in my soul. The centre
Of this vast Globe we breath on, is not faster
Fix'd then your Beauties here: Here in my Bo∣some
They sit tryumphant. Aetna in its torrey-En∣trals
Doth nourish lesser. Flames▪ then burn me daily.
And yet you have no pitty for my sufferings.



Alas! what would you have the make my self
A Beast, of such an horrid name I tremble
But to think of it? all tho Gods forbid,
Would you have her, whom you have cast a∣way
Some kindness on, become an Whore? My heart
Trembles to think upon't. And the swift Lightning
Of Blushes flies into my Cheeks▪ Me thinks▪
My tongue doth burn like fire within my Mouth
Since it did mention so abhord a name



Will you then never think me worth your mercy
Shall the vain terrors of an empty name,


Condemn me to a languishing life for ever.



You gods are Witnesses, that know my thoughts,
I would not by the wrack of Chastity,
And proving to my marriage false, redeem
My self from the most cruel death that Ty∣rant
Did ever invent for his most hated enemy.



More merciless than worst of all those Tyrants!
Can you refuse a Courtesy to me,
Which my assidnous services may plead for?
And such an one, as can be never known,
Neither impoverish you in the least degree?
Reflect upon my misery, sweet Clorina,

And imitate the gods in Mercy.



Rather the Fiends, if I should be so wicked.
The Lord Pyrontus (whom I heretofore
Did look upon as a most noble Person,
Accomplish'd with the virtues) hath declar'd
Or Counterfeited himself an Atheist, to
Allure Clorina from her Purity.
The gods see every thing. Nature, nor Art,
Can any thing conceal from them. Thoughts which
Did never take the aire in words, to them
Discover'd lye: And is it not far worse,
To have the gods to see our Crimes then men?
Could I prove guilty of so foul a fault,


I should impoverish my self to nothing;
A Bankrupt be in honor; which who wants
Is a companion fit for such wild people,
As never heard the name of virtue. Riches
Are Fortune's Trifles, neither altogether
To be despis'd, or doted on, but well us'd.
Poor Virtue is most rich. Virtue it self
Was (by the Ancients) held the greatest wealth.



In your Discourse you are too much a Stoick:
Young Ladies hearts should not so utterly
Be void of all Compassion.



I must leave you,



Not without hope of Comfort, I be∣seech you,
Let me but tast of those sweet Delicacies
You cloy Bassanes with, if it be possible
He can be satiated with such delights.



I trespass on my modesty to hear you.
Exit.



In a condition she so sad hath left me,
Joy is become an Exile from my heart.
To love and not be lov'd, is such a Curse

Jove (on his Foes) cannot inflict a worse.
Exit.












Trasullus is a great Astrologer,
In th' Mathematicks skilful to perfection:
For his profounder knowledge, the Chalde∣ans

Submit all to him.



Therefore I have reason,
More strictly to observe th' advice he gave me;
And wait for the Accomplishment of the For∣tune,
Which he foretold me.





I would not have you either be too scrupu∣lous,
Or negligent. The skill which they pretend to
Hath but foundation upon Probabilities:
The glorious Planets may incline, but force not.
We have a Liberty within our selves:
Our wills are free, not slaves unto the Stars.



Though I believe you; I am so super∣stitious
I shall expect the Accomplishment of his Pro∣phesy.


Further Discourse of it I shall forbear now,
And choose a worthier subject for our talk,
Tell me (dear OVID) therefore how th•… Fair
Bride's Fairer sister doth enjoy her health?
I left her (when I went to Travail) like
Illustrious Phoebus rising in the Spring,
Without a Cloud about his Temples, pro∣mising
A bright day to the world. I left her in
Her early youth, but with so growing a Beau∣ty,
That surely now 'tis able to work wonders.



Indeed she is a Miracle of Perfection;
Nature hath prodigally bestow'd upon her
All her rich gifts: she is so fine a Virgin,
That I should wrong her to describe her Far∣ther.
Health dares not be so rude as to forsake her,
Nor sickness so uncivil to approach her.



You have deliver'd her to my Amaze∣ment:
But I did always look that she would prove,
The Glory of this Province for her Beauty.



But Armelina hath besides a Soul,
Replenish'd so with goodness, and all virtue,
That were it lodg'd in any other body,
It would be lock'd up in a Cabinet,
Too mean for such a precious Jewel.






She is oblig'd to you for the rich Character
You have bestow'd upon her.




I cannot speak her to her merit. You
Will think (when you shall see her) I have In∣jur'd her:
Her merits do so much exceed all Language.



We two have from our Childhood had a Friendship,
And she will grace me to continue it;
If she be such an one, as you have spoke her.



Ah!. Caralinda I am grown too old,
To be a Flatterer.


Here she comes; and I
Appeal to your own eyes, to be my witness.
You grace me (Armelina) by this visit.
You seem a Deity; And bring a Comfort
To any Place you honor with your Presence.



Duty obliges me to wait upon
A Person so Renowned as is Ovid,

One banish'd from his Friends, and Native Country
And (in his Age) confin'd to our poor City.



You have a Charity equal to your Beau∣ty.
This Lady is my Cozen, born at Sulmo;



The Place of my Nativity, you will honor me
To favour her with your Acquaintance, and
(As you hereafter shall approve of her)
With your fair Friendship too.





New Obligations layes upon me daily.



My Kinswoman is your servant. Cara∣linda!

This Lady is the excellent Armelina

We were discoursing of, and I commending
(For who do's otherwise that speaks of her,
Doth sin against the greatest Truth on earth)
As she came in.



Madam! I kiss your hand; And am ambitious
Of your acquaintance, and Affection.
So excellent a Kinswoman of Ovids

Must find my best Respects, and truest Love.



Admirable Armelina! you are of
A Goodness so immense, that you may cast
Away of it on others an abundance,
And not impoverish your self at all.





Pontus had any Person in it worthy
To be a Suitor to you for your love;
That here you might be married, and fix.
We would not lose such Graces you are Mi∣stris of
Now we have seen you once. Ovid me thinks


Should joy to have so great a Comfort near him,
And setled past tho fear of Removal.



Madam! my stay may prove much longer then
You do imagine. But let my occasions
Prove how they can (you with your Curtesie,
Have won so on me) that without your leave
I'le not return.



You are too gracious, and have so •…gag'd me,
I know not what to speak or think.




I will believe (in Rome) one Phoebianus,

A Gentleman of this Country, and this City.



I saw him oft, and know him very well,
For he was pleas'd t' afford his friendship to me.



When thinks he of returning? he stays long,



I can imagine he is so discreet,
That he had rather live in the Metropolis
Of all the world, than in a solitude,
Retir'd (in a manner) from the world,
Upon the Confines of the Empire here:
And to that purpose he hath mighty reason
To choose himself (among the Roman Ladies)
A Wife whose matchless Beauty shall have power,


To fix him there for ever.



By your fair leave,
Dear Armelina, I with confidence
Dare say he shortly will be here.




Can he escape the Roman killing Beauties,
And slight so much his own full happiness,
As to return a Batcheler to Tomos,

And here take up with an inferiour woman
To be his wife. He hath too much discretion,
To be found guilty of so great a weakness.



You are a stranger it seems to his affe∣ction:
For he hath lest his heart here. Divers times
he hath told me, he hath such a Mistris here,
That Rome, and all the World, doth want her equal:
That there is neither Caesar, King, or Tetrarch,
But would elect her rather for his wife,
Then be an Emperour of the Universe,
And have all Mankind Loyal Subjects to him:



Who should that Beauty be?




Hath none of so supream an Excellency,
As he to you hath intimated. Poets
Report that Love is blind: And if he choose
A wife in Pontus (after he hath seen
Those glorious Ladies in Tiberius Court)
He will too late (by his Experience) find

〈◊◊〉 his own choice was also blind.



Do you not know her name he so af∣fects?



He is an hansome Gantleman, and if
He comes not back debauched with the Luxu∣ries
Of that proud City, nor infected with
The vices of it, He is a Personage
Of eminent virtues. Such he went from us;
And I shall hope he will come back untain∣ted,
And be an honour to his Native Country.



But still my curiosity is unsatisfi'd,
What might her name be, he doth celebrate
With such Encomiums?



Perhaps it might offend him if I should
Reveal that secret.



Do not think it, I
Believe (if he were here and I requir'd it)
He it from me would not conceal: And I
Dare pass my word the Lady Armelina

Will be as private in't as you can wish.



Madam! I easily will beleeve, that you
Care not at all to hear it.



I dare not (in modesty) be so inqui∣sitive,
Ladies would have their Loves conceal'd.




Dear Caralinda, tell us who it is.



Sweet Armelina! I must needs obey,


'Tis you that he affects.



You jest with me, and he abuses me,
To make me the subject of his mirth.




You are mistaken much: He hath exprest
Too great a Love for you, to be in jest.



There may be other women of my Name,
For ought I know in Tomos or in Pontus.




If you Clorina's Sister are, 'tis you.



You made me blush, A better choice I wish him.



Were all the Beautiful Ladies in the world
Together, and among them, he might select
Freely which he should please, I know the ve∣hemency
Of his Passion such, he would take you:
And you are of an Excellency so unparallel'd
That he would wrong his Judgement, if he should
Erre into any other Choice.



You complement too much: you Flatter me.



You do an injury to your mighty me∣rits
Deserve the Praise of all the world.




Discourse of something else.



Since you will have it so,
Let us withdraw; And taste a Glass
Of Cretane wine.




To Phoebianus, and his speedy Return.
Exeunt Omnes.








Now we are Friends again.



All very good Friends.




Spinella too will smile upon me.



Laugh at you also, when you de∣serve it.



My wonderfull old Mother! Dear Cypassis.

You are grown merrier of late, and it
Becomes you well; makes you grow fat, and hold
The Relicts of your Beauty up together:
If there be any woman in the world
That doth remember the building of the Ca∣pitoll,
I dare pronounce 'tis you. I wish I had
But as much money as you have spent in Alma∣nacks,
(Reckoning but one for a year) since you could
  60
make use of them; And I
Should be as rich as a Governor of a Province; And have Gold
Enough to make daily high Entertainments
Of the best Sweetmeats, and rich Grecian wines
For you, and my Spinella, and maintain her
In clothes beseeming one of Caesars Family.







For all you make a jest at my Age, you would
Be very glad to live so long your self.



I think there is small reason to imagine
He will arrive to such an Antiquity;
His Debaucheries will shorten his dayes. Besides
He is so quarrelsom, that 'tis a wonder
That he hath liv'd till now.



Pritty Spinella, you steer another Course;
Are tame enough, as Gentle as a Cad;
And he that gives you money cannot Injure you.





You prate, you prate.



Is the meat ready yet?



Whether it be or no, my stomach's ready for it.



It is; but we must stay for Lord Bas∣sanes.




Will he be here, Cypassis?




Yes, and his friend Marullus.




The more the merrier, my reverent Mo.



But the fewer the better Chear, I say.




Jove save you, Captain Hannibal. And Venus,

Delicate Floretta, smile upon you alwayes.




Mars (Captain Dacus) be thy Friend, and Victory
Sit on thy swords point, when thou go'st to battail.



If Victory be of any weight, he had better
Carry her behind him on horse-back through the Field.



You look, Spinella, very well to day, are neatly attir'd;
You meet with wealthy Servants, else you could
Not go so richly clad.



You wear as good Clothes as I; which makes me conclude that
Captain Hannibal is of a wealthy Fortune.



His sword hath been his money; 'Tis it that hath
Purchas'd him an Estate sufficient,
To live in nobler splendor then he doth.
But he's content without the Noise of Clyents,
And a Retinue of many Servants. Cacala

Serves him for man; And me for Maid.



I wish Bassanes would appear. 'Tis pitty
Good meat (out of a Complement) should be spoyl'd.



He is a Person of his word.




Be suddenly here I dare assure it.



But how if he comes not this hour yet?



We must stay for him.



I would then I were a Lord, and the better of the two; That we might go to our meat presently, and he come at his own lea∣sure, and sit down accordingly.





Long look'd for comes at last!



My Lord Bassanes welcome! Friend Marullus!





You see I trouble you Cypassis. Why
Seems my Spinella discontent?




She is not yours. You have forsaken me
I have not seen you many a day.




Not hereafter be such a stranger to you.



These wenches strange Temptations are. Yet sure.

Clorina's Beauties, and the sacred knot
Of Hymen will continue him in virtue.



Your daughter looks exceeding well, Cypassis,



She's Mistriss of a Beauty so supream,
It is above the rage of time, of sickiless.




Venus be prais'd, she needs no Art, and never
Read Ovids Poem of the skill of Painting,
She knows not what belongs unto a 〈◊〉

Her Face doth ever wear its native Colours.



Mother! the very thought of the In∣gredients
Of Paint, would powerfully deterre me from it;
I should be sick to daub my Face with Oynt∣ments
Made of the spawn of Snakes, Spittle of Jews,

And Mird of Infants.




Of good Repute, and excellent Features also
Have not so nice a stomach.




And have known many (who use Art them∣selves)
Rail at it with so fine an Impudency,
As if they did intend to win belief,
To paint they such Aversion had, as they
Scorn'd (with it) to adulterate their Faces.



You women no Dissemblers are! 〈◊〉 that
Can live without you is an happy man.



In my opinion, you Floretta had
Better become my wife, then thus continue


A Concubine to Captain Hanniball.




I shall inform him of your sauciness
If you desist not from your suit. Know Cacala

I scorn to be a wife to thee.




You have more Cause to scorn to be a Whore.
Aside.







No matter of Importance. I conceit
Your conversation with the Captain hath
Inspir'd you with valour.







Because you lead such an Incontinent Life;
I think you do not fear the Gods.




Or I will make you fear my Hannibal's Anger.



Our meat stays on us.



Mother lead the way.
Give me your hand Spinella,








I fear Bassanes will renew his Love.
Exeunt.
Could I win her affection. I would marry her
And take her to Rome out of his reach, she is

Cypassis only Child; And they are rich.
She may turn honest after she's a wife:
However Mony makes an happy Life.
Exit.









Ovids fair Cosen Caralinda hath
Inspir'd a spirit of Joy into me. Those
Sweet words she told me of my Phoebianus,

Sunk pleasantly into my heart, and thence
Disperse a Comfort unto all my Senses.
Before he travail'd he would often whisper
Kind Accents in my ears of his Affection.
But (though I wish'd him well) I durst not give
Too easy credit to his amorous tongue.
Yet from my Childhood I have had a kind∣ness
For him, as he profess'd he had for me.
His Constancy my only Comfort is;
And I will pay with my Affection his.








You should not be so angry. He in∣tended
You no affront. He had been drinking ere


We came. You 〈◊◊◊〉 much as he
Could bear: Come therefore in again, shake hands
And still continue Friends.



It must not be
Refuse my Mistriss health! It is a Crime,
Which nothing but his death shall expiate.
His body goes to Atoms for't aud's Soul
Whither it pleaseth surly Caron to Waft it.
Have I been ever his continual Friend,
Waited on all his worst Extravagancies
With my unwearied valour, and my sword?
And am I slighted thus! I will rouse up
The dreadful Furies from infernal shades,
To stigmatize him full of my revenge.
The lasting Stars of his Ingratitude.





Il'e •…ave no quarrelling in my house, you shall be Friends. He shall drink Spinel∣la's health, and have no more.



And you can hinder Quarrels in a Bau∣dy-house, you have more power than a Con∣stable. But if you force him to drink her health; Let him have something more, have her too, though it be but to night.



Leave •…imping Cacala, I have no need
Of your assistance in this kind. Bassanes



Let me en•… that you would reconcile them




Marullus! I conjure you by our Friendship:
And Captain Dacus! He shall have the Boul.
pointing to Marullus.



You shall command me.



If you expect favour you must leave
These •…u •…ours. Are you Friends?



I must obey you.



Shake hands, and let us in again.



I need not of Clorina's Health enquire
She cannot but be well whom you affect.




Cypassis! this is pretty Complement,
She's free from sickness, and I will be care∣full
To keep her clear from any vitious Act.



Doubtless she's virtuous: Trouble not your head
With Jealousie.



I will be wise, old Mother!




We men of War are for the Field, and there
Will be victorious; Let the woman here.
Exeunt.




Enter Clorina above, as in her Chamber.


I am lock'd in, and at it am amaz'd
But will conceal it from my servants while
I any Excuse can find. It needs must be
My Husband; For he last was with me here.
I did not hear him do't; but (in all likeli∣hood
'Twas he, when's mind did run on something else
I am so innocent I should fear nothing,
And yet so timerous that I am in dread.
Enter Pyrontus, and Philocles below.

Pyrontus and his Friend are come into
The Garden: Gracious Heaven divert him from
The Prosecution of his suit to me.
My troublesome thoughts have brought a Drou∣siness
Upon me. Sleep shall entertain my time
Until Bassanes comes, and ope's the door.


I will not force the lock, because I am
A stranger to the reason I'm made Prisoner.
Perhaps my Husband knows some Mortall danger
Design'd against me, and hath thus secur'd me
Till his return.
Withdraws.



My Philocles, by all
The Circumstances of our mighty Friend∣ship
I pray thee vex me with no more Disswasions.
I cannot look upon my Passion to
The fair Clorina as a Crime. If 'tis
Offence on her to be enamour'd, sure
All mankind that beholds her, must be guil∣ty.



You are so obstinate, my heart foretels me
You will draw Mischiefs on your head. For Heavens sake
Consider on your Friendship to Bassanes,

Reflect upon the Contumely, you
VVill bring upon you from the Mouths of all,
For your unbridled Appetite to the Wife
Of your approved Friend; and for the Breach
Of Sacred Amity by such a Crime.



Your words you scatter in the wind to give
Counsell to me. My Friendship must submit
To my more powerful Love.





'Tis not too late yet to consult with Reason.
Pray give me leave to wait upon you home.
Rouse your depressed Vertue up, and let
Time, your own Courage, and the gods Assi∣stance
Clear your brave mind, from all these vitious Flames.



I will not leave the House till I have seen
And spoken with Clorina.





She is retir'd into her Chamber, there
Hath lock'd her self up; And you may be∣lieve
Tis done to shun your Courtship. VVill you goe?



I will not stir from hence, till I have blest
My eyes with the most glorious Beams of hers.



I then must take my leave. If I can do
No good with my Entreaties to my Friend.
The world shall not inflict their Curses on me,
As if that I conniv'd at his Impieties.
I pray you come away.





〈◊〉 charm'd me from obeying your Com∣mands.



Farewell then; but be wise and follow me.
Exit Philocles.



So let him go. I undisturb'd may now
Enjoy my thoughts; and follow my own Ge∣nius.

She is not sick, and yet she keeps her Cham∣ber;
And locks her self in, to my greater Preju∣dice.
That is the window to't. Oh! For the power
Of Jove, t'fall on her in a golden shower.

Mercury! thanks. The Gardiner hath left
A Ladder here. I'le rear it up and venture
Thereby to get a sight of her; And (if
I else where must not) there declare my grief.
Rears and climbs up the Ladder.
The window open! every thing foretells
Happy success! she lyes upon her Bed!
Looks like Diana toyld with rural sports.
Fortune hath thus far favour'd me, and I
Will by her Foretop hold, and venture in.
Degenerate Minds are known by Fear: And •…ate
Makes the audacious persons fortunate.
She sleeps! Morpheus his heavy hand hath laid,
On the fair Lids of her bright eyes. I'le kiss
Them open, till those Suns appear
And shall disperse those Clouds.





You to Clorina are most welcom ever.
Alas! I am deceiv'd: What Spectre's this
That haunts me in Pyrontus shape?




No aiery Apparition, but the wretched

Pyrontus self, who hath presum'd to steal
Upon your Privacies.



For Heavens sake go, and never see me more.
Your self you too much trouble, and expose
Me (whether I will or no) to so much Ignomi∣ny
By this Intrusion, that should it be known
My Reputation would be overthrown.
For Heavens sake, hence immediately retire
Without a word.



Have you no pitty yet?



Have you no Goodness?
No care, and no Respect for a poor woman?
A Married one, and your Friend's Wife? You gods
Deliver me (in safety) from this Monster.
Men have exil'd all Piety from their hearts,
I must not hope for any succour from them.
Fie, sie Pyrontus! if you have not made
A league with hell and mischief, vanish streight,
And purge your foul Soul by sincere Repen∣tance.



Are you of so supream a Beauty, that


It were profaness to compare you to
The fairest of women kind (I think I may
Say, Venus self doth want of your Perfections?)
And can you harbour so severe a mind,
Within so rich a body? Give a Period
To your long Cruelty, and mercy shew.



You blast me with your words, study my Ruine.



Dearest Clorina! Have a Milder thought
Of my immense affection. In a body
(by Nature's liberal hand fram'd to a wonder)
Lodge not a soul for ever void of pitty;
Slight not my knees thus bow'd to move a ten∣derness,
In your so long inexorable heart;
Neither despise my tears, which thus I pour
A sacrifice to you disdain: No longer
Attire your heart in Robes of Salvageness,
Armour impenetrably cold. Oh! Molli•… it
With the Remembrance of the assiduous ser∣vice
That I have paid you, upon all Occasions.
Enter Bassanes, and Marullus below.




Marullus! I have pass'd my word to make
This Afternoon a Visit to Spinella.




You will not so discourteous be I know:
Your friend Pyrontus (as I heard within)
Is come to see you, and is in the Garden.
It seems he is retir'd into some of
The solitary walks; being out of sight.



Faithful Marullus! I will not conceal
A thought from you that doth disturb my Breast.
He's to our Friendship false, loves my Clorina,

And (if he hath not yet) intends to tempt her
By his leud Courtship to incontinent Life.
Because to day I meant to go unto

Cypassi's house, I've lock'd her in her Cham∣ber,
To prevent him of his wild Aimes.




I hear his voice in the next Ally to us



My Wife is with him: Her tongue I'm well acquainted with.



It seems they are together.



Here stands a Ladder at her Chamber window,
How came it hither! Hark O monstrous villany,
He by it is got up into her Chamber:
I am betraid; Marullus basely injur'd.
Forsake me not (my Friend) in my adver∣sity,
Remove the Ladder safely without noise.


Watch here Marullus, that he slides not down,
And so escape; And this great Trechery,
(By both of them) be impudently denied.
So, so, 'tis done without discovery.
Lay it down there, or any where, I now
Will go and make a Third in her lewd Lodg∣ing.



But my best Friend! noble Bassanes! let not
A rash impatience move you to say,
Or to act any thing unworthy you.



You need not fear me.
Exit.



This is an Accident so strange, I can∣not
Consider it without astonishment.
If these the Fruits of Marriage be: high Hea∣ven
Be prais'd that I have liv'd a Batcheler.
Boast not henceforth you Women, of your wealths
Or Beauties: for if you make no better Proof,
You bring an Hell, in Dowry to your Hus∣bands.

Bassanes unlocks the door above and enters there.



My Husband's come. Oh yov have ruin'd me,


Work'd such a Mischief that the gods will blush at it.



Thou beast! unworthy of the name of man,
Much more unworthy of the name of Friend!
Thy Crime so great is, that I need not lose
A Minute in hearing Lies for thy Excuse.
Kills him.
Dye; and go rince in vain thy so polluted
Soul, in the flaming streams of Phlegeton.




Let my last words (for they are perfect truth)
Find Credit with you. Your Clorina's chast,
I here surpriz'd her when she was asleep.



He's sunk to Hell. Now my leud Huswife come,
I'le find another Room for your disports,
Thy unclean Body shall no more infect
My Nuptial Bed.



Protect, Oh Gracious gods! my In∣nocence.



Walk in Marullus. I have suffer'd wrong:
And this Adulteress, Justice shall ere long.
Exeunt Omnes.











I tell thee (sweet Spinella) I adore thee;
Have for thee a more generous affection,
Than the greatest Lord in all this Province hath.



You mean Bassanes. But, my doughty Captain!
He doth express his love in Golden Terms;
Which I more value than a Souldier's Oathes.



He loves you for himself, and not for you;
Mine is a virtuous Flame.




Forgetfull grown of what is past.









Dacus! I am too young.



Why jests my pritty wanton so?



Old women that love melancholy Lives,
Are the fit'st Creatures to make slavish Wives.



Have you so small Esteem for holy Mar∣riage?
And can you think it such a Bondage?






Are not such yoak'd together? And often∣times
Draw they not Contrary wayes; like Dogs in Couples?
The tugging at an Oare in any Gally
Is as much Liberty as your Matrimony.



Fie pritty Atheist. Such profaneness quit
And take an Husband, take thy Captain Da∣cus:

A man whose sword shall reap the Parthian Fields,
And bring thee in (by frequent victories)
A large Revenue, equal to thy wishes.



My glorious talking Captain, I shall not
Be won with empty words.



Have you no care
Of future Bliss, or Bare?




Plato, and Virgil he hath read, I smell him,
And Courts me with their trim Philosophy.



As you resolve to live, you do not mean
To serve the Gods.



There you come something near me;
But Venus is a Goddess, and I shall.
Serve her. But Dacus! To be plain with you,
I love a Gaudy Charriot, and fine Horses,
Servants of all sorts, in rich Liveries,
Delicious Meats, and Wines, costly Apparel,
And Jewels of the highest value. I must


Out-glitter all the Femals of the Province,
Or I shall want my will.



And all this Bravery

Bassanes wealth shall furnish you withall
You hope, as I suppose. But (dear Spinella)

Think of his Marriage. He hath now a wife
Of great Descent, who brought a Fortune to him
So vast, I want Arethmetick to name it:
And she may look to be maintain'd at th'height
Of all his Means; And then your hopes will proove
Fleeting as shadows, vanish in the Air.



'Twit me not with his wedlock: For our Crime
Will now be greater, And he shall be brought
To buy his Pleasure at an higher value.





How 〈◊〉 it with my mighty man of War.
Lets us shake our victorious Hands in Peace,
And pray to Mars to set the world in uproar.



That Timerous Princes may grow Bountiful;


Court us to take Employment on us, while
Their Luxuries they may securely follow.



Brave Captain Hannibal, such Iron-Times
Would be a Golden Age to us; shall we
Together walk and drink an health or two,
To all the Sons of Battail?



I am for you.



Then I'le retire and keep my Mother Company.
Exeunt Han. Dac. Spin.



Gentle Floretta stay. Let me not lose
This opportunity to wooe thy love.



Where learnt your folly those fine words?



Your eyes have taught me to express my heart:
They have infus'd a Spirit of speech into me.



You have been certainly with some Peda∣gogue,
And hired him to pen this Courtship for you.



I love thee better then I love my Cap∣tain.



And I your Captain much above you aff•…ct.



What delicate eyes you have! I'le kiss them out,
And wear them in my ears.



You shall be hang'd first;
I'de rather scratch thy heart out with my nails.


And stuff a Cushion with't



To sit, and fart upon't, and keep it warm.
Thou art a pretious Rogue, and I had rather
Have thee to be my wife, than any Damsel
That lives in the Saburra. Give me a wench
In all the Gamesome frailty of •…er youth;
Especially, wo'd she turn honest afterwards.



Thou talk'st at such a Random Cacala,

That th'art a Pastime to me. But why rather
Wouldst thou elect a Beauty broken up
Than one that's sound?



To tell you the plain Truth,
An honest woman is a Bugbear to me:
I never took Delight in their Acquaintance.



Run after your Master, tell him, I would speak with him.



I'le pimp no more: But will henceforth grow honest.



I doubt me (Cacala) thou hast of late
Been troubled with some terrible Dreams. Hast seen

Pluto, and his dark Region in thy sleep?
What else should make thee talk of Virtue?



The goodwill (Floretta) that I bear to you
Engages me to this discourse. I pray thee
Take me unto thy Husband: And we then
Will run away together, leave Captain Han∣nibal.



To his new Fortune; And resolve both of us
To lead our lives Honestly for the future.



Out thou Villain! Turn Traytor to ā Master
So liberal to thee as my Captain is?
But that I know he would frown thee to death,
I would acquaint him with this Parley. A∣mend
Or neither he, nor I, will be thy Friend.
Exit. Flor.



I know not what to make of this wench; and yet I would fain
Make her my Wife: But I think I am a Fool for my Labour.
She'l hold her Peace I hope, That's all my Care,
And then to get her, I will not despair.
Exit.




Enter Bassanes, Marullus, and Clorina, with Servants.


So, place her in that Chair, and to the sides
Tye fast her Arms, keep her hands open thus!
Here the servants tye her fast, and fasten Pyrontus heart in her hands.


Thus! That she may not close them, or remove them:
And put her Paramour's Heart into them: So,
Now Foul Adulteress! Thou may'st contem∣plate
Of the Affection it did bear thee once.
Reflect upon the Mountain of thy Sins,
Which hath over-whelm'd the false Pyrontus. Look
Thou most libidinous woman, what a Ruine
Thy Lust hath brought upon him, and thy self.




I have at large (calling the gods to wit∣ness
That what I told swerv'd not a jot from truth)
Related to you all the Particulars
Of his unruly Love; that he surpriz'd me,
Came in at my window whilst I was asleep;
With what an horror I was stricken at it,
When I perceiv'd 'twas he; how I rail'd at him,
Call'd him by the worst names that I could think on;
Bad him be gon for ever from my sight,
That I look'd on him as a Basilisk,
The Ruine of his honour, and mine own,
That I would tell you of him, my Bassanes,

Inform you what a Devil's Company
You kept i'th likeness of a Friend. Just gods!
Protect my Innocency, and by some means
Divine, inspire these Truths into his heart.



That wife who dares polluth the Nuptiall Bed,
Is prodigal enough of Vows and Tears,
To win belief from credulous Persons; she
Hath done no wrong, when she hath done all the wrong.



Thrice happy are those souls that from the Cares,
And slanders of this wicked Age are free,
Walk up and down Elizium in their thin
And airy substances. And have them so
Transparent that their thoughts may all be seen.
Wood mine were such. Oh that the Deities
Would lend their eyes a while to you, that you
Might search (Bassanes) every Cranny of,
My heart. I do not know a thought I have,
I would conceal from you.



Thou hast a Soul,
So ulcerous, Clorina, that the Prayers,
And vows of all the world can never cleanse it.



Oh! the hard heart of unbelieving Man!
Happy you Virgins that do stop your ears
Against the Charms of their bewitching tongues
And evermore continue in your Chastity.
I would to Heaven I never had beheld

Hymen to light his Pine. Have I bestow'd
My self on you to find such miseries,
Under your Roof? I wish my Parents had


As soon as I was born expos'd me to
The open Fields, unto the Cruelty
Of the most salvage Beasts; or in a smal
Unguided Bear, left me unto the fury
O•… an inraged Sea. Would any Mischief
Had fallen upon 〈◊〉, but this fatal Marriage.



Hearken Marullus! are you not amaz'd
To hear her speak against our Nuptials thus?
It is apparent that she doth repent her
Of taking u•…, And wish'd she had Pyrontus.




I pray you 〈◊〉 her out.




My meaning, my belov'd, and cruel Husband!
I would it had been pleasing to the gods,
I never had been made a wise to any.
How fortunate a choice might you elsewhere
Have found; these dire Mischances mist; and I
(With my ill Fate) have no man else infe∣cted.



My heart is bigg with sorrow at her words,
And vents it self in this sad dew.



What are these Tears for, you do drie away?



I cannot choose but Melt.



You are too Tender.
Come: we will leave her to contemplate here
The horrid wickednesses, she hath acted.
If that all sense of honour hath not left thee.

Clorina, dye: It will be endless shame


For thee to live, after thou thus hast brought
Perpetual Ignominy on my poor Family.



I pitty her, Bassanes, much commiserate
Her so disastrons Fate: She may be Innocent:
I pray you think her so; I hope she is.



Her Reputation's gon, for ever lost:
A Sea of Tears cannot wash off her Guilt,
'Tis so infectious, I am tainted with it.
False woman, dye: Lost honour never more
(By any Means) admits of any Cure.
Exeunt.





Sure I was born when all the glorious Stars
Were met in Councel to contrive a Mischief.
Under pretence of my Loose usefull studies,
For the composing of my Art of Love.
In my declining years (when I expected
Ease, and a quiet Life) I was exil'd
From Rome, and here confin•…d to end my dayes
Among a people rude, and almost barbarous,
Except a few of th' Gentry and Nobility,
In a Cold Country, where sierce Jether payes
(Through divers channels) a Continual Tri∣bute


Of his vast streams into the Euxine Sea,
A many have imagin'd Julia

Daughter of great Augustus was too gracious
And liberal of her Amorous Favours to me;
Which caus'd him to inslict this Punishment.
But ere that Emperor left the world, he was
Inform'd (for that Particular) of my Inno∣cency:
And was acquainted that, if I were saulty,
It was an Error in me, not a Crime;
For if I ere enjoy'd her, it was through
Her craft; I taking her to be another.
But he was too severe; That excellent Prin∣cess
He shew'd as little Mercy to, as me.
Now about Twenty years, in the small Island
Of Trimerus (near the Apulian Shores)
Confin'd by him sh' hath led a tedious Life.
I must confess she had a Generous kindness
For me, and took delight to read my Poems.
But by her Letters, and Authentick witness
Clear'd me sufficiently from that Reproach:
And won thereby so much upon her Father,
That I had been repeal'd if he had liv'd.
Since his Decease by divers Messengers
(Persons of Noble Rank and Quality)
And by her eloquent Epistles she hath
(For my return to Rome) importun'd much
The great Tiberius, her too Cruel Husband,
But he that to a Wife (who brought him all


The Universe in Portion) shows no mercy;
Will not redress my wrongs. Here I must mourn
Out all my Life, and sind my Funeral Urn.
Exit.







T•… Captain Dacus is a jovial Blade,

〈◊〉 a very valiant Gentleman,
And of an heart as liberal as the Air.



How lik'st thou him



But so, so; yet?
I was well pleas'd to see him pay the Reck∣ning.
You are far from home, and Mistriss Floretta is
As chargeable as a stable of running Horses.



It is grown somthing late; And Time to think
Of our Return unto our Lodgings. Look!
What's that?
Espies a man hanging on a Gibbet.











〈◊◊〉 what is't hangs there?
〈◊〉


'Tis 〈◊〉 poor 〈◊〉 that was executed
Two, or three dayes ago.



He had 〈◊〉 fortune.
Had he 〈◊〉 b•…ter have follow'd Mars, and fal•…

In glorious Battail, and his soul exspir'd
Through 〈◊〉 wounds, then Ignominiously,
Thus 〈◊〉 to death in Noose of paltry halter?



My Captain Hannibal talks evermore
Of mighty Battails, or his little Whore.



What mutter you, Sirrah?



I (by your valour's Leave.) was saying Captain,
Y'on man hangs in a pittiful cold corner.
The North wind shakes his Legs as he were dancing.
Of Wine, and Women, and of all good Meats,
He hath for ever took his Leave.



I'•… sorry for's hard Fate. Some lying People
Report some of the dead have walk'd. If thou
Can'st such a piece of fine Activity show,
Come sup with 〈◊〉 to night. Thou •…alt be welcome.
Speaks to the Hang'd-man.



He bows his head.









He 〈◊〉, not put himself to such unne∣cessary trouble:
He that small savour hath receiv'd already,
From some of's smaller Friends.



If th'art a good dead Fellow, Come (I say)
And sup with me to night.







I think I heard him answer; he would come.



Thou art so timerous; The Eccho of
My voice deludes thee.



Follow me thou fearful Puppy.




His Captain-ship makes of me; Sir, I shall
Even tread upon your Heels; I dare not stay
Behind an inch.



Come then, for I fear nothing.




I dread the Gallows mightily: And a Thief
That can talk after he's dead is a terrible Bug∣bear.
Exeunt.








I'me come to wait upon you Brother, and
To see how my dear Sister; your Clorina

Enjoys her health. I found among your ser∣vants,


A general sorrow as I pass'd along.
And you (me thinks) reflect distractod looks:
What is the reason of this Alteration
Throughout your Family?



I am somthing troubled,
And now not in condition for discourse.



What is the matter, good Marullus! Though
I may suppose some business, that hath fallen
Athwart his Expectation, hath distemper'd
His thoughts at present; yet I guess he is not
Sick. Therefore my afflicted mind misgives me,
That my poor Sister is not well: Resolve me,
Alas! I see some malady hath taken her:
And he like a Good Husband suffers with her,
Grieves fot her want of health: Is it not so?



Sweet Armelina! At this present leave me:
I at another time should fitter be,
To give you th'Entertainment you deserve;
According to the utmost of my power.



The gods be with you: My poor Com∣pany
Shall be no longer to you troublesome.
I hope to find my Sister in her Chamber;
And will go sit with her.



She is not there.



Where is she then? For I resolve 〈◊〉 see her.



She's not in case to give you Entertain∣ment,
Or to receive a visit.



Alas! You strike me
Almost as dead, as I suspect she is.
For Heavens sake teach me where to find her.




I pray you let that satisfie, and leave us.



Not for the World. I will not leave the house
Till I have seen, and spoken with Clorina.




My dear Marullus! Since this Lady is
So very importunate, She'l not be diverted,
Guide her I pray you to her Sister.



I must obey you; And fair Armelina

Shall wait upon you.
Exeunt Mar. and Arme.



Lead, and I follow you.



Now she will curse me, and traduce my name,
Though (the Gods know) her Sister's in the blame.
He that refrains for fear of womens Tongs
To right himself, basely submits to wrongs.
Exit.




After a small Supper set forth, Enter Hannibal, and Cacala.



What! Is this all w'are like to have?



So please your Souldier-ship, renowned Captain,
This is even all; And it may serve the turn.
Although I have an Appetite as sharp
As your victorious Sword, great Captain Han∣nibal.




Where is Floretta (Cacala?) Go call her,
She will rail at this meat, and call me cove∣tous.



I needs must say, her stomack never fail'd her;
Though she's but little, she's a tall woman at a Trencher.



Run, and call her,
Tell her the meat will be cold; And then 'tis spoyl'd.



I may save that Labour. Mistris Spinella hath invited her to Supper.
They and Cypassis eat to night together.



Will Captain Dacus be there.



I think not Sir.
I never knew Cypassis but an hungry:
She's not so bountiful, as to invite
Others to eat her meat up.



How comes it then Floretta is their guest?
Sit down, and be not troublesome: You know
I'de have it so.



I thank your valour. I have some small suspition

Bassanes hath a Liking took to your
Dear Damigella, and Cypassis must
Court her, and tempt her to his various Lust.



May be so Cacala! Let him take his Chance:
If he so lead, i'le follow him the Dance;
Then I will woe Spinella; And he shall
Father the spurious issue i'le get on her.
Hark! Somebody knocks: Rise, and inform me who
Is at the door How now, What art thou deafe,
And hear'st me knock; or dumb because thou speak'st not?
An Apoplexy sure hath ceaz'd upon thee.
Sit down again, and drink a Glass of Wine
It will recover thee. Well done, now eat thy meat.
Again there knocks somebody at the door.
Rise once more Sirrah, and conduct them in.


Be gon, or I shall kick you to your duty.
He opens the door, turns back and falls down, as in a Swound.
This idle Rascal sure the falling Sickness
Hath got of late. I must be at the charge,

I fear to send for a Physitian to him.

I wonder who it is: For somebody knocks
Again. It needs must be a stranger, else
He suc•… long Complement would not have shew'd.
Still he knocks on. I will go bring him in.
Enter Spectre.

Your name Sir, and your pleasure.



My name, Helvidius is.



You are a stranger
Unknown to me; I pray, what is your busi∣ness.




I come to sup with you.



Though clad so meanly,
You shall be welcom.




I am not so rude,
To press upon you, uninvited, Captain.



Who should invite you?









I should forget it then.




I come unlook'd for Noble Hannibal,

But you did bid me to supper to night.



My Memory hath fail'd me. Where Hel∣vidius?




At the Gibbet, by the City walls;
Where I did hang in Chains.



This is a Curtesie deserves a welcome;
You are most welcome Sir, and so believe it.



You are my generous Patron, and I'thank you.



Sit down, I pray sit down. So: 'tis well done,



Where's Cacala. Give me a Glass of Wine,
What on the floor still! rise man.



I dare not stir, nor breathe Sir.



He will not hurt you.



I shall not be so rude, where I find wel∣come
To do a Mischief.



Fill Wine. Sir much good do you, And here's to you,
To your fair Mistresses health; whether alive,
Or your Companion it'h Elizian Groves.



You much endear me.



Could I have thought you would have supp'd with me,
You should have been much better treated.
Sit down and eat, Thou silly Cacala!




I am very timerous.



His Promise and my Valour do protect thee.



This Napkin thus dispos d under my Hat,
Shall keep my eyes off him. I'le cat like a Lyon,
Because I fit in fear, and after will
Chew the Cud as some Beasts do, to disjest it.



Good Fellow, I salute thee with this Bonl,
To thy brave Hannibals Mistresses health.



I have no mind to drink yet. My Ma∣ster
Is the better Pledger of such Fancies.



You shall not refuse him. Off with is Cacala:





It has gone round.
Captain, your kindness hath so far oblig'd me,
That I presume to beg a favour of you.







I pray you dine with me to morrow.







I am in earnest: You shall be most wel∣come.















Now my bellie's full, I cannot forbear.
To cast a sheeps eye at him.

  98Oh! oh. Cries out aloud, falls backward, and (with his Legs under the Table) over∣throws it, and all the meat.



I thank you, generous Captain; And good night.



Farewell Sir; And expect me as I pro∣mis'd.
Rise thou unmannerly Beast, and let's to bed.



Good Master, and thrice-valiant Cap∣tain Hannibal,

See me in bed first, and asleep, I beseech you,
And let me have Mistress Floretta; For I dare not lye alone.



Follow me and undress me.



Sir, I beseech you have a little patience:
Say that I shall not lye alone to night,
And you will comfort me. I otherwise
Shall be so weak with fear, I shall not be
Able to pluck your stockins off.




Thou wilt to be thy bedfellow, but Floretta:

For, her I cannot spare.



Then I entreat you,
Let me lye in the same bed with you both.



You must some other Lodging find.




Then I must old Cypassis try: Perhaps
A bottle of strong water will prevail
So far with her,
That she may give me leave


To lye with her.
And yet I had much rather
Lye with my old Grand-mother, or Grand∣father.



'Tis said she was a Beauty in her Youth.



Sure no man can report it that hath seen it:
For I believe her birth was in the daies
Of Lucius Brutus, who was Rome's first Consul.
Exeunt.




Enter Marullus, and Armelina, to Clori∣na fastned in a Chair, with the heart of Pyrontus in her hand.


Y'ave made me such a terrible Rela∣tion
Of his strange Jealousie, and his foul Murther,
And's barbarous usage of your dear sweet self;
That (my Clorina) I'm deficient
Of Language to express my admiration.
But (my dull eyes) •…an you so long refrain
From dissolution into showers of tears?
My heart is sure of stone, or it would break
At these effects of's impious proceedings.



Have patience, my best Sister. 'Tis enough


For me to be so miserable: I would not
My suffrings should beget a grief in you.



Then I more stupid were then Salvages,
Then any beast in any Wilderness,
Or any Fury in black Hell it self.



Oh! Armelina, how am I beholding
Unto you, for your pity of my wrongs!
And yet I needs must grieve to see you thus
Afflict your self at the sad sense of them.
But I beseech you to assume a courage
Worthy our Noble Family to o'recome it.
I shall but a few minutes longer trouble you
With my unfortunate company: I find
My heart too weak to make resistance longer
Against th' impetuous storm of my vast inju∣ries:
I find Death stealing sensibly upon me.







Prayers come too late now to divert my Fate.
I pray you therefore, good Marullus, hast
To my dear Husband, and your faithful Friend;
Tell him, I beg but so much favour from him,
As I may breathe my soul out in his presence,
And see him once again; and I shall die
Contentedly, and pardon him my wrongs.



Madam! I do beseech you to have pa∣tience,
I will go for him; and have hope he will


Be very shortly reconcil'd unto you:
For from my soul I pitty your misfortunes.
Exit Marullus.



Shed no more tears. You have, my Ar∣melina,

Spent too much of that precious dew already
On poor unworthy me.



You are Clorina! my Elder, and
My only Sister: And can I perceive
Your innocency persecuted thus,
And seem an unconcern'd Spectator of it?
It is impossible. Give me leave therefore,
T' express all sorrow I am capable of,
As tribute of my cordial affection
To your so lovely, sweet, and injur'd person.
Enter Bassanes, and Marullus.




Welcom my too unkind, though my dear Husband,
To your Clorina, welcom my Bassanes.

My eyes grow dim, and I my heart-strings feel
To crack. Your harsh suspition of my Loy∣alty,
And so severe an usage of me, have
Cut off my life in prime of all my youth.
Here, with my parting breath (in presence of
The Gods, within the hearing of your friend Marullus,



And of my Sister) I declare I dye
Free from all guilt, and never injur'd you.
And so farewell for ever. Gods! I come;
Afford my Innocency in Heaven a room.
She dies.



She hath took leave of life.



I did not think
Her death had been so near.
Farewell for ever all content and pleasure
Since she is gone. No thought of joy shall ever
Possess my heart hereafter. She that was
My only happiness is vanish'd from me.
Look Monster of Mankind! This is a sight
Only befits the eyes of such a Villain.
Here thou hast murther'd the most virtuous wife
That ever Hymen knew; And one that was
In her affection over-fond of thee.



Your passion makes you speak you know not what.
Your Sister injur'd me in such high nature,
That she hath justly brought upon her self
The end that's come upon her.



Th' Anthropophagians that devour mans flesh.
By thee may be instructed in worse Cruel∣ties.
What hellish wretch, but thy more hellish self
Would thus have us'd a Lady of her beauty?


To fasten with strong wires (in a Case of Male)
A mans heart in his wife's own hand, and lock her
With Chains into a Chair, fast; is a mischief
None out Bassanes durst have done. What Ty∣rant:
In History did ever act so ill?

Perill•…s was an Innocent to thee.
The vengeance of high Jove hangs o're thy head,
To strike thee with his forked-Thunder dead.



No Husband but a Wittal, would have suffer'd
The Prostitution of his Wife.



You slander her, basely belye her vir∣tues.
She to us all hath clear'd her self. Marullus

And I heard her relate the story. It was
The suddest that did ever fall from tongue;
Which she before had told thee all at large.
She doated on thee to her death, and with
Her last expiring breath protested freely
Her Innocency from thy imputed Crime.



I care not what you say: She was as foul
In her base actions, as her face was fair.



Thou dost traduce in humanely her vir∣tue;
And I believe forbad'st she should have meat.



I did not think of it; And therefore gave
Forth no such Order.



If the least Humanity
Remains yet in thee, let her be releas'd
From these so barbarous bonds; this heart re∣mov'd
O•…t of her hands; it with Pyrontus body
Deliver'd to his Friends for Sepulchre:
And I will take care for the funeral-Rites
Of sweet Clorina my poor murther'd Sister.



'Twill ease me of some trouble, and a Charge;
Therefore I will consent to that demand:
And the Gods keep me from a second Marri∣age.



Thou needst not fear that: thou canst not find a woman
So lost to Virtue, and to Honor, that
Dare be a Wife to such a bloody Butcher.
Sure there's no woman in the world so sense∣less,
And wicked, as to give her self to thee.
I'le tell thy story unto all I meet;
And thy reproach shall ring through every street.



Your Larum may run on, whilst I'le declare
To all the world how false you women are.
Exeunt Omnes.











I am amaz'd much, and afflicted more,
With the sad news you have imparted to us.



All my entreaties could not win him thence:
And therfore missing him too long from home,
And knowing upon what design he staid,
I did enquire of Armelina; who
Made me the sad Relation you have heard.
Oh brave Pyrontus! I lament thy Fate;
That hast in love prov'd so unfortunate.



It is so sad a story you have made us,
That it draws tears from my eyes. Though I was
A stranger to their persons, my weak Sex
Allows me liberty to weep. A man
Would not be tax'd of softness, to relent
At so deplorable an History.



Madam! I am so far from blaming you,
For gracing with your tears their cruel Fates,
That my heart chides mine own eyes for not melting.
Hell never plotted a worse Tragedy.
Nor ever did so great a Lover find,


So merciless a death as Lord Pyrontus:

Neither did ever Virtue and Beauty meet
So hideous a Treatment as Clorina.




Have you their bodies seen, since they were dead?
Oh Philocles! If you those woful objects
Have look'd upon, you have beheld a sight
More sad than ever Tomos was ac•…us'd for.



Alas! I brought the Heart, and mangled body
Of my dear Friend Pyrontus, to his house:
And did attend the Corse of fair Clorina

To Armelina's Palace: where alas
No April-shower ever fell so sweetly,
As she 〈◊〉 weep over her Sister.



A word with you dear Cozen Ovid. My eyes
Are big with tears, and my poor heart is loa∣den
With grief. A thousand showers cannot drain them.
And Time wants years enough to wear a∣way
The Sense and Memory of this woful day.



I must beseech you to have patience.



I have too much, dear Ovid! Much too much:
But I will all the Fortitude collect
That my poor heart is capable of, and shall
Suppress all signs exterior of a grief.


You know the Fortune which Trasullus told me:
I find it now points at me; And will there∣fore
Go walk abroad. You are acquainted well
With Philocles. I'le leave you with him.



I will attend upon you.




You are old and sickly; And I will not be
So troublesome.



You shall not go alone.
Good Philocles, My Cosin Caralinda

Is something undispos'd, and hath a mind
To take the Air abroad; You will oblige me
To bear her company. She is a stranger,
Which is the cause I crave the trouble from you.



The Noble Ovid may command me any thing.
But you confer much Grace on me, to give
Me leave to wait upon a gallant Lady
Of so su•… passing Excellencies.



You complement (Sir) with me.



Hereafter you may like better of her Company,
When you are more acquainted with her.
Beware I pray you what you do; Take heed
Speaks to Caralinda aside.
You give not too much Credit to Predictions.


Take heed your vengeance be not rash; Be∣ware
You bring not ruine on your flourishing youth.



I will not play the Amazon, believe it:
And so (best Poet) for a while farewell.



Your servant, generous Ovid!







O Love, and Jealousie! What mighty power
You, mighty passions, have o're humane hearts?
How you too often joyn within one brest,
And joys that would aspire keep low sup∣prest!
To be enamour'd on a beautiful object;
As natural to us is, as t' eat and drink:
But to suspect whom we affect, is a Crime
Declares a guiltiness within one's self;
A want of Merit. Then a wise man should
Make himself worthy of his Mistress Love,
Or never prosecute his amorous suit.
A discreet Lover in a beauteous out-side,
Expects a mind adorn'd with all the virtues;
And holds it an impiety to think,
So rich a soul can ever stoop to vice.
Therefore the Lover that is rightly bred,
Admits no jealous thoughts into his head.
I wish Bassanes had prov'd such, then he
Might have enjoy'd an happy life on earth:
Too passionate Pyrontus then had liv'd,
And (in some time) might have overcome himself:


The admirable and innocent Clorina

Had been alive; this Tragedy had never
Been acted here, which will be famous ever.
Exit.








If you would give me leave (as your known Friend)
Whom you have long grac'd with your Ami∣ty,
To tell you freely my Opinion,
And no offence, take it. I should tell you
(My Lord Bassanes) I conceive you have
Been much too rash in your proceedings.




If such a thought you harbour of my actions,
I needs must tell Marullus, that he thinks me
Guilty of my Wife's blood: Do not imagine
Your friend aspers'd with such a Crime. She was
A gallant Palace (to do her beauty right)
Where all the Devils of Lust inhabited.



I cannot tell, but if one might give cre∣dit
To her so often serious Protestations,
And to her vows utter'd with her last breath,


She was an Innocent.



They that dare play
So foul a Game, value not what they say.






I never saw her before.



She is a Miracle of such handsomness,
She can no other be but Venus self.



Yonder's the Murtherer of my Lord Py∣rontus,

And the base user of the best of women.
My blood is all on sire at this Encounter,
My Hilt seems Loadstone, and my hand of I∣ron;
I cannot keep it longer from my Sword.
(A sudden vengeance he deserves,) which shall
Fall on him. At this present I'le revenge
The slaughter of my friend, and the sad death
Of his so barbarously abus'd Clorina.




Dear Philocles forbear. I do conjure you,
By all the love you bore unto Pyrontus,

Suppress your anger for a while; yet know
I wish him but a short Reprieve, and hate him
As much as you. He at a fitter time
May sind his Destiny. Let it not be said
He dy'd i'th' presence of a tender mind.



I must obey you, Madam!



She is an object so extremely ravish∣ing,
I must speak to her.



I had thought you had
Done with that Sex for ever.




But beauty such a potent Charm is known,
Strong'st Resolutions it hath overthrown.
Hail Female Goddess, or if (of woman-kind)
Hail! rich Epitome of all the beauty
That ever yet in several women Nature
Reveal'd to humane eyes!





Draw back a little. I would find to what
His fine words aim; and he will be more spa∣ring,
(If y' are too near us) to express himself.



I will retire a little. But beware
His flatteries win not on your heart.







My friend Marullus, I beseech you walk aside.



I shall, my Lord, obey you.
Good day to Philocles! Pray shun me not:
For I am much afflicted at the Tragedies

Bassanes Rage and jealousie have acted;
I had no hand in them, and could I have
Prevented them, they had not been perform'd,



You both provoke my wonder, and my blushes:


Become enamour'd on a stranger! One
You never saw before!




Marullus he hath done such horrid acts,
The Gods can never punish him enough.



It doth become your beauty, to work such wonders.
Madam! I am one of the chiefest persons
Of all this Province, and have an heart to love you,
Above the expressions of a thousand tongues.



Your name (Sir) I beseeeh you.








What he that (through his jealousie and fury)
Murther'd Pyrontus, and his innocent Wife?



You have been mis-inform'd: He did deserve
The Fate he found: And her shame broke her heart.
I am the same Bassanes, but not guilty
Of any Crime. They in their deaths found Justice.



I've heard too much of them already, But how
Can you so fresh a widdower, so soon
Give entertainment to a second flame?



Your beauty that can work such Mira∣cles
Is a sufficient reason.






The like sad destiny Clorina did,
Should I become your Wife.




You are an heaven where all the virtues meet;
And therefore cannot be inconstant to
Your Wedlock-vows.



I merit not (Bassanes)

This favour at your hands. If I ere wed,
It shall be unto one of my own Country.



Within a Body form•…d to all perfecti∣on,
That ever liberal Nature, and the Gods
Could, can, or ever shall make up (fair stran∣ger.)
Give not an Entertainment to Contempt
Of your inslav'd Bassanes, neither in't
Lodge thoughts disdainful, nor an heart of Flint.



'Tis an astonishment in me to hear you
To make so passionate discourse to 〈◊〉,
Even one whose name you neither know, nor Fortune:
I may be poor, and vitious.




Can in a body so beautiful in habit.
Vice dares not so presumptions be, as t' enter
Under so fair a Roof: And y' are so rich
In Beauty, that I with more joy should marry you,


Then t' be saluted Emperour of the world.



You court me now indeed. I have some business
Of such concern, that at this time no lon∣ger
I can stay with you.



But must you needs be gone?



I must, in truth.



When shall I then receive
So great a blessing as t' enjoy a second time
Your covered company?



Within this half hour
I'le meet you here again.



Y'ave rais'd me to
A joy as great, as Jove himself can know.



Come generous Philocles, I will im∣part
Our Parley freely to you, and acquaint you
With the whole Cause•…, why I entreated you
To stisle your Revenge, and to retard
His death. You shal know al my secret thoughts.



Sweet Caralinda, you oblige me much.
I shall attend you any where.







Cupid hath pointed all his shafts with the
Fair beams of this bright Ladies eyes. I am
Become enamour'd on her to that height
That I must marry her, or I shall die.







Nay rather, friend, may all the gods vouchsafe it.



You know not what she is, she may be much
Unworthy of such Nuptials:
Resist bet•…mes; Physick too late is took
When sickness (through delay) is six'd at th' root.




No other be, but Ovids Kinswoman,
Who (we have heard) so lately came to To∣mos;

I will presume her, then, of Noble Birth.
That excellent Poet is my worthy friend;
And I may hope will easily be won
T' assist me to attain her to my wife.
Methinks he should be glad to have his Cosin
Well matched here; To be six'd a constant comfort
Both to his Age, and grief for his Exilement.



May the just Powers Divine, turn all to th'best.



If 〈◊〉 obtain her to become my Wife,
An Heaven on Earth, I shall enjoy this life.








Sir, I entreat you (my too valiant Cap∣tainl)
To give me leave to return home. I have
No mind to such a formidable Dinner.



What shouldst thou fear? My keen vi∣ctorious Sword
Carries spells strong enough to conjure down
All the unruly Fiends of Pluto's Court.
Therefore for shame take courage: Thou hadst wont
To have a good stomack to thy meat: And sure
This gallant Ghost will treat us very Nobly.



I have an horror to such company;
And had a thousand times much rather be
With Mistris Floretta, and converse with her.



Thou talk'st so often of her, that I think
Thou art in love with her.




I have some smackering that way: But the Awe
I stand in of your Indignation,


Deters me from professing my Respects.
I wish your Captainship would cast her off,
And give me leave to make her my honest Wife.



Thou talk'st impossibilities, Fool Ca∣cala!

To thin•… make an Whore an honest wo∣man.
Such an one wou'd indeed prove a strange wonder:
And he that should to such an one be wed,
Might raise a mighty portion to himself,
By taking money for the sight of her.



His tongue's no slander.
Aside.



Walk on: w'are almost there.







Fear nothing in my company, but the marrying
Of an Whore.



I ever dreaded stories of Hobgoblins,

But evermore abhorr'd the sight of them:
Beseech you therefore Captain Hannibal,

Give me leave to go back.



Thou shalt not leave me, I will make thee valiant,
And neither to fear Men, nor Devils.







We shall have a brave dinner without doubt.
  114〈1 page duplicate〉  115〈1 page duplicate〉  116〈1 page duplicate〉  117〈1 page duplicate〉



Instead of a Calfes head, and glorious Bacon,
A skull half rotten of some Malefactor,
Stoln from a Neighbour-Gallows to his own:
And (in the place of a brave side of Veni∣son)
The sal•… Hanch of some executed 〈◊〉:
And in the room of Grecian Wines, the moi∣sture
That doth distill from their hang'd putrisi'd bodies.
Sir, I will take my leave.



Thou shalt go with me,
And (when imployment calls me forth a∣gain)
I'le make thee my Lieutenant: w' are almost there.
Look you! He is come down from off his Gib∣bet.
'Tis the most courteous fellow that ere di'd
By skurvy Halter. Wou'd his Judges were
Truss'd up in's place, and all the villanous Jury
That did condemn so brave a Spark.





Welcome thou Noblest Son of Mars! Give me


Thy hand, thou servant to great Hannibal.




I wish you would excuse me the Com∣plement.



You need not fear me.




Cacala be couragious, and dread no∣thing,
My friend Helvidius will no hurt do to thee:
Should Corberus bark but at thee, with my Sword
I (at one blow) would cut off all his heads.
A Table set forth, cover'd with a black Linnen Cloth, all the Napkins of the same colour; the meat, and dishes, Bottles, Wine, and all things else.



You see your Entertainment, and are both
Most heartily welcome. Let us sit, and eat.
They all sit down and eat.



I do not like the colour of this Lin∣nen.
The Meat, and Wine, and every thing is black.



'Tis the sole colour us'd in Pluto's Court.



The meat tasts well though. Though I had rather be
At a piece of Bread and Cheese at Madam Cy∣passis's.

I cannot chuse but eat. I think my fear


Hath added to my hunger.





I dedicate this Boul to thy Floretta.




Off with it then, thou only Worthy of
The other world. Here Cacala, thou shalt pledg me.



I'le do my weak endeavour.



I thank you Sir, and in requital drink
To him or her you most affect.




Friend Cacala, here's to you, and you conclude it.



I dare not do otherwise.



Would you excuse my curiosity Sir,
I would enquire why you were executed.



I'le satisfie you: The Lords and Gen∣try of
This City Tomos gave order to a Statuary
To make the Image of the Poet Ovid,

In beaten massie Gold, for the Honor he
Had done them, by writing an excellent Poem
I'th'Getick Language in Tiberius praise.
When it was ready to have been presented,
I got into the house, and stole it thence;
Melted it privately, and put it off
By little parcels, spent it on wanton wenches,
And among boon companions. In my Cups
Brag'd on't to two false Brothers, who betraid me.



I would they had been born both drunk, and Fools.



I pray you give me leave to be as free
With you. Why were you banish'd and con∣fin'd?



A poor old woman, and a Witch, a Friend
Of mine, pretended an occasion to make use
Of a live Infant, ript out of the Belly
Of's Mother: And th' Enchantment she was hammering
Was for my service. I stole into a Cottage
That stood alone, where such a woman liv'd then,
Found her alone, and had so laid my plot,
That I might undisturb'd proceed; cut up
Her belly, took her Infant thence, and sow'd
A Cat up in the place; so she enjoyn'd me.
This simple Sorceress being for other
Matters accus'd, and like to dye, confess'd
This Prank.



How chanc'd it, you escap'd with life?



My Captain is the greatest villain that
I ever heard of; I will leave his service,
Although I have oft been told of this before;



The Favourite, all-powerful Sejanus,

Did bring me off with life. I help'd him to

Floretta's Maidenhead; for which good turn
I also had some bags cram'd with Sesterces.



You had good fortune to escape so well.



Some business calls me home. I give you thanks
For this brave Entertainment: So farewell.



I pray you stay a while, you shall look on
A little Masque I have provided for you.



You much oblige me, and are over-li∣beral
Of your high favours to me.
Enter (after very solemn loud Musick) Aeacus, Rhadamanthus, and Minos, the Judges of Hell; Alecto, Ty∣syphone, and Megaera, the Furies; and dance all together to loud Musick.



Aeacus, Minos, and Rhadamantbus, the three

Judges in Hell; Tysyphone, Megaera, and Ale∣cto.

The Furies there (of equal number to them)
Lead in a Dance.



Can Devils be so merry!
But I had ever thought there had been ra∣ther
Three thousand Judges there, then three; I wonder


Their number is so few: so of the Furies;
For oft, on earth, one woman hath more in her.

The Dance ended, this Song follows.

I.Most happy is the Libertine,
And of mankind the most in genious;
Who from grave Precepts doth decline,
And doth indulge his jovial Genius.

Oh! the joyes, the joyes,
They have that follow Vice,
Without any fear of the gods:
Who freely wast their Treasures,
To purchase them their pleasures,
And are with the virtuous at odds.

II.The Atheist is the greatest fool,
Who only aims to please his Senses;
Thinking in Heaven no Gods bear rule,
And tipples, murthers, swears, and wench es.
Oh! the woes, the woes,
That follow all those
Who wear out their lives in vice,
That swear, whore, kill, and drink,
And never them bethink,
Till they fall into Hell in a trice.




After the Song is ended, they all seize on him, and carry him away.


Must I be then bet raid thus! false Hel∣vidius!


And foolish Hannibal to trust to Spectres!




Away with him. Down to the Infernal shades
Of grisly Pluto's Kingdome let him sink:
A fouler soul was never seen in Hell,
Where's witchcrafts, rapes, murthers, and vi∣cious life
Will find a suitable endless punishment.
The Spectre vanisheth.



This was a terrible sight indeed. Hea∣ven keep me
But in my wits till I can see Floretta,

And I shall tell her such a tale, as will
Make her return virtuous, if she hath not lost
All love to th' Powers Divine, and fears no ven∣geance.
Exit.







I find my self half rais'd to happiness
Already, after my so late affliction.
The stranger Ladies Beauties triumph here
Within my heart; My hopes are fair enough
That I shall win her to become my wife:
Then all my future daies I shall esteem
To be a lasting Festival, and more
To be priz'd by me then are all the Fasts
Observ'd the year through in our Kalen∣dar.





I now have made you well acquainted with
My Person, and my History, and have to you
Reveal'd the reason why I did entreat
You to forbear Bassanes, when your rage
Would fain have flung you on him. Now you know
The cause why I will meet him. Give me there∣fore
Leave (Noble Philocles) to go alone.


I fear him not at all, and shall not have
Any need of your assistance. 'Tis
The will, sure, of the gods, that I should sin∣gly
Encounter him. Therefore retire (my Friend,)
Near hereabouts you may conceal your self:
You within call may stay, I shall have quick∣ly
Dispatch'd with him, and shall not fail then to
Hollow you back. See, there he is a walking,
And waiting my approach.



You must command me,
The Gods be with you.





Well met Bassanes. Ovids Kinswo∣man,
The stranger Caralinda, hath imploid me
To you, to make Apology for her
Not meeting you according to her promise.
Why do you look so wishly on me? Do you
Know me?



I certainly have seen your face
Before. Some alteration that I find
Some years of absence might have made. Re∣solve me,
I pray you Sir, Are you not Phoebianus,


Pyrontus younger Brother, that have spent
Three or four years abroad? If y' are not he,


I never saw two Faces so alike.



I Phoebianus am, and Caralinda

Whom you so lately troubled with your court∣ship.
Through the Providence of the Almighty Gods,
I met with thee in that disguize: And part∣ed
From thee but to divest me of those Cloaths,
And bring my Sword to our next parley. 'Tis needless
To tell thee more; And I have too much time
Tristed away in this discourse. Pray draw
Your Sword; For one of us must dye.
Thou trayterously, and unawares didst mur∣ther
My brave, and hopeful Brother. Though he lov'd

Clorina, he deserv'd her better far
Then thou; never attempted violence unto her,
And (in a little time) might have sub∣du'd
His too unruly passion. Thou hast broke
Thy Innocent Ladies heart with usages
More horrid then a Scythian ever practis'd:
Therefore unless you will die basely, draw.



You are a glorious Talker, sine young man;


But I shall presently allay your pride,
And the fond confidence you seem to have
In your own valour.



Let us try your skill.



Y'ave sought your ruine by provoking me.



So: Have you yet enough?



Oh! you have slain me.
I have receiv'd so home a thrust, I dye,
Without another word.
Bassanes dies.
Enter Marullus.





Marullus, in an equal Duel I
Have kill'd your friend. The Gods did guide my Sword;
Justice was on my side: He slew my Bro∣ther:
And I in Roman honor could do no less,
And to preserve my Reputation clear,
Among the Getes my Countrymen, then to
Fight fairly with him.



My mind mis-gave me some disastrous Fate
Would overtake him for so foul a mur∣ther.
Though I am griev'd at his sad death, I'm glad
You are, my Lord, return'd so safely home.



You'l see his body convey'd unto hi house.



I shall not fail.



The Gods preserve you.














I'm (at your service) here.



Stay, and I'le come to you.
Exit.



Draw near you that his servants are, and bear
Enter Servants.
This sad Lord to his Palace.
Exeunt.








It was a lamentable Spectacle
We met withall as we came hither.



An usual one, a dead man:
We Souldiers smile upon a thousand such.




Bassanes was an extraordinary per∣son.




Caesars, and Lords, must die.



You talk of trifles. The story I related you
Of my Master Captain Hannibal's being took away with Devils,


Deserves to be call'd terrible indeed.
Hell broke loose on him, Devils, and Devils-Dams
Seiz'd both upon him. He would fain have hung
An arse, but no resistance could prevail:
Away they hurried him, and left me in
So great a fear, I know not how I came home.



Thou hast told us too much of this al∣ready,
And too often.



'Twill never out of my Memory.



Nor from thy tongue I fear.



Oh fear the Gods, Mistress Floretta, fear them;
Take heed the Devils show you not such a Trick:
Turn virtuous, pretty One, and marry me;
For I do love thee above woman-kind:
Show thy self therefore to me a kind wo∣man.



Though I am sorry my Hannibal is pe∣rish'd so;
I cannot call him back; And must some care
Take of my self. And therefore Cacala

I'le be thy wife. All his remaining Goods
Are ours.



And I have something too to trust to


In my own Country.



Here's a Match soon made up.



We will return to Rome.




With all my heart.



And will my fair Spinella prove as kind



Now Lord Bassanes is dead, I am con∣tent
To receive Captain Dacus for my Husband:
Mother! I hope of your allowance to it.



And you shall have it. The gods grant you joy.



My Mother Cypassis now indeed!



You knew her Father. He was your Countryman
And a fine Gentleman, when he in Rome

Did marry me; I else should never have been
Content t' have liv'd in so remote a Pro∣vince.
Though his good nature, and many losses at Sea
Melted a way most of his Land; we have
Silver and Gold enough to make you live
In plenty.



Mother, I kiss your reverent hand
In gratitude. What my own means may prove
Deficient in, my valour shall supply.



We'l have no fighting nor any quarrel∣ling:


I am for Peace. Love hates the noise of War.



You are too timorous; grow as affe∣ctionate;
For thus I print my Soul upon thy lips.



Let us go home, send for a Priest of Hy∣mens,

And presently each Couple on's be married.







I dare not lye alone to night for fear
My Captain, or his Friends, should give me a visit.



Was Hannibal a Gentleman by birth?



My pretty One 
Brave Hannibal the famous Carthaginian,

Who march'd like Mars, even to the walls of Rome,

And fought against that Senate for the worlds Empire,
In one of's Winter-Quarters at Salapia,

Obtain'd th' affection of a Beautiful Lady,
Call'd Issidora: And from them he was
Descended lineally; as he lately told me.




Descended to the Devil; we have heard how.
Exeunt omnes.









My Father (on his death-bed) did en∣joyn me
(For Educations sake) to stay so long.
You grace me (excellent Armelina) much
After so long a Tryal to receive me.



I nothing have worthy your accepta∣tion,
But my reciprocal return of Love.



I kiss your hand for so immense a boun∣ty.
But why (my fairest) would you never ho∣nor
My many Letters with one single answer?



I durst not; fearing (among the Roman Ladies)
You might have made a second choice, and then
Have left me blasted in my Reputation.



I was too true, and you was too severe.



But wherefore came you so disguis'd? and why?


From me would you conceal your self?



'Tis reasonable that I should satissie you.
Just upon my departure out of Italy,

My Curiosity led me to Trasullus,

One of the chief Astrologers of these times,
And happy in fore-telling future fortunes:
I made Friends to him, and receiv'd these verses.
Return disguis'd in Womans Cloaths, and you
The Murtherer of your Friend shall pay his due;
Obtain your Mistress to become your Bride,
And with her gain a world of wealth be∣side.




Bassanes his death, and fair Clorinas's wealth,
(You being her Heir) added to your great Portion,
Confirm for truth the Sooth-sayers Predi∣ction.



And I again must thank you for so bravely
Revenging on Bassanes his soul Cruel∣ties.
But why (my Phoebianus) would you not
Disclose your self to me?



You are my Country-woman; And I fear'd


So doing, I should have broken my Injuncti∣ons:
But now (divinest Lady) when shall I
Be made so happy by your gracious self,
As to receive you for my Bride?




As I can give some stint unto my tears;
After my Sisters Obsequies are past.



Pray listen! What noise is that without?
I think
I hear an horn, and 'tis some Post.
Enter a Post.



From whence, my friend, come you?












I've Letters for the famous Poet O∣vid.




Deliver them. I'm that unfortunate man.

Ovid breaks open his Let∣ters and reads.
I am undone for ever. No more hope
For my return must ever flatter me.
My Wife writes to me, she hath us'd the ut∣most
Of her endeavour (assisted by the chiefest
Of both our Friends, and of most power with Casar.)



For my Repeal, or but (at least) Remo∣val
To a more temperate Clime; and that th' are both
Refus'd her, and she enjoyn'd perpetual si∣lence
In my behalf. Besides, my Friend Graecinus

(A Roman of high note) hath writ me word,
The gracious Princess Julia, our great Em∣press
And my best friend, is in Trimerus dead.
One of these News were much too much to strike
My poor and crazy body into my grave.
But joyning both their poysonous stings toge∣ther,
I needs must to the world this truth impart,
That Ovid dies here of a broken heart.
Dies.



It was too sad a truth his last breath did
Express; for he, alas! is dead indeed.



Death is too prodigal of his Tragedies
In this small City. I must spare from my

Clorina's Fate one shower of tears to shed
Upon his Grave.



Not only we, but all the Getick Nation
Were worse then barbarous, paid we not that duty
To Excellent Ovid's infelicious end.



He was a most accomplish'd Gentleman,
A person asfable, and sweet-condition'd;
And of the Roman Poets the most ingenious.



He was in Italy at Sulmo born,
A pleasant City within the Territory
Of the Peligni, and descended of
The Ancient Family of the Nasones;

Who had preserv'd the Dignity of Roman

Knights, from the first Original of that Or∣der.
I'th' Astatick wars, he under Varro

Had eminent Command, and well discharg'd it:
Who now alas (after seven years Exile∣ment)
Hopeless of a Repeal, hath breath'd his last.



Take up his Noble Body, and bear it gently
To his own house; we all will wait on it thi∣ther.



I'le have a stately Monument erected,
(Without our City-walls, near the chief Gate)
To his fair Memory, to declare the grati∣tude
Of Tomos to him, for the Honour it
Receiv'd by his so long abode among us;
Inclos'd in which (within a Marble-urn)
Curiously wrought, his ashes shall for ever
Remain in peace; An endless grace to Pontus.




No Poet ever did more glory contribute


Unto the Latin Language, then his Pen.
The Soul of Poetry feels a Convulsion
By his Decrease. He no superiour knew
In that sweet Art; and was great Virgils E∣qual.
His works have an Eternity stamp'd on them,
Do far exceed the Consul Cicero's verses,
And all the lines sacred Augustus ever
Writ in a numerous strain; All the fine Poems,
The Darling of the People, the Facetious
And valiant Prince Caesar Germanicus

Hath publish'd with applause; and all such things,
Though writ by hands that were the spoils of Kings.

Ovids Body being removed,
Exeunt omnes.



