Roxana, Hesione, Attendants.


THus the Repose which I but now enjoy'd,
Is by the malice of my Fate destroy'd:
And it is false Perdiccas, who has been
That Traitor, to the quiet of his Queen.



But are these Sisters then preserv'd alive?



Yes, He did my too credulous eyes deceive,


By th' blood of two condemned Slaves he spilt:
The just reward of their unpardon'd guilt
But did my Int'rests and his Oaths despise,
To pay his Tribute to Statira's eyes,
Whom he ador'd: Her Sister did pertake,
His Mercy only for my Rival sake,
But though he, to establish his design,
Did build his fortune on the wrecks of mine;
Yet now the Powr's above have overthrown.
Them both, in the advancement of their own.
Sending their Brother and their Lover's Arms,
To give to our proud walls their fierce allarms:
And they his Pris'ner with such pow'r demand,
Trumpets sounding, and shouts within in of Victoria:

As He, nor Babilon can long withstand:
And this unwelcome noise I fear declares,
They and the Empire are already theirs.



Madam, We know not what the Fates have done,
Perhaps they have confirm'd you in the Throne
Oh! how her Jealousie with Rage now burns!
Aside.
Love and Ambition torture her by turns. 



They must be taken pris'ners first, for we,
Till then, can never hope for Victorie:
Fortune their Arms with blest success does guide,
And Conquest, like a Slave, attends their side.
Methinks, I see. sierce Oroondates now,
Triumphant with wreath'd Lawrels on his brow,
Advancing to me in an angry form,
And speaking in the Language of a storm.







Prince Oroondates, Madam, 



 What's our doom?
And has he tell us Are we overcome?



Dispel such goundless fears, causeless alarmes,
Success, and Victory wait on your Armrs.



Kind Fates! Ohgood Arbates soon declare:
Oh! speak, and free Roxana from her fear!



Great Oroondates's taken. 



 Is it true?




Neander's bringing him to wait on you.



Ah! To what Miracles are we oblig'd,



So soon as e're our Rampiers were besig'd,
We on our Foes our barbed darts did pour,
Thick as driv'n Hail in a tempestuous showr.
Long time they did support the violent shock,
The Tempest beat, as on a senseless Rock,
Upon their shields, then broke, and downards fell,
As if their shields had born Fates strong-wrought spell.
Yet with a courage that still dar'd their Fat,
They to our Battlements clapt Ladders stra it;
Strait mounted, but on them such stones we hurl'd,
As numbers headlong sent to th' lower world;
Whose pond'rous load on the Assailants bent,
Bestow'd at once both Death and Monument.
Great Oroondates then, whose glorious Fame
Proclaim'd his sword as dreadful as his Name;
Brake through the crowds, and with his voice did breath
Thunder, and 's arm at every stroke gave Death.
Then 



 Relate what that Prodigious Prince did do:
I know Fate's wonders must his arms pursue.



Ran up his Ladder 
And on the walls, himself he nimbly throwes,
In spight of the resistance of his foes.
Our souldiers strait fell back at sight of him,
Amaz'd to see a valour so sublime;
Th' undaunt'd Prince rusht on, and could afford
No time of pause to his insatiate sword:


And though with ods surrounded, yet did show
Himself still dreadful by some slaught'ring blow.
But lifting up his mighty arm to deal
His fury on a Casque of well-wrought Steel;
His sword proves false at that revenging stroke,
And short in two the treach'rous weapon broke.



In what strange wonders is his Fate involv'd!
Wonders that have my fears for him dissolv'd.



The disarm'd Prince inrag'd at this surprise,
Shot Dragon-like, fierce light'ning from his eyes:
The pressing Crowd strait bore him to the ground,
His Sinewy arms pinion'd behind him bound.
I ask'd the souldiers greedy of their prey,
Whither they meant their pris'ner to convey;
Some to Perdiccas cry'd, But I besought,
That he might to Perdiccas Queen be brought:
'Twas granted, and I hither came to know,
If you would have him brought before you now.




Ah! my Hesione, it is not fit
For us to see this dang'rous Conqu'ror yet.
(To Arb.)
In th' Interim the Prince shall be your care;
And all things worthy his high birth prepare.
His Lodgings shall be o're our Pallace Gate,
And half our guards shall on his person wait.
Go, be his conduct thither, and be sure
To keep him from all Visiters secure, 
Till you have orders from me, for I mean,
He shall not by Perdiccas yet be seen.
Exit Arb.








I've heard our Enemies have quit the ground,
And that your Arms have been with Conquest crown'd:


Thanks to your Valour with the God's success;
We now, I hope, shall live a while in Peace.
Brave Oroondates's taken. 



 How! Is He?



Yes, and become a pris'ner too to me.
On us kind Fortune equallydoes shine,
For I your Rival have, as you have mine,
Forget not our agreement then, what e're
Of claim you have in him, I have in her.
As I have never yet a trouble been,
To you in your designs upon the Queen;
So I expect you should as little be
Mine, in what may concern the Prince and Me.



He, who with hazad of his life would do
You service, Madam, ne'r will trouble you.
Nor can I less then Oroondates give,
To Her, who me does fair Statira leave.
May Heav'n make him to you be much more kind,
Then yet to me I can the Princess find:
She after all does unrelenting prove,
But may he have a value for your Love.



If you are generous, you will forbear
A Visit to him, and a while defer:
His presence may in you a passion move,
He is your Rival, but he's one I love.



To your commands I due regards shall give,
And will not see him till I have your leave.








Madam, our foes have great Seleucus sent
And with him Valorous Nearchus, 
They wait without. 



Go, good Perdiccas, and to them declare,
We earnestly desire to see them here.






Re-enter Perdiccas, with Seleucus and Nearchus,
They kneel, and kiss the Queen's hands.


You'r welcome back, my Lords, your Chains, I see,
Are now struk off. 



 Thanks to the Enemy.



We solemnly vow'd your deliverance,
But were controul'd by the meer spight of chance:
Which ne'r to us would so much pow'r allow,
As to inable us to perform that Vow.



Yes, Madam, wishes do suppose a want,
But idle pow'r betrayes the will is scant.



Our will was strongly, for your int'rest bent.



Small force is strong, where that is violent.



We had design'd too morrow for the day.



Great ills might come by such a long delay.
Too day is only ours, too morrow light.
Might see us buried in eternal night.



We in your cause, it seems, have mov'd too slow.



Much danger from protracting time does grow.
We have great Reason, Madam, to resent.



Well you shall have your wishes complement.
Sit down, my Lords, and tell us your desires,
And what of us the Enemy requires.



We do demand the Prince, your pris'ner,
And, Madam, that's the business brings us here.



Cruel Selucus! you more Barb'rous prove,
Than can our foes, thus for the Prince to move.



Madam, I think their satisfaction must
Not be despis'd, but given them, 'tis just.


And though you know how much my int'rest does
Decline his freedom, and his fetters choose;
Yet is their Virtue and high Merit such,
To grant all they can ask is not too much.
And, Madam, if you please, I willingly
Consent the Oroondates should be free.



Begin with yours, Perdiccas, and let go

Statira, you don't know what I may do.



Madam, for her release they do not treat. 



No; if they did, I'd easily submit.
She would as weak before our walls appear,
As now she does, being your close prisoner:
But Oroondates is a Scythian born,
And One our absolute defeat has sworn:
The greatest of our enemies will be,
And we are ruin'd, if we set him free.
But whilst as pris'ner we the Prince detain,
We may an advantagious Treaty gain
From their extremity. and let their fate
More slow, I'm sure Necessity can't wait.



By keeping him, we may more damage do
Unto our selves, than did we let him go.
Madam, 



It is my pleasure that He stay.



If you decree it so, then I obey.



Do you no more our services regard?
Are slights for loyalty the due reward?
Is it because among the dead we lay,
Mangled with wounds, and neer as cold as they;
Whilst those, who now dispose of us, did flie,
And found these Walls their only sanctuary?
When all their spirits droop'd, and almost dead,
Against a conqu'ring Army to make head,
Alone I rallied our defeated Troops,
And flesh'd their flagging courage, with fresh hopes.
Did e're Seleucus such a fear declare,


As might perswade his flight in either war?
He singsly did against your foes dispute,
And Conquest made to waver in a doubt.
Are his deep wounds grown shallow in your eyes?
His bleeding scars how eas'ly you despise!
And can you think to meet his friendship still,
After you have rewarded it so ill?



No I perceive you with the Foe would joyne,
And only to their fortunes yours incline:
And since, Seleucus, that's your wish'd desire,
When e're you please, you freely may retire.



We must observe the solemn Vow we past;
 But there's no need to keep the Prince so fast.



The Foe in vain of his Return does boast,
To get him they shall be at greater cost.
And yours more easily we can allow,
Than the exchange, to which you'd have us bow.



Since rashly thus our loyalty you scorn,
We'll go, but with our forces we'll return;



Then, Madam, you may wish perhaps, too late,
That you had us'd us at a kinder rate.

Ex: Sel: & Near:





They threaten hard, my Lord, but let them do
Their worst, They can but turn unto the Foe.
I'll trust my fate, and all their aids defy:
Pow'r ne'r is strong, that's built on treachery.
Let them take heed, They to their cost shall know
What fury sharp'ned by contempt can do.



But should these Lords t'our Enemies retreat,
We ill can bear a loss that is so great.



What's to be done their passion to abate?



With some kind message try to moderate
Their swelling rage; 


If that works not, we their request must yield,
Or else prepare for a more bloody field.




Alcetas then shall go on this affair,
And to regain them ply his utmost care.









Grief must not sit so heavy on your brow,
For Love's sake to those tears some truce allow:
While thus our sorrows we anticipate,
We load our shoulders with a double weight;
One is the allotment of the heav'nly Pow'rs,
But th' other our fore-stalling care procures.



'Tis true but then when Angry heaven shrowds
Its glory up in dark and fullen clouds,
We ought to fear least from those clouds should break,
Such storms as may a fatal vengeance speak.
And now my Oroondates is in armes,
Nothing but tears can give me pleasing charmes.



Sister, just tears you do not hear me blame,
'Tis only the excess which I condemn:
I have as great a cause to mourn as you,
For I've a Brother, and a Lover too;
And some few tears I do my eyes allow.
But 
Such floods as yours no grief can justify;
They prove like oyl, and make the flame burn high.



Yet they'll prepare me better to submit
To all that in the Book of Fate is writ.








The Gods, who find more justice in our pray'rs,
Then, Madam, in the torrent of your tears;
Have from our walls our Enemies at length
Repuls'd, and quite defeated all their strength.
But, Madam, as this news may make you grieve,
I bring you something may your fears relieve:
Prince Oroondates now, from whom alone
Y' expect 'deliv'rance, is in Babilon.




His party routed? 







And is he here?



Madam, he is, But as a prisoner.
Though justly yet you may suspend your fear.
Since in Roxana's hands he is secur'd;
You know how much she has for him endur'd.



At his Captivity you may be glad,
Whil'st he a Foe, you little safety had:
But should this news prove false, your Policy
Is us'd in vain; neither his liberty,
Nor fetters, e're shall so effectual prove,
To make me my resolved thoughts remove.



From's bonds I do not think your change to meet,
Yet from it I may hope this benefit;
If to Roxana's Love he first comply,
You're disoblig'd from further constancy,



If Oroondates could his Vows decline,
It ne're should give Authority to mine.



But you may then more mild and gentle prove,
To him, who, adores you with the greatest Love;
Love's fire within me does so fiercely glow,
My heart flames out in Sacrifice to you:


Grant it some favour, Madam, in your breast,
And entertain it as a welcome guest.
Your pity, which can never do you harm,
Will keep me from consuming, like a Charm.



If common pity will your pain relieve,
That is an Alms I'll not refuse to give.
But could I, Sir, resemble your desires,
In answ'ring them with the like scorching fires;
We our own Executioners should prove,
And burn up one another with our Love.
Throw water on the flame, and you'll no doubt
Quickly get Master on't, and put it out.



The flame of Love no water can asswage,
It makes it blaze, and roar with fiercer rage.



'Tis cause you don't 
Fling on fresh buckets at a faster rate;
A close supply its fury would abate.



I'am quite tir'd out, just like an o'r-wrought Beast
That's sinking, being with too much weight opprest.



Then you should out aloud for succour cry,
To ease you in this sad Necessity.



Oh! 'tis you only that can succour give,
And reaching out to death can make me live.



Speak then, and you shall see that I will prove
So kind, to give you any thing, but Love.



But Love! and that's the only thing I crave,
Without it I were better in my grave.



From me you n're must look to have that grant,
I am resolv'd not to supply the want.

Perdiccas shall not, with his subt'lest art,
Succeed the King in his Statira's heart.



Gods! is't so great a crime as you abhor,
To love that Beauty I should but adore?
Aside.
Why did you give her such resistless fire,
And mee but with a tinder soul inspire.


You are unjust to make it be my Fate,
Aside.
To perish by those flames which you create.
Though your disdains be great, I'll not neglect
Turning to her.
T'oblige you still with a most high respect:
And if my service: can powerful prove,
They shall advance the Int'rest of my Love.







How do the Gods this wretched life pursue,
Afflicting still, as I o'recome, a new!
But what offence has Oroondates done,
Those pow'rs require such an Oblation?



We should not his Captivity suspect,
To be of his misfortune an effect:
For now he is Roxana's prisoner,
The safety of his life you need not fear.
She too much loves him, 
Not to divert what mischiefs e'r may rise
'Gainst him, from's Rivals, or his Enemies.



Ah! Sister, is it possible that you

Roxana's spirit should no better know?
Our own ill fortune speaks it but too plain,
After all gentle wayes sh'as try'd in vain
With him, there is not that extremity,
To which she is not blindly like to flie.
But she, perhaps, the Prince may soon oblige,
Jealousie.
Then there will be no need to raise a Siege.
If 'gainst her Charms he should himself oppose,
His love for me he by hard Fate may lose.



'Tis an unpardon'd injury you've done
The Prince, whose faithfulness so long you've known;
Are these ungrateful fears the due rewards
Of his high merits, and devout regards?



My Crime's confess'd, dear Sister, for I know

•rince Oroondates's Vertue cannot bow;
His constant Love for me his Actions show.
This is the onely happiness I meet,
Of which my fortune has not robb'd me yet:
But when Fate shall me of that Bliss deprive,
May Heaven then grant that I no longer live.








Ah! Let this day henceforth ne'r know a name,
Which onely serv'd to light me to my shame.
Aside
Madam, Grief racks me so I cannot tell
The sad confusion that our Arms befell.
But Fate has so malicious to us been,
Would I were nothing, rather than have seen.
It▪ took our men away so thick and fast,
That Death himself seem'd out of breath with hast.



But this is not the utmost you can tell,
I fear yet worse, speak, is my Brother well?
After a pause.
Oh! by your silence you so much have sed,
That does, oh Heav'ns! convince me he is dead.



Madam he lives, but by his Destiny,
He's made a pris'ner to the Enemy.



Oh, treachery of Fortune! to appear
Smiling, and yet be tyrant-like severe.
Thus is my life still by fresh griefs prolong'd,
As waves by waves, and stiffning gales are throng'd▪
Too fatal is the News that you impart,
It rends, and sure will burst my lab'ring heart.



Let not these transports carry you too far;
There is no room so early to d••••ir.
Chance, Madam, like the God of Love, is blind,
And in swift motion does out-ride the wind:


To day it did to th'adverse party lean,
But it will quickly tack about agen,
And come to us; its chief Prerogative,
Is, what it takes this hour, the next to give.
I'll with our Foes once more for Fight prepare,
And from their hands I'll Oroondates tear.
Yes, I can do't, inspir'd by your bright Charms,
I'll bring him back a present to your Arms.



But do not you become like Fortune blind,
First cool this boiling passion of your mind:
I fear th' event of what you'd now perform,
And that it threatens a more fatal storm.



Fatal! what can to her more fatal prove,
Aside'
Excepts she fears the ruin of her Love.
Ah! Madam, I was born for your Commands,
Each word you speak will bind, or loose my Hands:
But may I still retain a Lovers Name,
Though no new Trophies do inlarge my Fame?



How can you, Sir, in this misfortune prove,
So much at leasure to discourse of Love?



Love's the great business of this World below,
To that all other interests must bow:
The Mightiest Monarchs lay their Greatness by,
To Court more tempting Glories in an Eye:
Love makes them soon their Majesty forget,
And to its Pow'r, like creeping Slaves, submit.
But Madam 
At my return you made a Sacred Vow,
That upon me you would your Love bestow.



But your requests how shall I learn to grant,
When the performance of your Vows I want?
Go, by discharging your important trust,
Acquit your self, and teach me to be just.



Madam Seleucus and Nearchus are
Gone to the En'mies Camp bout this affair;
They have resolved his Liberty to gain,


Or else no longer on their side remain:
But they their Forces will with ours unite,
To rescue him, and their own wrongs requite.








 Araxis. Sir is come,
And does without the Camp your presence wait.



Madam, he will their whole Success relate.
But since they're not return'd, I hope to hear,
That Oroondates from his Chains is clear.
Heav'n sometimes hid in thickest masks of night,
Breaks suddenly in pointed Rayes of light.








Roxana, Oroondates, Guards, Attendants.



PRince I am coming now to render you,
What to your Birth and Vertue is a due.
And Since the Gods you to our pow'r commit,
Your Fortune shall not be the worse for it:
Tho you could not expect i• as you are
Our Enemie, and Pris' ner too of War.



Your Majesty does take a care too great,
Which I have never merited as yet:
And undeservedly this Favour show
To him, who both your Pris'ner is, and Foe.



Though you declare your self my Enemy,
Yet, Oroondates, yours I cannot be:
That Name's too cruel for Roxana's Breast,
'Tis only gentle Love must there be guest:
And shall your thoughts keep still in their first state,
Unchangeable, like the Decrees of Fate?
Are you resolv'd my slame shall fruitless prove,
And never in the least have pow'r to move
Your hard remorseless heart? there might be seen,
Methinks, some small compliance for a Queen.



I thought in the condition I am now,
I should be free from being reproach'd by you:
But Madam, since so freely you've made known,
Your Actions, give me leave to speak my own.
Your Enemy I still declare I am,
And hate the very mention of your Name:
You've torn away my happiness, and are
Of all my Joys the cruel Ravisher.
By your Inhumane Cruelty and Pride,

Statina, and her Sister too, had died;
But that Perdiccas, through the Flame he bore
My Princess, did so foul a deed abhor.
And can you now my just resentments blame,
After these gallant Marks of your high flame?



Cease your reproaches, Prince, for what I've done,
As Actions that are worthy mee I own:
If they were common to inferiour Blood,
I would not Act them, nor could they be good.
But now so much above my Sex I go,
(Yes, and perhaps above my Humour too)
That to the World does evidently prove,
They are the marks of my excessive Love.



That Heart which you by kindness cannot win,
You ne'r must think by Sieges to get in:
To use such Cruelties and Arts, does show,
What you have done, none but your self would do.



Have you forgot how she her self withdrew,
And from her haughty presence banish'd you?
Then when you came her liberty to get,
And, daring Fortune, ventur'd life for it.



'Twas you, Tyrannick Queen, past that Decree,

Roxana, not Statira, banish'd me;
'Twas a high Act of Generosity!



For my Repose, and for my Honour too,
I've had a value; but too great, for you.
For you (I blush to speak it) I did burn,
Who requites Love with an ungrateful scorn;
When you, though for our ruin arm'd, did fight
Before our Walls 
I could not wish you further out of sight:
But when against me you took up your Arms,
In them Roxana for your sake found Charms.



Far diff'rent are these proofs of Love you show,
From those Statira would on me bestow;
And my Queen's Vertue is so pure, that she
Merits a service of Eternitie.
Oh! I'm too proud by this advantage grown,
Another joy or happiness to own.



If your esteem's so great, ne'r hope that she
Will, kindly to acknowledge it, get free:
She's in Perdiccas pow'r, who does declare,
He'll rather perish, than abandon her:
And you your self, Sir, may remember this,
That you my pris'ner are, as she is his.



Madam, This Body is so, but the Soul
'S above the reach of any to controul:
Or if it be imprison'd, 'tis in one
That can, or will, not give 't exemption.


Though thus confin'd, to heighten your despair,
On Wings of Sighs I'll send my Love to Her;
Our Souls shall meet and mingle in the Air.



Desist, vain Man, henceforth if you betray,
Your Love in sighs to th' Princess to convey;
I'll spoil th' Amour, and stab 'em in the way.







Though she's my Qveen, yet none can nobler love;
My patience and submission that does prove.
I've serv'd her with the most extream respect,
She from the meanest Lover could exact,
Yet still Roxana does my flame reject.
E're Alexander dy'd, she Love did bear
To Oroondates, which still reigns in her;
And for a Captive must I slighted be,
Who proudly boasts in Chains his Victorie?
 No, the Usurper of her Love shall die.
But here she comes with such a Charming Meen,
Rage quits my Breast, and gentle Love gets in.







Madam, You come from doing such a grace,
The Action speaks you gen'rous to excess:
But it your Majesty this day had seen
The Posture which your Prisoner was in,
As I saw him; when at our Walls he stood,
Dreadfully fighting, all besmear'd with blood:


Strength'ning his Men, when all their hearts were down,
With an astonishing courage of his own;
Perhaps, you'd have resented more his Crime,
And not been in such haste to visit him.



His Quality exacted has from me,
What you miscall a Generositie,



That he is worthy of it, is most true;
But chiefly cause he is belov'd by you.
Yet, Madam, you could not have honour'd one,
More fiercely bent to your destruction.



So Generous an Enemy as He,
In whatsoe'r condition he can be,
More grateful and more lovely does appear,
Then can a base and cow'rdly friend, by far:
And I blush less, that to the Prince I bend,
An Enemy, than unto you, a friend.







Queen, since your Captive you so highly prize,
Your Love becomes his Crime, and for't he dies.
Rather than slights indure, or quiet lose,
His blood shall be the price of my repose.











Alcetas, Madam, has sometime been from
The disoblig'd Seleucus Lodgings come.



My Lord, How were our reasons by him heard?



With but a mean, and very slight regard.
He says their Friendship which we did despise,
Has made them now become our Enemies.


And though so quickly we could change our mind,
Like Weather-cocks which turn with ev'ry wind,
Yet their resolves, as firm as Fate, they bind.
They 've kindly sent us notice to prepare
For the worst miseries that attend on war.



Ah! What Perdiccas, had we best to do?
Thus we're not able to withstand the Foe.
Our strength is weaken'd, but theirs double made,
They'll beat us with those pow'rs should be our aid.



Madam, if it be so design'd by Fate,
We must submit to be unfortunate:
But if their now lost Friendship you'd retrieve,
You Oroondates must resolve to give.



What is't you say? the Scythian Prince restore?
Oh! good Perdiccas, let me hear no more!
I ne'r shall of so soft a humour prove,
To please them with the Shipwrack of my Love.



Then we must dare our Fortune, and be brave,
For it is all the Refuge that we have.
Madam, my Life, and all's at your Command,
Whil'st I've a Sword, I will their pow'r withstand.
I'll do my utmost to preserve him yours,
Fate may be kind, and send us happy hours.
But first I'll to my Princess go and try,
Aside.
If she still keeps in her proud constancy.







Though my misfortunes do appear so great,

Roxana cannot yet her Love forget:
If I could once get Mistriss of my soul,
And from my Breast this sturdy passion pull;
Proud Oroondates soon should meer his Grave,
Who triumphs that he makes a Queen his Slave.








Madam, I'm come to wait upon you now,
That I your last Resolves might fully know.
My pow'r's unbounded, and will reach too far,
If once you stir it up unto despair.
Then feed my Love, least my just rage should prove
Fatally pointed against Him you love.



Fate both our Lives has twisted in one twine,
And when you cut off his, you'll cut off mine.



Death dares not seize your life 



 that hour he dies,
My Soul shall take a hasty flight to his.
Ah! Prince has Heav'n brought you so near to me,
To make you fall by your worst Enemy!
Aside, but
over-heard
by Perdic∣cas.

After so many dangers you did 'scape,
Must you meet Death at last by such a Rape?
Yee Gods! have pity on him I adore,
And since you have done this, do something more.



So great a passion for the Prince to show,
Was the worst Office you for him could do:
For now, though I was sure to have my fall,
And with me crush to dust this mighty Ball;
The prince I would not suffer to survive
My hopes, when once they've lost their pow'r to live.
Yet through that great respect to you I bear,
I for a while shall my revenge defer:
And with obliging actions still pursue,
To try if they have power to soften you.
But if in vain all my submissions prove,
He shall not triumph o'r my slighted Love.


And if I fall, my Rival shall fall too.



Go, act the utmost that thy rage can do.
But by the Gods I swear the Prince's death,
Shall make you see expire my latest breath.
Yes, and this too shall the last minute be,
Till I see him, that you shall e'r see me.



How, Madam, see the Prince? it cannot be.
Gods, it must not 



 Do't, or ne'r see me more.



I cann't deny the Princess I adore.
Passionately.
Madam, this hard request you shall obtain,
If possibly Roxana I can gain.
But you may fear that from the Enterview,
There will but small advantage to you grow.
'Tis on that usage you to me shall give,
His hinge of Fate does turn, to die, or live▪
If Reason rules his Love, th'request he'll make,
You would his Int'rest and his Love forsake:
And upon that success depends alone,
Either his Death, or Preservation.








Unkind Oroondates! must I be
The subject of your scorn and crueltie?
Does making love my gift deserve such slight,
That it no other way you will requite?
I'll be reveng'd 
But something does within me countermand:
Alas! I find my heart restrains my hand.
In vain are all my hopes to meet relief,


Since I'm my self the cause of all my grief.
To gain a pow'r, we should a passion hide,
But I made love, and that has rais'd his pride:
And 'tis Statira does the Scale o'rpoise,
Whil'st she's alive, I must not look for joys.
No, it is by her death I ease must have;
I'll either give her, or my self a Grave.






My Lord, I hope you have my Rival seen,
And pray, what news is from that haughty Queen?
Will you relate to me the passages?


The Gods as yet have giv'n but ill success.
But, Madam, I have hopes, if you will prove
But kind to me, that I may gain her Love.



If your good fortune does on me rely,

Perdiccas, doubt not but that I'll comply.




Statira, Madam, does demand of me,
That she this night may Oroondates see.



Ha! is my Rival grown so insolent?
Aside.
Let her take heed she don't at last repent.
My Lord, I cannot grant an Enterview,
That will prove fatal both to me and you.
Alas! already but too much he has
Been with her, for the quiet of our dayes.



Madam, my Guards I've order'd to be there,
To mind their Actions, and Discourses hear.



How readily you have found out a way,
Both to deceive your self, and me betray I
D'ye think that so imprudent they will prove,
In loud Discourses to declare their Love?
No, when they find they have such careful spies,
They'll speak to one another with their eyes.


Each sigh they fetch, its meaning will betray,
And ev'ry tear explain what it would say.
You know not the effect of such a deed.



When we oblige, we may some merit plead.



But o'r the will that has not any force.



Yet obligation never made one worse.



Of my deserts in Love, if I might boast,
I best deserve him, cause I love him most.



And, Madam, if your Love for him be such,
Can you for him think any thing too much?



On this a dang'rous consequence ensues,
Therefore, my Lord, I justly may refuse. 
He to destroy my Love, this Boon requir'd.



Was then this favour by the Prince desir'd?



Yes, but I did deny him that request,
So much destructive to my Interest.



At first demand of it my Love did start,
And all my blood went to support my heart.
But forcive reason me did plainly show,
There could no disadvantage from it grow.
To fair Statira's will I did submit,
And promis'd her I would indeavour it.
 Madam, my hope's from you, 



 My Lord, I'll try
After a Pause.
With your desires to make my heart comply.



Worse than our Fate is now it cannot be;
By these Reflections 



 You have conqu'red me.
But in what order would you have me go?



Let him your mind in a short Missive know.
Pray trust the rest unto my management,
My Int'rest equals yours 



 I am content.
This Act being great, perhaps, his mind may move,
And be a prosperous Agent in my Love.







How many dangers have I safe out-run,
And yet the worst I have but just begun!
Here I am kept a pris'ner by the Queen,
Who hopes by this way she my Love may win.
I would be kind and grateful, but shall ne'r
Unfix my Love, to place it upon her.
If I could turn it unto her I hate,
It would be then but a meer Love of State.
Besides, could I a flame for her admit,

Roxana but by halves would cherish it.
How she deny'd, (a sign she sighs for me!)
I but one moment should Statira see?
And against her she did such threatnings breath,
As did determine in no less than death. 
But here Arbates comes, her Confident.






Sir, By the Queen Roxana I am sent,
Who says that in this Letter you will find
The settled resolution of her mind 
Delivers a Letter and Exit.



Ah! how my Vertue yields to Jealousie!
And fain, into what most it fears, would pry.


Restless, I'm tost betwixt despair and hope;
This sinks me low, the other is my prop:
But I must know my doom; so great a fear
Is the worst torment Flesh and Blood can bear.
Opens and reads.


YOu are permitted to see my Rival, according
to your desire, but it is not meant you should
make use of the favour to the Ruin of those who
grant it you. It is in your power to turn it to your ad∣vantage,
if you use it as prudence would advise you;
and in councelling Statira not to think of you any more:
You ought to receive the counsel she will give you to
loose all thoughts of her. This is the way you ought to
follow, if you love her life, since it shall meerly depend
upon the success of this Enterview.
ROXANA.

Ye mighty Powers! how subtle are your wayes!
How are they all encircled in the Rayes
Of richest Mercies! 
As glist'ring Stars which oft obscur'd we find,
Yet still remain the same the Clouds behind:
Your Judgments are severe, but die withal;
And frequently in tenderness they fall.
Ah! and shall I this blessing now obtain,
Shall I my fair Statira see again!


I fear my Soul will with a joy so great
Sink, not being able to bear up the weight.
It must: for it will come with such effort,
No humane strength its violence can support.
Exit.
Finis Actus Secundi.








ANd they have them put off with such disgrace,
As if their pow'rs they never durst outface.

Seleuchus and Nearchus could not brook
Such high contempts, but has their side forsook.



How ere to day Fate gave their Arms success,
It made no future conquests ore by lease:
No, they will find the next ensuing war,
Shall bring their triumphs to the last despair.



Yes, our Assurance of those friends is such,
That from their Arms we may expect it much.
For their resentments swell them up so high,
They are resolv'd to conquer or to die.
And who dare Fate, but seldom vanquish'd are;
They prove Victorious through their brave despair.




Lysimachus, my Lord, can never doubt
The Victory, since you're to lead us out.


Heav'n has determin'd Babilon should bow,
And for that purpose has made choice of you,
For our too morrows Leader where you'll move
In Paths of Honour, and Commanding Love.



'Tis True, too morrow's the decisive day,
That will the ruin of one side display.
The Laws of Honour I shall then fulfil,
And yet obey my Berenice's Will.
Our Souldiers shall too day be all my care,
To animate their Spirits for the War:
Which will I hope conclude these Martial Toils,
And load our Lawrels with Luxuriant Spoils.







Whil'st on the Army you your care bestow,

Lysimachus a greater work must do.
The thoughts of high plac'd Love so swiftly rowl
Thorow each passage of his Captive Soul;
That he can take no rest, till he does prove,
Himself confirm'd in Parisatis Love.
But in this enterprize 
How many dangers must I undergo?
I may be taken by my greatest Foe,
Or else expect, but Coward as I am,
To shew such Fears, and wear a Lovers Name!
Let Dangers fright weak Souls, True Lovers should,
Despising Dangers, wade through Seas of Blood.
The desp'rat'st Acts, do meet the bravest end,
And when Love calls, Glory does still attend.
Well, to my Princess then my steps I'll guid,
I'll leap the Foord, though it be ne're so wide:
And Let what will be the intent of Fate,
This Resolution nothing shall rebate.








Repell these doubtful Sentiments of yours,
Fate may be kind to your unseign'd amours.

Perdiccas said, he to the Queen would sue,
That Oroondates might come wait on you:
You know his power is with her so great,
That her Compliance mayn't be hard to get.



These Fears, which have such Empire o'r my mind
Will prove to be but too too just you'll find:
The Queen, 'tis true, Perdiccas does esteem,
But ne'r in that request will yield to him:
Since to her rising jealousies 'twill prove,
Contriv'd but for the ruin of her Love.
You cannot then condemn the pain I bear,
Till I the Queen's reception of it hear.



Ah! If such Fears can make you to despair,
You'll never be victorious in Loves War:
Resume your Courage, and take firmer hold,
You'll out-brave Fortune, if you dare be bold.
How can Roxana his desires blame,
When all his sufferings are with hers the same?
Nor can you think she will her fury turn
'Gainst him, for whom she does so fiercely burn.
For though Revenge and Pride in her do sway,
She'll not her Reason, and her Love betray.



If Oroondates had requested it,
She to oblige him might perhaps submit:
But when it threats her Love so great a wreck,
She'll shun the danger of it by the check.



Lovers, like Gamesters, Sister, ne'r are seen,


To count their losses o'r, but what they winn:
And you like them, all thoughts of Fear should hide,
And always reckon on th' advantage side.



Sister, 'tis true, but yet we must not be,
So blind to fall into Temeritie:
Delib'rate Reason should our Actions mark,
Who walk without it, walk but in the dark.








Madam, my Lord Perdiccas has obtain'd
The Queen's Compliance to your last demand.
And a Diversion has design'd to show,
Till he can bring the Prince to wait on you.
He has prepar'd it in the usual place,
And hopes you'll with your Presence give it Grace.



Go, and inform your Lord I will be there





Surprizing Joyes does all my Blood allarm,
And gives to ev'ry Sense a Conqu'ring Charm.
Fortune her greatest kindness now has shown,
And I'm all happy in one moment grown.
Shall I once more my Belov'd Lord Embrace?
Heav'ns! how you overwhelm me with your Grace!


Let Coward fear to Noble Love give place.
Fears, Sister, are the Hags of Souls, which still
Disturb and fright us 'bout some future ill.
Like Guilty Consciences, they entertain
Us with the Horrors of an endless Pain;
And do our very Reason so destroy,
We cannot find we have a Soul for joy.



How nimble did the hasty minutes move,


That made us happy in each other's Love!
Fleet as the Lightning cutting through the Air,
Only to show its self, and disappear.
But oh! how slow this lazy time has gone,
Whilst w'ave been under this privation!
It seem'd with such a heavy pace to creep,
As though 'twere jaded or o're clogg'd with sleep.
Propitious hours! avaunt, be dull no more,
But fly as swift as e'r you did before:
Unite our Arms again; then take your ease,
And crawl away as Snail-like as you please.









Madam, A Gentleman without does sue,
That he in private may discourse with you.



 Let him appear.







Ye Heav'ns! Is it Lysimachus that's here!


Yes Madam, Your Lysimachus is come,
Before he Fights, to know of you his doom.
You are the Oracle that tells his Fate:
Oh! pity him in this deplor'd Estate.



Ah! Sir, How strangely you my heart surprize!
How durst you venture in this loose disguise?



What is there, Madam, that Love dares nor do,


When 'tis ingag'd about the seeing you?
But coming through the Guards I met a Friend,
Did me this Garb for my safe Conduct lend▪
And still to pass the more securely on,
Gave me the word, by which I was not known.



Your Courage I can ne're enough admire
It raises still my Obligations higher,
But 
I dread to think the danger which you dare, 
If any should discover who you are!



A Lovers Fate is rul'd by's Mrs. Eyes,
Unconstant Chance I boldly will despise,
And if I die I'll fall your Sacrifice.



We have so long been absent that I thought,
You now had Parisatis quite forgot.



Ah! Madam, absence does like Wind Conspire,
To make a Lover burn in fiercer Fire:
You are the Saint to whom I always pray,
I could for ever at this Altar stay:
But such blest Visions, do like Judges prove,
They smile, and yet pronounce the death of Love.



Your Honour now does call you to prepare
Your Armes for this last Fortune of the War.
Why then my Lord, do you so slowly move,
When you're to Fight for Liberty and Love?



May I not Madam, beg you would foretel,
Whether my Sword shall be invincible?



Your Arms will never fail to meet success,
Fate does entail on you that happiness.



Arm'd with my Love I will to Fight retire,
Turning aside.
And prove that Courage which your Charms inspire.
This Sword shall, like a Comet in the Air,
Portend their Fates, who shall my Fury dare.



And that your Arms may most Victorious prove,
I will solicite all the Pow'rs above.






Perdiccas conducting in Statira, Parisatis, Attendants.
and seats them. Et Exit.


1.THat heart that bows to the power of Love,
In the happiest Empire is found;
No joyes so sweet, or so ravishing prove,
As the joyes with which True Love is crown'd.
They are mixt with such heightned Raptures and Bliss,
That the Soul is all lost in its own Extasies.

2.Sometimes, 'tis true, the pleasure, by fears,
Is allay'd, and sighs sadden the heart:
But Loves pains are soft, and we by our tears,
Find a way for the ease of our smart.
All their Stages are short, and they're hurried along,
Making way for new Pleasures that come in a throng.

3.Our Charms come most from the wounds of our Love,
And its Launces make sweet our desires;
The pains we bear, so delightful do prove,
That they raise our Joyes higher and higher.
Oh! no happiness e're can these Pleasures exceed,
Which we still by our fears, and our jealousies feed.
A Dance, which ended,









To show you what the power of Love can do,
Ive brought my Rival Prince to wait on you:
I hope the greatness of the Act will plead,
The awful Flame your Charms in me have bred.
And wish this Visit you may so improve,
As not to make it fatal to your Love.



Sta. goes to Oroon. who is kneeling.


My dear lov'd Lord!



 My Soul's Eternal Bliss!
My heart's o'rewhelm'd with Loves sweet Extasies.
But I'm your Criminal, therefore desire
That at your Sacred Feet I may expire.
My Love, and Life too long have Rebels been,
For the Repose of my Soul's Charming Queen;
But Life I'll give to expiate the Sin.



Ah! My Lov'd Lord, my Oroondates, rise 
Pardon this blind distraction of my Eyes.



Ah! Madam, I all o're so guilty am! 



No, you are now by me exempt from blame.



Then do not, let me a fresh guilt contract,
By swerving from what Dutie's Laws exact.



But you more from the Laws of Duty go,
When such neglect to my Commands you show.



If by my Zeal I an offendor prove,
Forgive the effects, of which the cause is Love.
Rising
Madam, It was your Beauty's influence,
That made me give this Reverent Offence.
Alas! the Gods (to whom poor Souls with low
Prostrations at their Sacred Altars bow)
Do want such high Devotion ro receive,


Which at the Altar of your Eyes I give.
I my Idolatry to you do pay,
But 'tis with a less fervour that they pray.



My Life! my all! I want words to express. 
My Soul's resentment of this happiness.
The greatest Fortune or the Queen could give,
To see my Oroondates does still live,
And live for me! 



Or may I cease to be:
Link'd in these Arms, I scorn base Liberty.
Ah, Madam! was it then at your request,
That I became thus gloriously blest?
How did my Heart with trembling lose its form,
For fear my sight should swell you to a storm:
And I did now before your Justice come,
But to plead guilty, and receive my doom.



'Twas my desire, but I ne're thought so sweet
A Blessing in my miseries to meet:
Therefore being toil'd with grief, opprest with care,
My Soul was taking flight with my despair.



Ah! Madam, at the rumour of your death,
You know how neer I was my latest Breath;
Yet (may I be permitted to complain,
And use reproaches 'gainst my Soveraign Queen?)
My cruel Fair, unknown to me, stood by,
Disguis'd, to see her Oroondates die.



Those, who did give you this Relation,
(If e're to them I did my thoughts make known)
Might with the reasons have acquainted you;
Which made me take that course I did pursue,
And how my Dutie's Laws, 'twas to fulfil,
I us'd such rigo'rous force upon my will.
Alas! 'tis true, I did your sight forbear,
Yet the Gods know to me 'twas very dear;
Yes, and those sufferings too for me you bore,
With broken heart, and sighes I did deplore:


But then my King just dead, so much was due,
To's Memory, I could not think on you,
Without committing such a horrid Crime,
As would have lost me Heav'ns, and your esteem.




Too much of the Divinity you share,
To make me think that you can ever err.
And you resolve, I see, to use your Pow'r,
And all ways prove your self my Conqueror,



No, Sir, your Merits are so vastly great,
More than all I can pay you is your Debt:
Tis only they, which flood in their Excess,
And being so high, to you do seem the less.



You load me now with such a Glorious Fate,
I reel for want of strength to bear its weight.
You give me Death, when you such Bounty give,
And place me in too high a Sphere to live.



What your Humility won't hear me name,
You by the title of desert do claim.



Madam, This Blessing which to me you've given
Transcends the petty Gifts sent down from Heaven.
Life, Riches, Honour, all must yield your Love
Makes me immortal, as the Gods above.
Fate, do thy worst: my Life I'll not regard,
Since such a Heav'ns at th'end for my reward.



Ah! Sir, We must not rashly run to Death,
Heav'n is to rule our Fate, as well as Breath.



Madam, My Fortune to your Will shall bow,
You are my Heav'n, and I'll be rul'd by you.
The chance of War, durst not your pow'r dispute,
You, and the Gods, are alike absolute.
But yet 

Roxana still my dismal rack does prove,
And I am tortur'd by her hated Love.
She would have me adore her, and despise
The pow'rful Charms of your triumphant Eyes.


But by the Gods I swear, I ne're will do,
What base Roxana would perswade me to.



Nor I, my Oroondates, ne're will prove,
True to Perdiccas, to be false to Love.
What I decree, no pow'r shall ever shake,
I fix the Resolutions that I make.

Perdiccas too, shall see I can despise.
His hated Love, in midst of Cruelties:
And Death from him I shall more highly prize.



Ah! My Fair Queen, rather than see you die,
I would bequeath you as a Legacie,
And with my Life my Rival satisfie.



But in my Breast a different flame I've bred,
I'd rather, than unfaithful, see you dead.
Live then, dear Prince, either for none but me,
Or die, and that way prove your constancy.
E're to my Rival I could you bequeath,
I could commit you to the hands of death:



And can you fear to find me e're untrue,
Since I have all my life, and hopes from you?
You may be sure I'll die, but that I'll prove
My due regards to all the Rights of Love.








The Queen has sent me, Sir, to let you know,
She your Converse no longer will allow.



Ah! Madam, We our Masters must obey,
Though they command us cruelly away:
But it is with this firm resolve I part,
Fixt to your Breast, its Sphere, to leave my heart.



And this assurance of my Love I'll give,
Never for any, but for you to live.



Ah! Madam, From your presence now I go,
As the Religious from their Temples do,
When hall'd, and driven by the rude prophane;
The Sacred Place they leave their thoughts retain:
So where my Fortune ever me shall bear,
My Breast shall always your Idea wear.












CAssander here! ha! how his Eye-balls rowl;
Those looks denote a Tempest in his Soul.

 To his Souldiers as without.


Make good this place by Heav'ns if you permit
One to come in, your Lives shall pay for it.
Swell big with ioy, my Soul, for thy kind Fate
Aside,
Has brought thee here to make thee Fortunate.



Ha! Your distracted looks make me incline
To think you have a treacherous design
Upon some Life, speak, Traitor, is it mine?



Yes, Prince, for my Resentments have decreed,
Together with your Fate, that you shall bleed.



Come on, thou kind promoter of my Love,
I gain Eternal Bliss by this remove:


In th'other World I'll wander till I find
My Fair Statira, has by death prov'd kind:
Then in the Heav'ns we will enjoy our Love;
But if the Ambitious Gods my Rivals prove,
I'll act the Phaeton of my Mrs Eyes,
And with her Rayes I'll fire their Pallaces,
And make one Comet of the spacious Skies.
That done, 
Out of the Chaos of the Heav'ns I'll make,
One Glorious Structure for my Princess sake:
She then shall reign, and th'Under-world no more
Shall any other Deity implore,
But my Statira's Beauties power adore.
Strike, strike, thou welcome Minister of Fate.



That future Bliss, he aims at, does abate
My swelling Rage: He happiness will gain
By's death and th'Queen for his sake may disdain
My excessive Love: Rival, could I but win
My Queen without thy Death 
By me your happiness should nere begin 
But 
Thy Life has been my Fate, my Love has crost,
That on the Billows of despair 'tis tost:
But thus, thy Soul shall steer me to my coast.




Offers to stab him, but
is prevented by Roxana,
who presents a dagger to
Cassander's Breast En∣ter
Rox. pty, & Cas. party
Enter Roxana, Guards, Attendants


And thus, bold Traytor, I'll thy Life remove;
How dare y'invade the object of my Love?



Gods! is Roxana here!




To be reliev'd by her whom most I hate,
How am I still tormented by my Fate!




Guards, seize the Villain.






Thy Love, Repose, and Life are all at stake.
Proud Queen, your scorns my fury shall inrage,
And did the Gods with you 'gainst me ingage:
Back'd with Revenge I would their pow'r despise,






Chasing them through the Regions of the Skies:
I'de force them to yield up their Deities.






Now Prince how must this Obligation be
Receiv'd, still as a Fatal Courtesie?
Where had you been but in the Shades below,
If I had not kept off that dreadful blow.



was so resolute to give?
Remember, Sir, by whom it is you live.



I must confess, if I that life did prize,
Which you preserve but for new Cruelties;
The Obligation would be then so great,
That, Bankrupt-like, I could not pay the Debt.



Yet Bankrupts, as in Justice they are bound,
Do first with their Chief Creditors Compound.



That Madam, I most willingly will do,
You shall have all I'm able to bestow.
I own Cassander did my Life pursue,
And I acknowledge 'twas preserv'd by you:
And now I would (witness y' Eternal Pow'rs,)
Give back that Life again to rescue yours.



And is this all? this, Sir, does only prove
Th'effects of Generosity, not Love.



If Love y' expect, another's right y'invade:
Heav'n, and my vows have me Statira's made,
And could I now, swerve from those vows I've giv'n,
I should alike be false to Her, and Heav'n 


Madam, I cannot that desire fulfil.



The cause springs only from your stubborn will.
And since my Fate is thy proud scorn t'indure,
Ungrateful Prince, revenge shall be my cure.
Revenge against my Rival I will bear,
Attended with the raging of despair. 
If of thy heart I can't the Empire get,
Yet I'll dethrone my Rival from its Seat:
Assure thy self that she shall never live
Another Visit from thee to receive.
No, ill take care since you are lost to me,
To make her by her Death be lost to thee.









Perdiccas ne're can yield you shall enjoy
Him, who would all his hopes and life destroy.



Inhumane Monster, if thou hast decreed,
The Prince, to satisfie thy rage shall bleed:
Pursue, and execute that black design;
Pulls out a
Dagger.
But if thou art his death, this shall be mine.
Thus arm'd, your Love and Threatnings I despise,
For I can act my Death when e're I please.



Madam, You treat me in so ill a sort,
As does demonstrate that my Love's your sport.
I've paid as great Devotion to your Eyes,
As Heav'n receives from its chief Votaries:
And to your will my strict regards have born,
Yet your return has been with pride and scorn.
But since from you my wretched Fate I bear,
It will be just if you the like shall share.
Your Lov'd Prince Oroondates I'll remove,


His Life's the Barr that keeps me from your Love.
Yet, Madam, you his Ruin may recall:
Oh! Grant me Love, and you'll prevent his fall!



No, use thy utmost tricks of Pow'r and Art,
Yet thou shalt never gain Statira's Heart.
Thy Rival, unto whom my Vows l've giv'n,
Shall either here enjoy me or in Heav'n.
Go on, but know I my own Fate command.





You doom his death, and he shan't 'scape my hand.

As he is going out, he meets Rox.





Madam, My Loyalty has ever been,
Just, as it ought, to my Dead Soveraign's Queen.
Your will has been my Law, and your Command
Did my own private Interest disband.
To fix your Crown all dangers I despis'd,
Above my Life, Roxana's Peace I pris'd:
Now if past Actions for reward can plead,
All, Madam, I desire 
Is that you'll pardon what I have decreed,
That Oroondates by my hand shall bleed.
There's nothing can my Death anticipate,
Unless I am Prince Oroondates Fate.
Then blame not my Resolves, for he must die: 
None can condemn what's a necessity.



My Lord, from your discourse this I infer,
You've sav'd my Life to be my Murtherer
Should the Prince die, I should not long survive,
Yet you an act of Grace would have me give:
'Tis granted, seeing 
After your bold request I let you live. 


For the ungrateful Captive shall not fall,
'Tis, I, your Queen, his Sentence will recall:
But e're this Sun does in the Ocean set,

Statira shall pay Nature her last debt.



Though she deserves not for her proud disdain,
The least protection from my Sword to gain;
Yet, Madam, with the utmost of my pow'r,
I will defend her to my latest hour.
'Twixt her and death my Life I'll interpose.



But I've decreed that she her Life shall lose:
And if Perdiccas dares dispute my will,
I'll through his Heart my Rival Princess kill.







Such matchless pains my Tortur'd heart does bear;
I would court death in the worst form of fear.
Fortune has been resolv'd by me to prove,
No wrack so great as that of hopeless Love.
I never must possess whom I adore,

Roxana loves; but HER I most abhor.
Whose rage is to my Princess so severe,
That she must die, to give her Empire† here
Prodigious Fate! my mis' ries wanted yet
But this one curse to make 'em all compleat.
My vows and heart I to Statira gave,
And Oroondates must his honour save.
When promises are to each other given,
They instantly are ratified in Heaven:
And to be perjur'd to them is to prove
Blasphemous 'gainst the Sacred Tyes of Love.


I to the Gods my Princess will resign,
Sure to their pow'r they will their justice joyn,
To guard the innocent 
And will not tamely lay their thunder by 
For with her all the Vertuous World would die.
My Princess safety to their care I'll trust,
As they are Gods, they cannot be unjust.






Villains, from whence proceeds this insolence?
Say, what's my Fate? 



 Our Queen, Sir, has decreed.



And must I then for my dear Princess bleed?
Such Glory by my Death I shall receive,
That greater here would foil Heav'ns power to give,



Or live, or die, I know not; but you must
Along with us. 



If its to death, 'tis just▪
For should I live I'd still her Love despise,
But dying 
Fall a Victim to Statira's Eyes






Statira, Guards, with Oroondates bound.


What horrid Vision does my sight surprise,
Or is't the abusive couznage of my Eyes?
Ah! By what Barb'rous Inhumanity,
Do I my Prince's Hands in Fetters see;
Which were for Scepters destin'd by the Gods,


And not to feel the weight of Iron Loads.



Gods! Am I once more to my Princess brought!
Aside
Your pow'rs this Blessing for our Loves have wrought.
Your Oroondates Madam, in these Chains,
More Glory far, than in a Scepter, gains.
And these which on your Lover's hands appear,
But poorly bind, to those his heart does wear.










Madam, I come not now the time to waste,
With long excuses for my Actions past;
Or seek out pow'r full reasons to convince
The Justice of this dealing towr'ds the Prince;

That's above Law, and can do nothing ill.]
But 'tis to tell you 
Though by your death there would to me survive
A double interest I have let you live,
To the destroying of my own repose; 
Which act the height of my compassion shows.
Yes, and my kindness I could still improve,
If you would yield me up the Prince's Love:
'Tis only that, and his Repentance shall
Proclaim his safety, and your fate recall.



And, Oroondates, if you don't resign
Up your pretensions, to make way for mine,
To the Divine Statira, and despise
Th' attractive influence of her charming Eyes;
You shall the Fury of a Rival bear,
Keen as an Ev'ning's Wolf in her despair,



Madam, Your Beauty and your Mind are still,
Like Tyrants, never pleas'd but when they kill.


Yet, Cruel Queen, your Menaces pursue,
Life I despise, if I must live by you?
And in my Death not all the Gods above,
Shall for one moment make me quit my Love.



This course, by which you would my Princess get,
Is for the greatness of your Courage fit:
And brave Perdiccas Nobly does aspire,
To gain those charms he does so much admire;
Setting his Valour forth in its full power. 
'Gainst one, who is a fetter'd Prisoner:
But yet a Man that often made thee fly,
And twice repriev'd thy Life from destiny.



I those good Offices, my Lord, disown,
Which you so proudly boast for me t'have done;
But here's no place that question to debate, 
Besides thy Breath is of too short a date.
You must your Life, or Fair Statira lose,
Advise with her which Destiny to chuse:
If she the Sentence of your Fate would bar,
She must resign your Love, and mine prefer.



And you this hour Statira's Fate must give,
I know you would decree that she should live,
She shall 
If with this one request you will comply,
Quitting her Love, you will not mine deny,
For that will but reverse her doom, to die.



You, for your safety, may consult your Breast,
to Sta.

And take the way which shall displease you least:
But to be just, I must my Life pursue,
For if it reach not me, 'twill light on you.



Hold, Oroondates, I'm resolv'd to die,

Statira means that Justice to supply.
But though I would have you my Death survive,
'Tis not that you should for Roxana live.



Her Tyrant passion I as much despise,
As my Statira's generous Love I prize:


And if so base I prove t'out-live your Fate,
May Heav'n, my sin the more to aggravate,
Curse me, and joyn me to the Queen I hate.



Captive, desist, and with my Love comply;
Or by the Gods 



 Before I'll love, I'll die.



Offers to stab Sta.

Then thus, rash Man, my just revenge I'll take,



And I with joy 
Welcome my Death for Oroondates sake.



Gods, but that must not be 




 Traytor, how dare
Y' oppose my will, be prudent, and forbear,
Or thus expect in my revenge to share.

Presents the Dagger to Per. Breast.


Thy Female rage I slight, and with this hand,
To guard her Life, I'll all your arms withstand.





As the Guards go to seize Per. he draws,
and his party sides with Him, they retire.


Ah! Do not such apparant dangers run,
By thus dividing you are both undone:
Your Common Foes will at a breach so great,
An easie Conquest in your Ruins get;
Your Kingdom too will feel a killing smart,
For you your selves do stab it at the heart.



Conduct the Prince to his Apartment strait,
After a
Pause.
And then, Arbates, for our Orders wait.



Farewell my Love, 
Yet e're I go, this solemn Oath I make,
Never to live, but for Statira's sake.



The same make I to you: death shall relieve.
Us both, if in our Loves we cannot live:
Then shall our Souls together mounting fly,
Into the Regions of Eternity;
And in those Aery Circles as we go,
We'll reap that Love we could not here below.


And in that Heav'nly Orb, like Stars, we'll move,
To teach the World true constancy in Love,



Oh! My Statira 


They are parted and taken off
severally with Guards.


My Soul, my Life, my Love! 









Oh, Madam, Fly, our Foes like Torrents come,
Rouling upon us to our certain doom:

Seleucns and Nearchus both are met,
The Pallace with their Forces to beset:
Besides without the City's to be seen
Long Troops of Horse and glittering Armour'd Men:
And all do seem as if they would ingage
Gainst us the sharpn'd fury of their rage.




Resume your Loyalty, your Rage defer,
And 'gainst approaching Foes let us appear 



No, Queen, Revenge my Boiling Breast controuls;
Hence Loyalty; the, Curb of fearing Fools.
When Monarchs Tyrants prove, their Subjects rage
Is justified by th' Gods 
'Gainst Tyrant Force they will their power ingage.



Rebels to mask their Treasons want no plea,
They'll with Religion cloak their Infamy:
And cry 
'Tis Zeal for Heav'n to pull down Tyrany,
But in th' affront to Crowns Heav'n bears a part.
The Gods by us 
Redress their wrongs upon disloyal hearts.
In vain, proud Lord, All-mighty Aids you boast.



To me, and all the World Roxana's lost,
Urg'd by your Tyrant Will and Fury too,
What is it that Perdiccas dares not do?



I can do more by my Resentments led,
Strike with my looks thy slender Squadrons dead.
Defend my Rival with thy utmost pow'r,
Yet she and you shall find a Conqueror.
For from your Captives boasted Pow'r and Charms,
I'll borrow strength to kili her in thy Armes▪



Retire, proud Queen, and for the Fight prepare.



You for your Fate I for the Spoils of War.









his Armour hangs. 
Roxana, Hesione.


HOw am I now to all good Fortune lost!
Which way so e're I turn I still am crost:
My Enemies together do combine,
And for my Ruin all their Forces joyn.
Their Standards planted on each side my Walls,
Call me and mine to Deaths and Funerals:
Great Artaxerxes at my Gate is seen,
And Powerful Lysimachns: within

Perdiccas and Cassander do ingage,
Against me with a Rival's utmost rage.
There's Strong Seleucus and Nearchus too; 
To all I am become the hated Foe.


Such Oppofition I can ne're Withstand,
Against such pow'r what is a single hand?
Ye Gods! if to your Justice I must fall,
Sink all these Traitors in my Burial.
One Tomb for me and Babilon erect,
And like your selves a Sacrifice exact.
And then I shall with some Contentment die,
When all with me in death and ruin lie.



Madam, We know not yet the God's decree,



An! my Hesione, 

I'm on the Fatal Rocks of Ruin cast,
Not the least glimpse of hopes but what is past.



One way I still perceive may you protect; 
Yet I much fear my Counsel you'll suspect.



Ah! do not, Friend, my miseries increase,
But speak, if what you know can give me ease.



'Tis then to set the Prince of Scythia free.



Oh, Heav'ns! and art thou too my Enemy!



His Foes with Madness for his Death do rave;
You'll make your Pallace be his certain Grave:
But were he free, he soon would let 'em know,
What 'tis t'ingage 'gainst an uncommon Foe
His oft experienc'd Vertue's known so great,
That this Obligement He can ne're forget.



Haste to the Prince, and his Opinion Learn, 
Pauses
Tell him his safety is your Queen's concern:
And if you think my passion may him move,
Tell him all can be said by one in Love.









Madam, Your Enemies come on a-pace,
And will within few hours fill all this place:


You may their strength on yonder Turret see,
As they come marching up along the Key.
Like a long Train of Clouds they do appear,
And with their Dust they thicken all the Air.



What is't, Arbates, we had best to do?



Set free the Prince, whose Life they do pursue.



My Blood I'll give for his 



 that won't suffice: 
They have design'd the Prince their Sacrifice.
Making outragious Clamours as they're led,
They cry, now, now for Oroondates Head.



Rather than they his Life from me shall tear,
These Hands shall be his Executioner.



Yet this way we their Fury must controul,
Expose the Body to preserve the Soul.
Madam, Restore his Armes and set him free:
Should he revolt his Generosity
Will make him prove a Noble Enemy.



Whilst I consider what I'd best to do,
Lead you my Men, and let your Valour show,
At least you can resist, if not o'rethrow.



Madam, with joy I do this charge receive,
And hope such proofs of my large pow'r to give,
As may the Justice of your cause express,
And silence all their boastings of success.
I'll go where most your Interest shall call, 
Shout within
And come with Conquest back, or not at all.






The powr's of Heav'n against me now declare,
Leaving me to the effects of my despair:
And if the Gods our Ruin have decreed,
In vain we strive 'gainst Fate that will succeed.








What mind found you the Scythian Captive in?



He still remains what ever he has been.
To have a tim'rous thought of Death he scorns;
A Nobler Courage his great Breast adorns.
And did he once your treach'rous Friends assail,
He'd show the World and them who should prevail.

Perdiccas then under his Sword should bow,
His Death should pay the Forfeit of his Vow:
And he would make Cassander too declare,
Who was Great Alexander's Murtherer. 




Hesione, Conduct him hither straight,
Tell him Roxana will pronounce his Fate. 





But she'll take care it such a one shall prove,
As may be most conforming to her Love.
Perhaps the Act that I'm about to do,
Will at once please him, and oblige him too.
'Tis vent'ring my last stakes: the Gods may be
So kind, to make the Dice fall fair for me.






Will you for ever, Prince, ungrateful prove,
Still to prefer thy Death before my Love?
I have, till now, secur'd thy Life, 'tis known,
Against thy Foes with hazard of my own:
And still I wish that I could something do,


(So well I love) both for my self and you.



Your kindness will prove Mortal at this rate,
And bring your Lover his Apparent Fate:
You see with how great strength my Foes appear,
Only their Rivals from your Arms to tear;
And yet my Sword you can to me deny,
Wherewith I could defeat my Enemy.
But this Act, Madam, from your Love does come,
I know it, you would see my Martyrdom.



No, you should find I would preserve you still,
Were but my pow'r as strong as is my will?
There, Prince, thy Arms I freely do restore;
Go, Fight, and Conquer; but remember her
Gives him his
Sword, &c.

Who for thy safety makes her Int'rest bend: 
Lets go her Love to be so good a Friend.



Ah! Madam, let me now embrace your Feet,
So high a Favour speaks you truly great:
And to the Sacred Gods I make this Vow,
(If they on me the Victory bestow,)
Although my self to you I cannot give,
To serve your Int'rests I will ever Live.


Turning her Head away.





Something restrains me bidding him farewel,
Yet what that something is, I cannot tell;
It wounds and tortures with so great a smart,
As though it aim'd to break my tender heart:
Yet I must speak to him e're he does go; 
Love, I obey you; since you'll have it so.
Farewel dear Prince, ha! where is he become?
He has not sure already left the Room?



Madam, He thought you turn'd your Eyes away,
On purpose that he might that time obey:
Had he not took it he had never gone,


I'm sure you could not let him, and look on;
But he exprest, though in such haste he went,
He did your Bounty, as he ought, resent.



Gods! I have now pull'd down upon my head,
Ev'n all the Vengeance that your pow'rs can shed.
This Act will give Mortality I fear,
To all that both to Heav'n and me is dear.
Ah! Oroondates will too surely die,
And 'midst the heaps of Common Rubbish lie: 
What wracking pains I feel within my Breast,
Too strong to bear, or be by words exprest!
But, Prince, since to thy Life I've been unkind,
When e're thou diest, I will not stay behind;
But bid to Empire, Life, and all adieu:
Oh! Death will then be sweet to come to you.


A noise within, follow, follow, follow.






All's lost, and we are ruin'd in the heat,
They've blockt up all the ways of our Retreat:
Unless you will your Courages recall,
We by their Fury must expect to fall.


who ingage with Arbates, and his party: Ar∣bates
is kill'd, and his party routed. Exeunt.






Follow, brave Friends, your Vallours re-assume,
You come not here to die, but to o'recome.
Then to the thickest of the Foe prepare,
And with your Noble Acts your Cause declare:
Conquest's of right the Loyal Subjects due,
With Courage then your Enemies pursue,
But should you fall in this so brave a Cause,
The Gods and World would give you just Applause.
Who for his Monarch's safety Life does give,
Though Dead, his Name, and Loyalty shall live.
This Act, Brave Queen, past Cruelties out-vie,
For which I'll fix you in your Throne, or die.





The Pallace Stairs where Perdiccas and Cassander have al∣most
beaten the Queens party, but Oroondates, and his
Souldiers enter, and joyn the Queens party. 


Hold, hold, Perdiccas, here's a Nobler Foe,
You have before you Oroondates now:
The Gods by th' Queen have giv'n this happy hour,
Which must decide who shall be Conquerour.



Those Gods you mention have to me prov'd kind,
Since thus my hated Enemy I find.
And they've decreed, I plainly now descrie,
'Tis I that must this Gordian Knot untie:
And thus thy Death shall give me Victory,

Both parties Fight, Perdiccas almost prevails.
Enter Seleucus on Oroondates's side, with his
party, and beat off Perdiccas party.


In vain they Fight, for we are Conquerours made,
Since Brave Seleucus comes unto our Aid.










Such dismal Fears my Senses do invade,
That, Sister, of my self I am afraid:
Before my Eyes, continually there swims,
Objects as dismal, as Sick persons dreams;
Which way so e're I turn I still do hear
Distracting Noises heightning my despair.
Were Oroondates safe, I'd Death defie.



Oh! Do not, Sister, with base fears comply.




Noise of Fighting without, Paris.
steps to the door
Ah, Prince, for thee I'd only wish to Live
But if thou'rt Dead, I shall not long survive;
For I'll not intercede for a Reprieve.

Coming from the Door.


They come, they come, the Ministers of Fate,
At last they've forc'd their Entrance at the Gate:
Their haste and rage declare our Lives must be
The Sacrifice to crown their Victory.








Who e're thou beest that from the Queen art come,
About the Execution of my Doom;
Pause not upon the horror of the thing,
That I'm the Wife of him who was thy King,
Least you strike not, and that your Fate should bring.
Here sheath your Sword, your Tyrant Queen obey,
And let not pitty loyalty betray:
For I'm prepar'd to die 



The Gods defend Lysimachus should come,
The Minister of such a horrid Doom.
Live, Live, Fair Queen, to re-possess your Throne,
For you are Sov'raign now in Babilon.




Par. Heav'ns! Lysimachus! 



We only could for our deliverance hope,
From your great Vertue, which can Ruin stop.
We owe our Lives, Lysimachus, to you;
But yet from Parisatis there is due,
(Beside the gen'ral Obligation,)
A greater Sense of this last service done.



Yes, this last Action does oblige me more,
Than any that you ever did before.
And I shall have as great a Sense of it▪
As your Desires, and Honour can admit.



Of all the Glory in the World possest!
Oh how magnificently am I blest!



But, my Lysimachus, oh! let us know
How we were made so happy by you now.



The Gods your safety by this Sword design'd,
Which with the Prince, your Brother, then was joyn'd,
When I receiv'd your first Intelligence 
Of your Detention here, and how the Queen,


To seize your Person, brought down all her Men,
Quitting their Force, I was resolv'd to come,
Either to Conquer, or to share your Doom:
And Heav'n has made me now so Fortunate,
As to dispose you to a better Fate.



But in what posture did the Princes seem,
To be, when you did come away from them?



Such, as (I question not) will soon declare,
To them belongs the Triumphs of the War:
For when your Brother and the Prince I left,
The Enemy was of all hopes bereft;

Perdiccas then desir'd the Liberty,
His Fortune singly with the Prince to try:
For being Rivals, 'twas but just, he said,
You should the merrit of their Sword be made:
Great Oroondates, Madam, who was born
Not to be frighted, but all dangers scorn;
Just as I came, begg'd the same freedom too,
From all his Friends, of Fighting with his Foe:
Strait by consent they did a Circle draw,
To give each Combatant his equal Law.
And Madam, We've no cause to fear the effect;
We know who 'tis the Gods ought to protect.



Let's go, and of the dangers then partake,
Which those brave persons suffer for our sake.
And stay no longer in a place, where we,
Have met with so much inhumanity.



Great troubles height'ned still by more distress,
Prepare the way to future happiness.







I cannot tell what course to follow now,
In this Distraction under which I bow:


Yet suddenly I some resolve must make,
Or swift-wing'd Vengeance will my Crimes o'retake.
Deaths my desert, I know, but that will be
Too great a pleasure to my Enemy:
Living, I must expect the shame to bear,
They, to reward my Cruelties, prepare.
Resolve, Roxana, bravely then to die,
Pulls out a Dagger.
And show them, this shall cure thy misery, 









Both sides the Pallace are to me alike,
And each with equal Fear my Soul does strike:
Methinks Perdiccas should be coming there,
And from this part I should Roxana hear.



Rival, since thou so happy art become,
Look up, look up, and see Roxana's doom.
Those Charms which Oroondates now obtains,
Which I've so long oppos'd but yet in vain;
I will not envy them I shall not see,
Death from all troubles now shall set me free.



Hold, hold, Roxana, I conjure thee stay,
By all the pow'rs you ever did obey;
By Alexander's Sacred Memory,
Your Love to th' Prince, and Cruelties to me.



What makes my Rival thus Importunate,
To have me give my self a truce from Fate?



As thou the Mercy of the Gods Wouldst have,
Oh! Envy not the Glory that I crave;
Live, and repay thy Cruel Wrongs to me,
I'll not pretend right to thy Liberty:


Nor shall you a reproach from me receive,
Which may be in the least to make you grieve.



You such a Heav'n of Mercy now express,
As makes the Hell of my despair increase:
But to requite the kindness which you show,
I'll leave you Oroondates with this blow.










For Heav'ns sake, Madam, this rash Act forbear,
Gods! is Roxana her own Murtherer?



Would Oroondates too my Death defer?



Oh! Live, Roxana, I'll your Throne restore,
Since I've obtain'd the Princess I adore:



Oh! 'tis too late, yet I could wish that Death,
Would not too suddenly demand my Breath;
Since thou art present, Prince, to see me die,
My Death's rewarded with the sight of thee.
But, Queen, though Dead, I still your Rival prove,
And ever will attend on him I love:
And when his Soul, like mine, shall be set free,
I will enjoy it to Eternity, oh! 




Unbridled passion did her Life betray,
And hopeless Love her Reason did o'resway:
And now, my Fair Statira, I restore
Turning to her.
You to your Liberty, and former Pow'r.
The Gods would not Perdiccas Fate recall,
But did decree he by my Hand should fall:
Thus with his Life I Victory did meet,
And now am come 
To lay my new gain'd Lawrels at your feet,



Ah! My Lov'd Lord, our mis'ries are no more,
Through many storms we've safely reacht the Shore:
Your Valour to my forrows gave an end,
And you are a Queens preserver and best Friend.
Receive the Debt which has been long your due,
Giving him
her Hand.

Statira wholly gives her self to you.



How Glorious is my Fortune now become,
Since in your Breast I shall possess a Room!
My happiness does from my crosses flow,
As Saints to Bliss through Scorching Flames do go.
The Clouds of sorrow are all blown away,
And show the Glories of a peaceful day,



to Par. And Madam, Shall my hopes this Blessing find,
That Heav'n and Parisatis will prove kind?



My Lord, they shall your Services are such,
Nothing can for their Merits be too much.
'Tis Parisatis boast that she can give,
A Heart which you so willingly receive.
But that she grieves Heaven will not let her bring
Something more worthy of an Offering.



A Greater Blessing, Madam can't be giv'n,
You do at once possess me of all Heav'n.



Since Brother (by the Goodness of my Queen,)
Our Nuptials shall with the next Light begin;
I can't but wish our satisfaction should
Be equal in our Loves, as in our Blood.
And since my Sister Berenice does prove
Worthy of the Brave Artaxerxes Love:
Your worth that confidence in me procures,
Which prompts me to conclude she will be yours.



Ah! Madam, What must I expect from you?
Now Heav'n does smile, let Berenice smile too.



Since th' Heav'nly Pow'rs now have restor'd us peace,
This day shall crown each others happiness.
For now you've kept your Vows, I will not start


From mine, but give you Berenice's heart▪

Gives her hand to Arta.



I wish, my Lord, I could your Throne restore,
And with her give you up your former pow'r.
But since I can't you in all mine shall share;
Two Monarchs may, when Friends, shine in one Sphear.



After the matchless Gift of Berenice▪

The Empire of the World I would despise:
Yet Bravest Friend, for Berenice's sake▪
I accept the offer you so nobly make.
And since the Gods have giv'n us this success▪
I'll live with you, and keep my happiness.



But first our Thanks we to the Gods will pay,
For all the Glorious Fortunes of this day:
The gentle Calm of Peace from Heav'n descends,
And all those Sacred Pow'rs salute us Friends.
They call us now to lay aside these Arms,
And to contemplate on Loves soften Charms.
The High Transports and Extasies of Love▪
Are the next Pleasures to the Joys above.





