Nichomede and Laodice.



MY Joys Sir, must exceed, to finde that you,
To whom so many glorious Wreaths are due,
My Chains, to all these Laurels can prefer,
And be my Captive, though a Conqueror,
That all those Actions which the World dismay,
To such low Merits should their Homage pay;
And yet amidst this height of Joy, I finde
A secret Passion which afflicts my minde.
With fear I see you fear that springs from Love,
Doubtful this Court to you may fatal prove.
You have a subtile Step-Dame, Sir, whose wit
Has made your Father to her Charms submit,
And she does manage him with so much Skill,
He's but the Property to act her Will;
What She enjoyns more force than Law does bear,
And then what Safety can you hope for here?
Besides her Hate, which was enough before,
Is from our mutual Love, encreas'd to more,
And now her Son, your Brother's return'd too,



I know it, Madam, and that he courts you.


The Romans did him home from Hostage send,
Not out of kindness, but a weightier end.
I too well find what 'twas did him recall,
He was Flaminia's price for Hannibal.

That mighty Man was for his Ransome paid,
And by the King had been to Rome betraid,
Had not his Courage taught him how to free
Himself by Poyson, from that Slavery,
Which gazing Romans exercise on those
Who were their Terror, whilst they stood their Foes.
'Twas not till after my last happy Fight
Which Cappadocia's Kingdom did unite
To our Bithinia, I this News did hear
Which made me weep for him, and for you fear:
That Fear begat an Anger would break forth▪
So to Theagenes, whose steddy worth
I knew, I of the Army gave command,
And hither flew, these Troubles to withstand,
Hoping my presence would my Queen oblige,
For still Flaminius does the King besiege,
And if that Hannibal his Errand were,
He, being dead, why staies he longer here?
Unless it be, which I believe too true,
To aid my Brothers weak pretence to you.



I doubt not, but this Roman vertue may
Strive to oblige the Queen in her own way;
That bloody Sacrifice she paid to him,
Must have engag'd him to the utmost crime:
But, be it so, yet why should you complain,
Why should you fear the worst he can obtain?
My love o're you a weak Ascendant hath,
If 'tis your Presence, must secure its faith.
That Spirit must be mean, which does prefer
Poor Attalus, to Asia's Conquerour.

Att'lus, of whom the most that can be se'd,
Is that he was a Roman Hostage bred,
And at full height of Courage will appear
To shake at Eagles, and an Adile fear.



Death, Madam, Death, shall here an Empire gain,
E're I such jealous thoughts do entertain:
I Force from them, not weakness fear in you,
For what if Rome appear against us too 



Sir, I'm a Queen, and bear that Noble Soul,
Which Rome, nor your Kings Thund'rings can't controul.
Though he my Guardian be, he cannot have
More power o're me than what my Father gave.
Whose Will having design'd me yours, there's none
Can choose elsewhere for me, but I alone.
By my own choice, and by my Fathers care
I'm destin'd Spouse to the Bithinian Heir.
And this great Heart of mine will never bend
To let a Subjects Right o're it pretend.
Banish your doubts.



Ah Madam, let me fear
Whilst I behold you thus exposed are
Unto a Fury, who both hath the Will,
And Power to act, all she conceives of ill.
Who, but to place a Crown on her Sons Brow,
Would Justice, Law, and Nature overthrow,
And greedily the sacredst Rights invade:
She may force you, who Hannibal betraid.
Nor can there Faith from those expected be
Who break the Laws of Hospitality.



As little Natures Laws will you protect
From those who to such Rights show no respect.
Your being here advances her Design,
And does expose both your own Life and mine.
Coming without leave, some suspition wears,
And she will buzz it in your Fathers Ears.
Who by her Charms too soon will be enclin'd
To sacrifice you to his jealous Mind.
Then I, who stood so firm before, become
A Victim to the Mother and the Son.



'Twas fear of you that made me take this course



Whilst you were in the Camp I fear'd no force:
This, this Sir, you for my support should do,


Order things so that they may still fear you.
Back to your Army, then protect me there,
They are secure to act whilst you are here.
But Armies Rules to Politicians teach,
And you may boldly do it out of reach.
Valour, though high, to numbers still must yield,
You're but one here, they none, when you're ith' Field.
And though the noise of Victory sound high,
'Tis seldom Fame has quell'd an Enemy.
Sir, were you both the Worlds Delight and Dread,
Entring the Court, you tamely yield your Head.
Once more I say return, by that Renown
You there have gain'd, you here will best be known:
Return, and with your own, secure my Fate,
You banish mine, when you theire Fears create.



Ah! To the Camp perswade me not to go,
There the Queens Hate, her Murderers do sow
Secret and thick: Two I have brought along,
By their Confessions to make known my Wrong,
And disabuse the King, who though he be
Husband to her, is Father still to me.
And though she Nature should to silence charm,
Yet three great Kingdoms added by this Arm
Unto his Crown, will loudly let him know,
That he does something to my Valour ow.
Or if that by the Rigor of my Fate,
I must become the Victim of her Hate.
If both the Camp and Court my Life pursue;
Will you deny me then to dye by you?



My past Advice I trembling now recall,
If we must die, let us together fall.
Courage, brave Prince, they may perhaps ensnare
Themselves, in those Traps they for us prepare.
The People love you, and abhor their Arts,
And he Reigns safest who does Reign o're Hearts.
But here's your Brother 



Since he does not know
Who I•am, keep me undiscover'd now.




Laodice, Nichomode and Attalus.


Must then the Charms dwell in those Eyes appear
Onely to me, of all the World, severe?
Shall I ne're gain one of those blest regards,
With which you, Madam, use to conquer Hearts?



To conquer yours, if these Sir, don't suffice,
When I design't, I'le speak it by my Eyes.



Of what's all yours, you can no Conquest make.



Then a more pleasing Mein, I need not take.



But yet to keep that heart, I must implore.



I rather had such ill got Goods restore.



It's Value is too poor, your Soul to touch.



To juggle Sir, I value you too much,
Our distance of Degree admits it not,
Then for the heart you tell me I have got,
Where should't be kept?



Ah Madam, in your Brest,



That Place is by another, Sir, possest▪
And you so oft hath this great Truth bin told,
That your Address as senseless is as bold.



Happy the Man, whom Fortune so does grace,
To give admission to so blest a Place.
But I should think him happier far who might,
Fairly dispute, and gain from him this Right.



E're that be done Rivers with Blood must swell,
This Conquerour Sir, preserves his Conquest well.
Go ask his Foes, 'mongst them 'twill best be known,
What 'tis to gain that Fort he once has won.



But there is one who will assault it so,
That he must yield it where he will or no.







If the King be the Man.



He's just and wise, and wills but what he can.



And what cannot his Soveraign Greatness do?



Talk not so high, he knows what is my Due.


Though King, he acts as to a Queen with me,
That's not by Force, but by Civility.



There's much included in the civil prayer
Of Kings, unto whose power we subject are.
But if a Kings request can take no place,
Yet Rome with hers will my Addresses grace.








Yes Rome, do you her kindness fear?



No Sir, but lest some Roman over-hear,
For if Rome knew th' Addresses by you made,
Youl'd gain her Anger, whilst you hope her Aid.
Scorning to see her Nurs•ing own a Flame
Injurous to the lustre of her Name.
That Title which does so much glory wear,
Of Roman Citizen, sheel'd from you tear,
For she too mighty thinks it to bestow
On that poor soul, can to a Queens love bow.
Have you forgot that neither King, nor Queen,

Rome equal to a Burgess do esteem.
If she have form'd in you that generous Mind,
Let her th' impressions of her Maxims find.
Resume a pride then worthy her and you,
And studying something to your glory due,
Pursue this Ignominious Flame no more,
But ceasing the Armenian Queen to adore.
Seek out a Love more worthy your high place,
That's of some Tribunes or a Pretors Race.
For such a high-born Match Rome thinks you fit,
And lest your Royal Birth exclude you it.
By her Adoption you have put on,
Authority for such Ambition.
Break loose then, Sir, from this reproachful Chain,
And leaving Queens to Kings they so disdain.
For things more vast and high, your thoughts reserve,
And so your greatness, and Romes pride preserve.



If this man, Madam, do to you belong,
Forbid his boldness, or restrain his Tongue,
That I his utmost insolence might hear,


I yet have forc'd my Anger to forbear,
But if he shall continue in this strain,
To smother 't longer, I shall strive in vain.



No matter, Sir, to whom I do belong
Can Reason loose it's value on my tongue?
Set Love apart, and I'le be judg'd by you,
What Glories to this Roman Name are due,
The King and Queen, so high the Title priz'd,
They'l not be pleas'd to see it now despis'd.
Their value of the mighty thing appears
In giving up to it your Infant years.
From four years old 't has rob'd them of your sight,
Can you think now, they will that Glory slight.
Or suffer for the Marriage of a Queen,
You forfeit Honours they so much esteem;
No rather jealous of so rare a Treasure.



Madam, once more I ask, Is it your pleasure,
That insolent man of me, this scorn should make?
Or is 't from you he does his freedom take?



Since talking to you as a Roman, he
Offends you Sir, give me the liberty,
To treat you in a way which you may own
With no less Honour, that's a Monarchs Son.
But Sir, in this degree you must allow
You to a Prince your Elder, ought to bow.
That though so near ally'd in blood you be,
It takes not from his difference of degree,
But to his Birth there ought respect be paid,
Yet you, he absent, does his Rights invade.



If that Right be the Honour to be yours,
One word from you, that Right for me procures.
And if my Birth does lessen my degree,
'Tis by you, Natures fault repair'd may be;
But if as a Kings Son, I so much owe,
Permit that I speak like a Roman now.
And know there's none born so, but are design'd
To command Monarchs, and be unconfin'd;


Know that my Love's the Project of a Soul,
Contemns Subjection, and disdains Controul;
Know that 



I know that in my Crown you finde
More Charms, than in my Person, or my Minde;
But such as I am, both my Crown and Me,
Are vowd that Brothers, who your King must be;
And were He here, his Presence might give end
To all this mighty Passion you pretend.



Might I but see him, he should know from me 



Beware, such Wishes, Sir, may dangerous be;
For if he hear them, you may chance to prove
The Vengeance due on those attempts his Love.



Sir, you shall pay me that Respect is due.



I know not who omits it of us two.



Whilst thou knowst me, dar'st thou thus boldly prate?



By knowing you Prince, I can set my Rate,
But you being ignorant of my Degree,
Cannot tell what you ought to pay to me.



Ah Madam, suffer my just Anger may



Yes, yes; but now your Mother comes this way.




Nichomede, Arsinoe, Laodice, Attalus, and Cleone.


Pray Madam, let the Prince your Son here, know
What's the Respect he unto me does owe;
For want of it he is outragious grown,
A fault which surely does but ill become
Such rare bred Mindes.



Sir, do I then see you!



Yes, and you shall see Mithrobates too.



Oh that's a Traitor!



He talks something true,
You best know if it ought to trouble you.



This swift Return I cannot understand,
Where is your Army?






Of my return you soon the Cause shall hear,
I left a Master and a Mistress here.
One Rome and you have taken frommy Cares,
T'other I'le save both from your Hands and theirs.



Is this the Cause that does you hither bring?



Yes, and I hope you'l serve me with the King.



Yes Sir, I'le serve you, just as you hope so:



Of your good will I the assurance know.



I'le go and to the King this Business move.



And I'le go think how I may grateful prove.



Do so, you may depend upon my Care,



Whilst I know yours, you guess what my thoughts are



Madam, is this Prince Nichomede?





Who comes to see if Rome can you prefer,
To him.



Excuse me if I did not know.



Your self Prince, a deserving Rival show.
And if you dare design t'assault me here,
Still in your looks a noble boldness wear.
But as • to her Aid, am singly come,
Threaten me not with the Kings Power, or Rome;

As I defend, do you attempt alone,
I'le set by all pretences to the Crown.
Try it thus Prince, and we shall soon see then
If Rome, or Hannibal breeds braver Men.




Arsinoe, Attalus, and Cleone.


Go, that Excuse of thine to him was base,
When thou beheldst him brave me to my Face.



Madam, what could I do in this Surprize?
This quick return destroys your Enterprize.



No Attalus, it gives it Life, and Heart,
Go thou and finde Flaminius on my part.
Let him in private here conducted be,
And of thy Fortunes leave the Cure to me.



But Madam, if 



Go, no more if, nor and,
When done, thou these Intreagues shalt understand.







Madam, do you hide from him his own Concern?



Yes, and have Reasons thou dost not discern.
I fear his heart would my Designes oppose,
I fear that vertue which to Rome he owes
Has taught him, there's no Glory so sublime,
Can recompence the hazard of a Crime.



Those should guess Rome less scrupulous, who knew
How Hannibal she did to death pursue.



Be not in charging Rome with Guilt deceiv'd,
'Twas I, and but one Roman, who contriv'd
The whole Intreague of that great Heroes Fall;

Rome still had granted Life to Hannibal,

And would not for a more inviting Cause,
Have made a Breach of hospitable Lawes;
For though whilst she did his great Conduct know,
Prudence forbad his Sojourn with a Foe,
And therefore to make good his Peace with them,

Antiochus was forc'd to bannish him.
Yet freed both from Romes Envy, or her Fear,
We being Allies, he might have still liv'd here.
Had not Revenge prompted Flaminius too,
Things which the Senate would have blush'd to do.



What desperate Cause could raise his Hate so high,
That to allay it, Hannibal must dye?



A Fathers Loss of Honor, and of Life,
Hast thou not heard, how in that fatal strife
'Twixt Rome, and Cart•age, in one bloody Scene,
Acted nigh to the Lake of Thrasimene,


Flaminius Father, then Rom•s General,
Fell by the mighty Hand of Hannibal?

The Son since burning to revenge that shame▪
A close Conspirator with me became,


And for to have the object of his Hate
Deliver'd up, procur'd the Roman State
To send my Attalus from Hostage home,
And farther whisper'd Jealousies in Rome

Of Nichomede's Conquests here, which might
(Should he to them the Armenian Realm unite
By Marriage with Laodice) one day
To Romes increasing Greatness put a stay;
On which the Senate, who now jealous grew
Of such an Empire, and such Valour too,
Did him as their Ambassadour propound,
To break the Marriage, and the Empire bound:
And this is what Rome undertook to do.



And this makes Attalus, his Mistress woo,
But yet, why did not Rome her self concern,
E're his Return had made her Love too firm?



No, for whilst he a conquering Army led,
'T had been too much to affront him at their Head.
Here we dare do't, and 'twas my Plot at length,
By cunning slights to draw him from his Strength;
To Mithrobates, I did teach the way,
Who seeming false to me, did him betray,
Whisp'ring a thousand pannique Fears, that he
Had been to murder him, suborn'd by me,
That fiery Spirit by degrees he won,
And gently leads him to destruction.
I know he'l to the King for Justice call,
But from that Justice he shall finde his Fall.
His Accusations as my Engines move,
Will fortifie me in his Fathers Love.
At his first sight I did appear dismaid,
And by my change of colour seem'd afraid;
But he mistakes much that Surprize of mine,
Since his Return, was wholly my Design.



But what e're Rome or Attalus pretend,
That Queen will never to his wishes bend.



The Love he showes to her I have design'd
Only the King, the Court, and Rome to blinde,


Not that I would the Armenian Crown procure,
But our Bithinian, for my Son secure.
That done, I care not where the Queen espouse,
But freely leave her whom she please to chuse.
This Passion of my Sons if only prest,
To raise fresh Tempests in the Princes Brest;
Who when he sees the King set on by Rome,

An Advocate for Attalus become,
Will grow outragious, and induced be,
To brave that Father is as fierce as he.
Whose Hea• by cunning ways to Flames I'le blow,
And work this daring Lovers overthrow,
Before he blinded by his Love, shall see,
The least intreague of this great Mistery.
By this thou see'st all that I do pretend,
But sure Flaminiu• does me now attend.
I'le go the Secrets of thy Queen preserve,



My Faith long try'd does not a Doubt deserve.









WIthout my Orders, durst he then come here?



Pardon, Great Sir, you wrong him if you fear;
Prince Nichomede's Thoughts are all •o just,
'Twere injury to vertue to mistrust.
'Tis true you any other might suspect,
This quick return does seem to want respect.
And might give place to doubtful Thoughts, to know,
The Springs from whence does such impatience •low.



I see 'em well, this Act appears to me,
A pure Attempt on my Authority;
His happy Victories have rais'd his Soul
So high, that now he does abhor Controul
Scornes to depend, and thinks he has a Right
To Rule, since he has purchas'd it by Fight.


Heroes, like him, believe when they obey,
Their Glories and their Greatness they betray.
And cast a shadow o're their mighty Deeds:



Sir, heat of blood in youth that Humor feeds.
Their to wring Spirits are by success blown high,
And whilst Camps do their Fortunes deifie.
They of Command gain such a habitude,
Obedience after seems severe and rude.



Speak all Araspes, say a Subjects name
Sullies their Acts, and does eclipse their Fame.
That though Fate does design 'em Crowns, they grow
Impatient, if her motions be too slow.
That they conceive that Father does them wrong,
Who makes them tarry for their Right too long.
That hence 'tis first they Factions seek to raise,
Gaining our Subjects hearts, by secret ways.
And then if still to us a life they spare,
Granting us a few days perplext with Care,
Yet insolent and disobedient grown,
They leave us but the shadow of a Crown.



This might of others Sir, be the Intent,
And what would ask sit Counsel to prevent;
But here Advice like that would ill become,
You're a kind Father, he a vertuous Son.



Were I not kind, how faulty must he prove?
His innocence depends upon my Love.
'Tis only that makes his offence be none,
Or onely that will rob me of my Crown.
For my experience tells me youth in vain,
Opposes Vertue to desire of Reign.
Ambition, is a thriving Plant, and findes
Its proper Soil in such heroick Minds.
How oft is't writ in Characters of blood,
Man's Itch of Rule, could never be withstood.
For if that Passion once our hearts surprize,
Religion's dumb, and Nature has no Eyes.



Sir, these reflexions cannot sure be due
To that high Service, he has done for you.




Araspes, this I from his Service owne,
Increasing of my Power heleaves me none.
He's not my Subject now, unless he please,
Who makes me Reign, may Reign himself with ease:
In short, his Merit's grown so bright, and high,
Its dazling Lustre does offend my Eye.
For naturally we abhor the sight
Of those, whose benefits we can't requite.
All his great Acts speak here at his approach,
And so his presence is a close reproach;
Which tells me, thrice he has these Temples crown'd,
That all I can give him's a Spot of Ground
To these Dominions, which his conquering Hand,
And prosperous Valour adds to my Command.
Thus I must blush, though I prorogue my Fear,
And shame's a Burden Monarchs cannot bear.
Shame, in whose boyling Jealousies I finde
Those pestilent disturbers of my mind,
Which tells me, that he may do what he will,
And Crowns are Soveraign Prompters to do ill.



In any other whom you might mistrust,
I know what Policies were safe and just;
That Subject must be false, who's grown too high,
Although he never thought a Treachery.
Power Sir, in Subjects is a Crime of State,
Which prudent Princes, e're it be too late,
By wisely clipping of their Wings, prevent
From meriting severer Punishment.
But for the Prince, his thoughts from crimes are free
And all so just 



Wilt thou his Surety be?
Thinkst thou but he his utmost pow'r will prove,
To revenge Hannibal, or save his Love?
Can he behold, and yet no force pretend,
A Rival Brother, and a Slaughter'd Friend?
No, no, he does his Vengeance now pursue,
He has a fair Pretext, and Power too.


He, like a Sun, amidst my States do shine,
Whom Soldiers, and People think divine;
Sure of the first, he now the last will gain,
And fix his Powers on my small remain.
Which yet is not so low, and abject grown,
But he shall finde it hard to make it none.
Yet I'le my passion with such cunning wear,
It jealous of his Honour shall appear,
And whilst I make his Glory my pretence,
I'le by obliging kindness, drive him hence.
But if he thus refuses to obey,
I shall be forc'd to try another way;
For what e're he has done, or I can fear,
I must preserve my State.



Sir, he comes here.




Prusias, Nichomede, and Araspes.


Prince, what affairs could bring you from the Field?



My duty did to just Ambition yield.
First, for the Honor Sir, to tell you here,
That you have yet another Crown to wear,
Then to receive your kind Embrace, and be
A Witness, you approve my Victory.
Sir Cappadocia's yours, Arsaces Throne,
Your Orders by my Arm, has made your own.
And I Sir, thought it was but just to bring
Thanks due unto my Father, and my King,
For the great Glory you vouchsaf'd this Hand,
To make it Minister of your Command.



You might have staid Sir, till I sent for you,
And by your Letters, paid me the thanks due;
Nor ought you to have sully'd with a Crime,
That which your Victory adds to your Esteem.
To leave a Camp in any's Cappital,
But above all Sir, in a General,


Be sure, who e're but you, had thus come home,
Had changd his Lawrel, for a Cypress Crown.



Sir, I confess my easie thoughts gave way,
To those desires which my heart do sway.
I've err'd, but Love to you caus'd the Offence,
That Passion with my duty did dispence.
My guilt alone from my affection grew,
Else I had faultless been, but not seen you,
A Happiness to me Sir, so sublime,
That if for it, I'm fallen into a crime.
I hope 'twill finde not strict severity,
If Love judge in you what it did in me.



With a Sons Name a slight excuse will serve,
Him in his Fathers kindness to preserve.
I look upon you, as my sole Support,
Receive this day the Honor of my Court.
The Roman Legate who does audience crave,
Shall see what confidence in you I have:
You Prince, this great Ambassadour shall hear,
And answer him, for you're indeed King here,
I'm but the shadow; my age craves no more
But Titles, for the Toiles I took before.
Which I e're long must likewise yield to Fate,
But yours is now the Interest of State.
Upon your self, then a true value set,
But midst your Greatness don't your Fault forget.
Which having made a Breach on Soveraign Power,
I to repair't, confine you to an hour.
After to morrow dare not to stay here,
Your Love by your obedience will appear;
And by example you will best maintain
Your power inviolate, when you shall Reign.
Go then, and by it to the people show,
Our greatest Subjects best know what they owe.



Sir, I'le obey, though the Command be hard,
Yet give me leave to ask this small Reward;
Since my late Armes have open'd a fair way,
That now with safety we may her convay,


And all Armenia for their Queen does wait,
Please to let me conduct her to that State.



The Conduct of a Queen so great and fair,
Becomes your Due, as you are Bithinia's Heir;
But e're that I can send her to her Right,
You know some Ceremony's requisite.
Whilst for her Voyage I things fit prepare,
Go to the Frontiers, and attend her there.



She without greater Equipage would go.



That Wrong to Majesty I'le never do;
But see, th' Ambassadour of Rome comes here,
Answer him first, and then we'l think of her.




Prusias, Nichomede, Flaminius, and Araspes,
Guard, Attendants.


Sir, e're I take my leave, Rome does command,
That I on her behalf make one Demand.
For Twenty years you to that Senate owe
For a Sons Tutorage, and you may know
By Vertues which his Education grace,
He in their Cares had not the meanest place.
'Bove all, he is instructed how to Reign,

Rome sais't and asks this Credence to obtain
From you, That as a Witness you esteem
Her Cares, you order now a Crown for him,
And you'l offend her Sir, if you appear
To slight, what she thought worthy of her Care.
Let me then to the Senate Tydings bring,
Where 'tis that you design he shall be King.



The Senates Cares for him shall never find
Me either, Sir, ungrateful, or unkind.
That he deserves a Crown I must believe,
Since Rome and you do that assurance give;
But Sir, you see a Prince his elder there,
By whose victorious Arms three Crowns I wear,
Who now a Lawrel at my Feet does throw,
Some Glory to such worthy Acts I owe.


To speak for me, let him the Grace obtain.



'Tis none but you Sir, can make Att'lus Reign.



Your Int'rest is most touch'd in this affair.



But to preserve yours, it shall be my Care.
What's Romes Concern? whence does the Senate take
Power, whilst you Live, and Reign o're your Estate?
Live Sir, and Reign, whilst Nature grants you breath,
And leave me then to deal with Rome, or Death.



We ought to have Respect for such good Friends.



Who shares in Life your States, your Death intends.
And of such Friends in Policy 




I'le nothing against that Re-publique hear,
To such Allies you should more Reverence pay.



Must I see Monarchs stoop to what they say?
Since Rome does for this Prince so much pretend,
Back Sir, to her, the mighty Present send;
If he to Govern does so well deserve,
He is a Treasure which they should preserve,
That he in time might that Republique grace,
Either ith' Consuls, or Dictators place.



Sir, this Discourse so much in scorn of Rome,

Not from your Son, but Hannibal does come;
That proud Abhorrer of the Roman Name,
Has fill'd his heart with Hatred and Disdain.



No, but he fix'd it as a Maxime there,
To value Rome, and not her Greatness fear.
He was my Master, which with pride I boast,
And when Flaminius does revile his Ghost,
He must know, he may do me Reason yet
For that dear Life, nor ought he to forget,
That by his Fathers Blood; that mighty Man
His Triumphs o're the Roman State began.







Do not the Dead revile!



Nor you by Contests me with Rome embroyl▪
Speak plainly to the King as 'tis propos'd.



Well Sir, since then it cannot be oppos'd,

  19Attalus must Reign, Rome has resolv'd it so,
And since what she wills, must for Mandates go;
If this dull World will stoop to such a Sway,
'Tis fit when she commands, Kings should obey:
But Sir, though Attalus a mind possest,
Brave as the Greatest, vertuous as the best;
Though he with all the Merit were endow'd,
Might grace a Throne, and make a Monarch proud;
Yet 'tis too much for you, Sir, to afford
Credit to it upon a Romans word:
If he such Vertue, and such Valour own,
They by their great Effects will best be known;
Give him your Army, let him try to do
That for himself, which I have done for you.
I'le lend him, Sir, if he think fit, my hand,
And gladly will march under his Command:
Let famous Scipio my Example be,
To justifie such a Lieutenancy;
Who when Antiochus was by Rome dethron'd,
The Orders of his younger Brother own'd.
The rest of Asia will to him afford,
Sufficient Employment for his Sword,
Where he may surfeit his ambitious Brest.




Rome into her protection takes the rest;
Nor must you, Sir, your Conquests there extend,
Unless you will her mighty Powers offend.



I know not what to this the King would say,
But I my self perhaps may Reign one day,
Then the Effects we of these Threats shall see,
Mean time, go, and those places fortifie.
Prepare my now resolved Designes to oppose,
And in good time your Roman Aids dispose;
And if Flaminius shall their Leading take,
I'le finde for him a Thrasimenes Lake.



Prince, you my Kindness by these Taunts abuse,
You should a Legate with more Honor use;
The Soveraign Power which does to me belong 



Command me either speak, or hold my Tongue.


I cannot say less for a King to those,
Who whilst he Reigns, would Lawes on him impose.



You offend me Sir,



Just as Rome Honors you.



Dare you with boldness your Offence pursue?



Why? should I, Sir, behold your States confin'd,
And Stops to my victorious Course design'd.
Should I stand still, and hear Rome threaten you,
And be so tame as not to threaten too?
But kindly thank the imperious Tongues, that dare
Restrain my Glories, and my Conquests bare.



Excuse those Heats from youthful Blood do rise,
Reason and Time will render him more wise.



Reason and Time opened my Eyes before,
And Age, Sir, will but open them the more,
If I had liv'd as Attalus has done,
And but imaginary Vertue known,
For what's without effects I must term so,
And that which does from admiration grow
Of mighty men, and Deeds does lamely teach,
'Tis Imitation must Perfection reach;
If then my thoughts like his, had ne're soar'd higher,
Than only Romes great Heroes to admire,
They still would leave me the Bithinian Crown,
As from all times due to the elder Son.
Nor would have so much prest my Brothers Reign,
Had not I taught your Armies how to gain:
But since by three Crowns joyn'd to yours by me,
Too great a Power they do united see.
'Tmust be divided, and a Blot so gay,
Makes this Prince too well bred Sir, to obey.
To weaken me that he their Turn may serve,
He more than Alexander does deserve.
And I must quit to make his Title good,
My Birthright or the purchase of my Blood.
Thank Heaven my Fortune's past, and those to come
Have cast a Cloud of Doubrs, and Fears on Rome.



You, if you please, those Mists away may drive,
But never think I my consent will give.
The Master to whose Rules I all things owe,
Did not, Sir, teach me how to stoop so low.



By what you say Prince, it may well be guest,
You han't for Glory fought, but Interest.
And all those great Exploits which you have done,
Make but the Father Tennant to the Son.
The King's at best but Steward of your Right,
You for your self, and not for him did fight;
If those Dominions gain'd him by your Hand,
Are not to be dispos'd at his Command;
Those Romans Sir, whom you so much despise,
When they fight, fight for Glory, not for Prize.

Scipio, whose Courage you extoll'd so high,
Having overcome Romes stubborn'st Enemy;
Claim'd not for all the Kingdoms he had won,
More than the mighty Name of African;

But Glory so sublime's not elsewhere known,
And such pure Vertue Rome can boast alone.
But Sir, as to those fond conceits of State,
Your Power, might Jealousies in Rome create.
Consult some graver heads, you'l quickly learn,
Your Greatness is too mean for her concern.
Respect unto the King does now restrain
My saying more, but think of this again.
Let less smoak from your Martial Fires arise,
And you perhaps may see with clearer Eyes.



When time this difference shall 'twixt us decide,
Perhaps you may not what I said deride.



Mean time, if you in fighting find such charms,
Press forward Sir, the Glory of your Arms.
For unto them no Progress Rome denyes,
But Sir, she always succours her Allyes;
If you don't know it, I give you this Advice,
Lest at first sight her Eagles should surprize?
But to the point all your ambitious Brest
Claimes as your Right, shall be by you possest,


Enjoy Bithinia, as it is your due,
Po•tus, Galatia, Cappadocia too.

That Birthright, nor that purchase of your Blood,
Shall not make Attalus his Title good.
But since you think they all to you belong,

Rome has not a Design to do you wrong.
A Crown is none of yours that Prince shall wear:
The Armenian Queen is still unmarried Sir,

Th' Occasion does the thing it self propose,
You are her Guardian, and of her dispose.



To make him King is this then the Design,
Without infringing any Rights of mine?
The Piece with very curious Art is wrought,
And long Intreagues have worthy Issues brought;
But since no Right to me you here afford,
As unconcern'd I'le answer but a word:
Only take Care that Princess treated be
Like to a Queen, press not on that degree,
Nor do in her the Rights of Crowns invade,
Or if you do, I'le perish in her Aid;
Know that no place can Laws to Soveraigns give,
But they're at freedom wheresoe're they live;
And in these Courts she's at her own dispose.



Is this all you to that Request oppose?



Yes Sir, that's all, save only that the Queen
Knowing what I can do, too sharp has been.



'Gainst her, Sir, in my Courts, what dare you do?



Sir, I could speak, but can be silent too.
Only once more advise you, if you please
To Treat Laodice like what she is:
'Tis I that beg it.




Prusias, Flaminius, Araspes, Guards, Attendants.


What! oppos'd too here?



This from a Lover is no Wonder, Sir:


That fiery spirit heightned by Success,
Hopes to her heart to hinder our Access.
We'l therefore seek that Passion to remove,
Kings Marriages are seldom made for love,
And I have Plots of Greatness, and of Fame,
Will quench Loves Fires, and blow out all it's Flame.



But loving him, she'l be capricious too.



If it should prove so, I know what to do.
But she's in fine a Queen, and that Degree,
Seems to require some Formality;
And though my Power o're her be absolute,
And might constrain, yet Prayers will better do't:
You first as an Ambassadour shall move
The Match, I'le second Rome; and if this prove
But to our Wish, 'tis better than Commands,
If not, she will be still Sir, in our Hands.
Come then let's go, and as this does succeed,
Take our Advantage further to proceed.






Prusias, Flaminius, and Laodice.


QUeen, since that Title carryes so much Charms,
It's Loss, methinks should give you some Alarms;
Power if abus'd is seldom long preserv'd;



This great Advice shall by me be observ'd,
And if I ever Reign, Sir, you shall see
The Practise of such Noble Policy.



Madam, to Reign you take but an ill way.



You may direct me if I go astray.



You slight Rome, and too small respects you give
Unto a King, under whose Command you live.



If you your Regal Power would better know,
You'l find I pay to both, Sir, what I owe;
If I as Queen receive Ambassies here,
I must as Soveraign before you appear.


Assume a Power which I cannot own,
And in your own Estates affront your Throne.
I them refuse out of Respect to you,
Honours, that in Armenia were my due.
There I might Romes Ambass•dour receive,
And with fit splendor him an Audience give,
Their Answer, as a Queen to his Desires,
Or as the merit of the Cause requires.
Here Sir, I can't the Mistery understand,
Out of Armenia having no Command;
For all that Heaven does me else where allow,
Is that I live and no subjection know;
Reign o're my self, and have in all aboades
No Soveraign, but my Reason, and the Gods.



Those Gods your Soveraigns by your Father gave
To me the Power which over you they have,
And you perhaps my one day understand,
W•at's a Kings Reason where he does command.
For proof of it, let's to Armenia go,
I'le bring you thither, but attended so,
That since you stand so much upon your State,
You must prepare to see it desolate.
Wars utmost fury through your Land shall Reign,
Dead •odies shall make Mountains of a Plain.
And Rivers flow with Blood that I will spill.



Losing my States, I'le keep my Glory still,
All those vast mischiefs wherewith you me brave,
Shan't make me subject, though they make me Slave:
My Life is yours, but not my Dignity.



This mighty Courage will reduced be,
When all these Miseries to a Head are grown,
And Attalus sits on your Fathers Throne;
Then, then perhaps, that Heart may stoop in vain,
To ask his Hand to seat you there again.



If of your War such base Effects you find,
There must be a strange Change wrought in my Mind.
But Sir, perhaps you cannot get so far,
The Gods will of my Fortunes have a care.


And raise a man who may my Cause defend,
'•ainst all these Powers which Rome to you can lend.



You build your hopes on my presumptuous Son,
But know that both of you to Ruine run;
Think of that, Madam, and resolve to be,
Either a Queen, or else Laodice.

For 'tis the last Advice I'le give to you;
Make Attalus King if you would Reign. Adieu.







Madam, in short, Vertues perfection.



Follow the King, Sir, your Embassy's done,
Once more I tell you, that whilst here I live,
I cannot an Ambassadour receive.



Madam, what I would say does proceed more
From one's your Friend, than an Ambassadour:
From one that of your Safety has a Care,
Touch'd with the Ills you for your self prepare;
And whilst I do make this my sole Pretence,
You may admit me say with confidence;
Perfection of Vertue does require,
Prudence should be the Checque of your desire,
That of our Interest we should take a Care,
Consider in what times we live, and where,
Else height of Courage in a Royal Brest,
Is but a bruitish Vertue at the best.
Which, (by false light of Honor guided) blinds
With its own Merits, the sublimest minds:
Leads Heroes to such a violent Course,
That they from Happiness themselves divorce;
Grasping those Ills, which they should have prevented,
They grow admired, onely to be lamented;
Only hereafter with vain sighs to say,
I had Right to Reign, but Passions crost my way.



Honor to me appears so fair and bright,
It cannot sure admit of a false Light;


Yet since 'tis out of kindness, that you do
Instruct me thus, as Friend I'le answer you;
And without asking by what jealous Fate,
You height of Honor prize at that low Rate;
I dare affirm you'l by experience finde,
Not brutish Vertue Mistress of my minde;
But such as will my Dignity defend,
And repulse those shall on it's Rights pretend.



Consider Madam, whom you do oppose,
The Wise, and Valiant, make not them your Foes
Which are too strong, but you a King incense,
Who makes increase of Rule his whole pretence;
Whose Army now upon your Frontiers lies,
Numerous, Strong, and skill'd in Victories.



'Tis true, he has a Potent Army there,
But such a one, Sir, as I need not fear;
'Tis true▪ 't has with Success and Glory fought,
But when the King shall think by whom 'twas taught,
He'l either checque those Threats of using force,
Or finde perhaps that he mistakes his Course;
And e're with it he does attempt my Throne,
Levy another to secure his own.



Though this were true, whilst in his Courts you live,
He'l force that Reason which you will not give;
He may do what he will, whilst you are here.



I, now you have said all that I could fear,
But out of my own Realms and in his Court,
Vertue 'gainst Tyranny may find support.
Sir, these Encroachments on the publique good,
Are by the very people understood:
They know Prince Nichomede, and know the Queen,
Her obstinate Hate to him is plainly seen;
They see the King to all her Humors bends,
And can as well discern his dangerous Friends.
But for my self, whose Fall you think so nigh,
No humor makes me Atta•us deny;
But will to spare these Scorns he must receive,
Though I to him the Stile of King should give:


I should regard him as a common thing,
One born to be my Subject, not my King;
My Vassals too, like me, would think him so,
And such Scorns generous hearts can't undergo;
'Tis out of Favour then I don't expose
Him, to such ignominious Slights as tho▪



Madam, if this be so, 'tis you that Reign,
And o're both Camp, and Court are Soveraign.
The King's but an Idea, and does bear
No Sway, but what you him in pity spare.
To receive Embassies is now your due,
Then as Romes Legate let me speak to you;
Or if that Name disgust you here, you may
Still as a private Roman, let me say,
That in these dayes the only way to Reign,
Is Romes Alliance, and her Aid to gain;
By it to Neighb'ring States, Kings can give Law,
Quiet their own, and keep their Foes in Awe.
No Monarch better does his Crown defend,
Than whom she graces with the Name of Friend:
By it is Attalus more King, uncrown'd,
Than those whose Temples Diadems surround.



I knew to what, Sir, this discourse would come,
Kings are not Kings longer than pleases Rome:

But if she have their Crowns at her dispose,
To Attalus she little kindness shows:
She with her Greatness does her self deceive,
Else she'l not beg for him what she might give.
Or if that Prince so much her Fav'rite be,
Why sends she him without a Crown to me?
Why for a Subject strives she thus in vain,
To move that heart, which would a King disdain;
Stoopt he to Rome, or suffer'd her Commands,
Sullye the Supream Power in his hands,
My Heart cannot my Glory, Sir, betray,
I scorn these Kings have learn't how to obey.
And since at large you see what my Thoughts are,
Spare for the future both your Threats and Prayer.



But let me pity, Madam, your Mistake,
And beg you yet would from these slumbers wake;
Think but on Rome, think what her Power can do,
Let your own safety change those thoughts in you,

Carthage destroy'd, Antiochus o'rethrown,
To be oppos'd she is too mighty grown.
Both Sea, and Land, unto her Mandates bow,
And of the World Rome is the Mistress now.



Mistress o•th' World! how would that Name affright,
Did I not know Armenia is my Right.
Did none to mighty Hannibal succeed,
Or he reviv'd not in Prince Nichomede;

Or had he not to him the Secret shown,
How your redoubled Powers may be o'rethrown.
That valiant Scholar of a Man so great,
May put his Lessons, Sir, in practise yet;

Asia by three Crowns gain'd, six Battels fought,
Has prov'd the Conduct which that Master taught;
But these were Stroakes he did for tryal show,
The Capital may fear his Master-blow.
And he one day 



That day is yet far off,
The Gods of Rome do at such threatnings scoff;
That God whose shade at Cannae did appear,
And fill'd your conquering Hannibal with fear,
But see the Mighty Arm that must become,
One day so fatal to the Stars of Rome.





Nichomede, Laodice, and Flaminius,


The Power Rome to her Agents gives is large,
Or in my judgment you exceed your Charge.



Sir, if I act more than I ought to do,
The Senate may exact the Account, not you.



Go then, and let my Flame the freedom gain,
After your State Intreagues to entertain


The Queen, whose thoughts perhaps suffer such force,
Under the mighty weights of your discourse,
That I the Expence of Time and Art must use,
T'expel those Maxims you would introduce.



The miseries ill plac'd Love might bring on her,
Made me for pity be her Counsellor.



Whilst you to pity her such Causes find,
You're an Ambassadour extreamly kind
But I must doubt those Counsels which you teach▪
Madam, what Treacheries did this Roman preach?







Sir, I should do so.



Yet to Ambassadors Respect you owe.
All Countreys to so sacred a Degree.



Boast not so much your Rank and Quality;
Who Counsels, is Ambassador no more,
He has renounc'd the Charge he had before 
Did he his Answer, Madam, yet receive?



Yes, Sir, and such as became me to give.



Then know, I prize you for no more than thus,

Attalus Agent, and Flaminius;

Or if you force me, I shall add to all,
The Poysoner of my Master Hannibal.

Behold what Honors you from me obtain,
If you'ld have more, go to the King complain.



Hee'l do me Justice, when I make't my Suit,
Or if he fail, yet Rome knowes how to do't.



You may of both go ask it if you please.



Prince, think what may ensue such wrongs as these.







That Counsel for the Queen had been more fit,
My generous Thoughts now to her hate submit;
These thoughts to which my Justice did appeal,
And made me long her murdrous Plots conceal.


Till forc'd by new designs, I now did bring,

Zenon and Mithrobates to the King;
Who knowing something will surprize his Ear,
He does himself their informations hear.



I know not what, Sir, the event may be,
But this proceeding's not approv'd by me;
Nor what should force you to 't I cannot guess,
The more the Queen should fear, she fears the less;
And still the more she is disgrac'd by you,
She with more fierceness will her Hate pursue.



Fain would she make my just Complaints appear,
The effects of my Resentments against her,
But that false Mask of Courage which she wears,
Shrouds but her Doubts, and does disguise her Fears.



Court Myst'ries are oft so close and fine,
We but at Random of their Aimes divine;
Whilst to defend me, Sir, you were not here,

Rome never did for Aitalus appear;
Nor to our Loves the least disturbance gave,
But now, whilst you but one dayes freedom have,
That day, and in your sight the Roman State,
Presses for an Alliance, which I hate;
So that there's nothing which I can perceive,
But urges you with speed to take your leave;
For whilst you still within their Pow'r remain,
Strange Throngs of Fears over my Spirits reign.
The King dotes on his Wife, Fears, Rome, and you,
By your Renown have made him jealous too.
I scarce dare think what I am forc'd to say,
There's too much Reason to expect foul play.
And you but I see Attalus appear,
What Projects, what Designs can bring him here?
Perhaps the search of me is his Intent,
If so, retiring I'le that Game prevent.




Nichomede, Attalus, and Laodice.


Madam, that converse was so sweet before,
Now mine is interpos'd, is so no more.



Your importunity that's so extream,
Me in my second self may entertain;
Knowing my heart my Spokesman he'l become,
And answer you as he has answer'd Rome.








If, Sir, my presence drives the Queen away
will retire 



No, no, Prince you may stay,
For I have something still to say to you,
I laid by all these Rights that were my due;
The Thoughts of being destin'd to a Throne,
Resolving to maintain my Love alone;
And did request you would attempt her so,
And nothing to the Kings, or Romes Aid ow;
But I must either think your memory's bad,
Or you make no account of what I said.



You force me ill, Sir to remember this,
Whilst yet between us nothing equal is.
'Tis true, you with some Rights of Birthright part,
But will you, Sir, give up the Princess Heart.
Those Vertues did create his Love, decline
And quit those Glories make you seem divine,
Six Battels gain'd, three mighty Kingdoms won,
The glorious Assault of many a Town.
Sir, with such Seconds, what can equal you?
Make then the Queen indifferent 'twixt us two,
Let her no more that Mass of Glory see,
Heapt on you by Success and Victory.
At once, Sir, let her from heart remove
Your mighty Deeds, your Vertues and her Love,
Or else 'gainst all that odds, let me prevail
To place the King, and Rome in t'other Scale;


You may by what already is obtain'd,
Judge there will little by their aid be gain'd.



Prince, this Excuse is very bravely fram'd
I see you han't lost all your time at Rome,

And if not Courage, have brought Cunning home.




Arsinoe, Nichomede, Araspes, Attalus.


'Tis the Kings pleasure, Sir, you him attend.







Yes, Sir, he sent me to that end.



Prince, calumnies are easily o'rethrown.



Madam, that Truth by me is so well known,
I wonder you instruct me in a thing
I never doubted 



Why then did you bring,
Swell'd with vain hopes which will your self ensnare

Zenon, and Methrobates from so far,



I was resolv'd the whole should be conceal'd,
And you have forc'd it, if it be reveal'd.



Truth forc'd it; and did o're your Gifts prevail,
Such Undertakings, Sir, do often fail.
They both said somewhat more than what you taught.



If you're displeas'd you that displeasure sought.



I cannot be displeas'd at what I find,
Save that it blemishes so brave a mind,
That to those mighty Titles which you had,
We must the base one of Suborner add;



Then to accuse you, they are subornd by me



Prince, mines the trouble, yours the shame will be?



And thus their Credit you would take away.



No Prince, I rather stand to what they say.



What have they said which your belief can gain?



Two mighty Words which will augment your Fame.



May not I know these words of so much weight?



The King expects, Sir, your Attendance straight.



From him you'l hear them, go know his command.



Madam, I now begin to understand


His love to you, chasing his love to me,
Will make you faultless, and me guilty be.
But 



What? continue what that But does mean?



Two weighty words which Ile think of again.



Those words of so much weight may not we know?



You'l hear them from the King, to whom I go.







My son, we Triumph; this great Nicomede

Begins to see how his Deceits succeed,
Those two Accusers by himself produc'd,
Which should to kill him, be by me seduc'd;
But to defame me were suborn'd by him,
Being startled at so foul and black a sin.
Both accus'd me, but did declare as soon
They to it by the Princes Gifts were won:
How mighty's Truth before the face of Kings,
It from the Souls dark parts, a secret brings.
That Presence does all Falshood soon confound.
They've lost their own, who sought my Fame to wound.



Madam, I joy to see such a Deceit
Has left your Glories yet more pure and great.
But put this Business to a closer Test,
And lay aside a while your Interest,
You'l less indulgence to a Humor give,
Makes you those Villains with such ease believe,
Their story twice this day has alter'd bin,
Subor'nd by you, and then suborn'd by him.
Against a man in whom such Vertues reign,
Such treacherous Souls should no belief obtain▪
A confess'd Traitor does not faith deserve.



You're generous, Attalus, and I observe,
That even a Rivals Glory's dear to you.



If I'm his Rival, he's my Brother too,
We're of one blood, and that blood in my veins,
Forbids me think him guilty of such stains.



And does that blood of yours forbid you less,


To think your Mother is a Murtheress?
Your Mother, whose Destruction must be sure,
Unless his Loss her Safety does procure.



If I 'gainst him such witness scarce believe,
To them 'gainst you I can no credence give;
But yet your Vertue that's above all Crime,
May let me keep for him a just Esteem.
His Glory has those jealous Spirits rais'd,
Which are best pleas'd when Vertue is disgrac'd,
Who with base acts (spur'd on by Envy) strive
To dark the Lustre of so fair a Life
For me, if other minds by ours be known,
Or we can guess of their thoughts by our own,
I must presume that I in him shall finde
The self same Maximes, and the self same minde.
With that great Rival I have fair play us'd,
Not sought his Ruine, nor his Fame traduc'd.
Those Aids I have, I did demand aloud,
And I think him with such brave thoughts endow'd,
That Glory onely his Designs inspires,
And but with Merit counters my Desires.



Intreagues of Court you never yet did prove.



Should Princes not like Princes treat of Love?



You treat and talk like one did little know.



Madam, I speak those Vertues Rome did show.



From time perhaps you will the knowledge gain,
What Vertues should compose a Monarchs Train.
Mean time, although that he your Brother be,
Think that you have a Mother still of me,
And to defeat what you of this conceive,
Come see how far the King does it believe.










ARaspes, bring the Prince 




Madam, those sighs which do my Bowels tear,
What need you thus with grief my Soul oppress?
Those Tears will nothing add to your Redress;
Nor is there need of them for your Defence,
Do I his Crimes doubt, or your Innocence?
Or in all I have said, what do you finde,
Should make you think that I can change my mind?



Ah Sir, what can repair those wrongs that be
Thrown on the Justest by base Calumny?
Virtue once charg'd with falshood, can no more
Be made so pure, so bright as 'twas before.
Still some reproachful mem'ry does remain,
Which to the brightest Glory brings a stain.
Whilst, Sir, Detraction harbours in your Court,
And People blindly would the Prince support;
Truth is too weak that Scandal to remove,
They'l think me freed from onely by your love;
And if the least Spot rest upon my Fame,
If your worst Subjects but suppose the same,
Can I deserve your love? or do these Fears
Concern too little then to merit Tears?



You're scrupulous, and do too much mistrust
A Husbands love, that knows his love is just:
Glory by Calumny becomes more bright,
And from its darkness gains a greater light:
But here's the Prince, and you shall see to day 




Prusias, Arsinoe, Nicomede, Araspes, Guards.


Pardon Sir, Pardon for our onely stay:
Pardon for Laurels are so fertile grown;
Pardon for the Supporter of your Throne,
Pardon 



For what Madam? Three Kingdoms won,
Which my death must devolve upon your Son?
For having so far prest your conquering Arms,
That even Rome has taken the Alarms:


For having too much Regal Power sustain'd,
For that Renown I through the world have gain'd,
For having with Success and Glory fought,
Following the Maxims my great Master taught,
If I want Pardon choose 'mongst these my Crimes;
I know no more, Madam, unless you'l joyn,
That Villains (by some others gain'd) betraid
My easie Faith to credit what they said.
That having a clear Soul free from deceit,
I wanted light to see into their cheat.
'Tis glory this, and not a crime for one
Who lives in Camps, where no Court Tricks are known;
Who scorning baseness, does not Thunder fear,
And knows no Stratagems, but those of War.



Sir, I recant: he cannot guilty be,
Loading me with eternal Infamy,
He onely does that common Hate obey,
Men to the odious Name of Step dame pay,
That Humour having in his heart took Root,
He does to me the strokes of Fate impute.
Does Hannibal his Master (having here
The Publique Faith) give up himself to fear,
And rather trust his Life and Liberty
To black Despair, than Hospitality?
Those Terrors which his doting Soul invade,
Are onely Plots by me before-hand laid.
Though he such Charms in Laodice espies,
'Tis I make Attalus see with the same eyes,
'Tis I the Aids of Rome against him gain'd,
And all that wounds him issues from this hand.
But though to blemish h'attempted have▪
That Master to revenge, that Mistress save,
All might be pardon'd in a Jealous Lover,
But I do something more in this discover;
'Twas not his Love that foster'd this Design,
That I'm your Wife, Sir, is my greatest Crime.
From that Name onely springs this Calumny,
For else, in short, what can he charge on me?


Have I since first your Armies he did command,
Deny'd th'assistance both of Voice and Hand?
Have I refus'd him that Renown was due?
And when he stood in need of Aids from you,
And might have perisht had they been delay'd,
Who better prest that necessary Aid?
Sent him quick Succors, both of Men and Treasur•▪
And to supply his Wants, made it my pleasure;
You know this, Sir, but see he does return
For all that I have done, Reproach and Scorn.
To rob me of your love, has scandal us'd,
But still in Jealous Lovers all's excus'd:
I say't again 



What answer canst thou make?



That the Queens goodness I must wonder at.
I will not say that with those Aids she gave,
By which she did my Life and Honor save,
And which with so much Pomp she does repeat,
She sought by my hand to make Attalus great,
And by this Arm of mine those Glories heapt,
Which this day tells us should by him be reapt;
By what she was to so much kindness wrought,
I leave to Heaven to judge, that knows her thought.
Those gods who heard the Vows she made for me,
Will of our Cause the best Deciders be.
Mean time, since the appearance is so fair,
She spoke for me, I ought to speak for her.
And for her interest, I must let you know,
In punishing two Villains, you're too slow.

Zenon and Methrobates ought to be
A Sacrifice to her wrong'd Dignity.
They both accus'd her first, and that scarce done,
They made her faultless, to accuse your Son;
But no way clear'd themselves, their death is made
Too just, for having thus with Greatness plaid.
Offences done to those of our Degree,
Can no way but by blood, repaired be.


For things unsaid, you cannot pardon give,
The Blot remains whilst the Impostors live,
And sparing them, you Royal Blood expose
Unto the malice of such Tongues as those.
Th' examples ill your Life in hazard lies,
If you let scape such spreading Calumnies.



How Sir, would you destroy 'um for that truth,
Which Heaven did suddenly put in their mouth,
That truth which does restore to you your Wife,
Cancels her Scandals, and secures her Life?
That truth which did your Sentence, Sir, suspend,
Whilst for my Int'rest he does this pretend?
You have no Cunning, Prince, no Court tricks know.



Leave 'um, and of your own Defence think now,
Purge your self of a Crime so base and low.



I purge my self, you cannot Sir, think so,
You know too well those of my Dignity
When they grow guilty, aim at things more high;
Their Failings like their Glories are sublime,
And with their Pow'r they do protect their Crime.
T' have rais'd your People, brought your Army here,
In an opprest Queens In'trests to appear,
Snatcht her from hence in spite of Rome, or you,
Or all that Attalus Rivalship could do,
And of their Tyrannies have stopt the course,
With all your own, and all Armenia's Force,
Had been fit Crimes for such a Soul as mine,
If I a breach of Duty could design.
Mean Spirits for Revenge use to defame,
And 'tis most properly the Womans Game.
'Gainst those Impostors then your Sentence give,
For my sake, or the Queens they ought not live.
At the last moment, men with Heaven make peace,
Truth best appears when Worldly Int'rests cease,
And those base spirits when about to die,
Perhaps may once more what they said, deny.







Pray Madam▪ the true Cause declare,
Why you should press so hard these Lives to spare;
Or let us think you fear, lest dying they
Might out of conscience some close Plots convey.



What hate than this Sir, can more cruel be?
Whilst I'de acquit him, he accuses me.
But Sir, perhaps my presence whets his Rage,
I by my absence may these Heats asswage,
And quieting a Spirit soar'd so high,
Prevent those Crimes at which he yet may flie.
I will not ask that Pity should procure
For my protection, you a Crown secure.
Nor do I seek my Attalus to save,
That he should half of your Dominions have.
If that your Roman Friends request it so,
I never did of their Intentions know.
They with their Pow'rs may favor still my Son,
But I shall need no Aids when you are gone,
I love too well Sir, not to follow you,
When in these arms you pay to Fates their due,
Upon your Tomb my Love's last Duty, Grief,
At once shall sacrifice my Tears and Life.







Yes Sir, when that time shall come,
Your Destiny and mine shall be but one.
Then since he never shall my Soveraign be,
What should I fear? what can he do to me?
All that I ask in favor of that Gage,
That Son, who does so much his hate engage,
Is that he may return to Rome, and there
Finish his days under that Senates care;
To whom you did commit his Youth, and be
A weak Remembrance of your love to me;
This Prince will serve you better than before,
When Jealousies shall wound his Thoughts no more.
And fear not Sir, though thus you Rome defie,
For all her Power his Valour is too high.


The Secrets of great Hannibal he knows,
From whom Rome did receive such mighty blows,

Africk and Asia yet admiring stand,
At those renown'd Advantages he gain'd
For Carthage and Antiochus. But now
I go Sir, and the liberty allow
To your Paternal Goodness, to improve
The tenderness of Nature, and of Love:
I must not longer in your Presence see
My self unworthily reproached be.
Nor would I move your anger against one
Who is your Valiant, and your Conquering Son.




Prusias, Nicomede, Araspes, Guards.


This in my brest does strange disorders raise,
Yet Nicomede, I cannot think thee base,
But let's yield somewhat to the Senates Prayers,
And strive to reassure the Queen who fears;
Passion for her, Affection pleads for thee,
I would not have this Hate eternal be.
Yet though I prize them, cannot in my brest
Cherish these thoughts onely to break my rest.
I would make Love, and Nature, of accord,
Father, and Husband be; and in a word 



If I may with you any credit win,
Be neither one, nor t'other.








Bravely that Noble Character resume,
Passions in Monarchs hearts should finde no room,
Father and Husband are respects not known
To a true King, who should regard his Throne,
And nothing more. Reign as you ought then, Sir,
And Rome will fear you more, than you fear her.
See but how she who dares to threaten you,
With apprehensions does my Loss pursue,
Hoping by losing me, strange things to gain,


Cause she foresees I shall know how to reign



Thus then ungrateful i'le thy counsel use,

Laodice, or my four Kingdoms choose.
'Twixt thee and Attalus thy King does make
This dividend, thou one of them must take
No longer Father now, but King i'•e be.



Were you as well King of Laodice;

And could with Justice such a choice propose,

I should ask time e're I my thoughts disclose.
But now to show my will to pleasure you,
Yet with respect not to offend her too,
I answer without frivolous delay,
To your intentions not to what you say.
To that dear Brother all• those rights transpose
And let Laodice be free to choose.
By that see which is mine.




VVhat fury makes thee for a woman blind,
Prefer'st thou her to all thy glorious fights?
To all thy valour to my Realm unites?
After such baseness, dost deserve to live?



I follow that example which you give,
Prefer not you a woman to that son,
By whom those Victories those crowns were won?



Do you see me renounce a crown for mine,



Do you imagine that is my design?
If to my brother what is yours I quit,
I nothing yeild having no right to it,
For what can I unto your Crowns pretend?
Till death shall to your Right and Reign give end.
Pardon me Sir the Harshness of the Phrase,
Yet Fate in fine does limit Monarchs days
Your people then, wanting a King, will see
And choose perhaps betwixt that Prince and me▪
Sir, our resemblance is not yet so nigh,
But dullest eyes a difference may espy.
And the old rights of birth have oft been known▪
To call an Exile back to fill the throne.


Or if your Subjects thoughts with yours agree,
Their's others brought under your yoke by me.
And though Rome still her jealousie pursue,

I can do for my self what's done for you▪



I'le take a course for that!



It may be done.
If to their Fears you sacrifice your son:
Else your Estates resign'd unto that Prince,
Shall not be his, when you are gone from hence
'Tis not in secret, that I this declare,
But speak it, that he may himself prepare.
He hears me now.





I shall know how to make his titles good.
And you 




Prusias, Nicomedes, Attalus, Flaminius, Aras•es, Guards.


If my affront this anger draws,
Sir you might spare it to so light a cause

Rome may receive it with resentments due
But I have Friends that shall appease her too.



I'le do her right, to morrow from this hand,

Attalus shall receive supream command:
I'le make him King of Pontus and my heir,
And for this Rebel who does so much dare,

Rome shall be Judge what his affronts deserve,
In Attalus stead, he shall for Hostage serve.
And to conduct him fit means shall be found,
So soon as he has seen his Brother crown'd,



And will you send me then to Rome?





Go, ask your dear Laodice from her.



I'le go, i'le go Sir, and shall there appear,
A greater Monarch then you dare be here.




Rome on your actions will true value set.



Gently ••aminius we are not there yet


The Journey's long, and you may be deceiv'd,
Things well begun are often ill atcheiv'd.



Away Araspes, double now his Guard.







Thank Rome, and still have this regard.
That as her powers are the springs of yours,
'Tis her support alone your power secures.
But Sir I now must your excuse desire,
(to Flaminius.
The Queens disgusts some comfort do require.
I'le therefore go but leave him still with you,

Attalus once more give Rome those thanks are due.







What value shall I on these favours set
Which for the highest Merit are too great?
Your kindness does so far all bounds surpass
It has for my ambition left no place,
Yet Sir I needs must say my Fathers throne,
Would not compleat my happiness alone,
That which most charms my spirit is that now,
The Armenian Queen may to my wishes bow.
The scepter which does make me worthy her 



Will not your passiion in her heart prefer?



Sir resolutions are not always one,
Our thoughts are oft chang'd by occasion,
Besides it was her dying Fathers care,
She should be spouse to the Bithinian heir.



She being Queen, that will's no order now,
Further then 'tis her pleasure to allow,
Besides what can she in a Crown respect,
Given in that Princes wrong she does affect,
In you who rob her of a Friend so dear,
And of his fall the only Authour are.



That Prince sent hence, to whom shall she complain
Who can gainst Rome, and us; her cause sustain,
For still I promise to my self your aid,



Cou•s•ls are different by occasions made


And to be plain, Prince i'le not promise it,



At this Rate Sir you do confound me quite
By Soveraign power I am out wretched grown
If I must loose your Friendship with my crown.
But I Romes justice wrong in doubting thus
Han't you her orders?





For that Prince whom she from his Cradle kn•w▪
But for the King of P•ntus must have new,



New orders Sir I cannot understand,
Why Rome should crush the work of her own hand
Unless she jealous of my power become.



What i'st you say Prince, what i'st you presume?



Only from you Sir I would comprehend
To what this unequallity would tend.



I would explain't and would recover you
From these destructive errors you pur•ue,

Rome courting for you the Armenian Queen,
Dispenc'd with Justice out of that esteem
She had for you, but since she does obtain,
You by more just and equal ways may Reign,
Glory does with her love to you dispence
And stops her acting further violence.
Then leaving that Queen to her own thoughts free
Your wishes must elsewhere directed be.

Rome will a sitting match for you provide.



But if that Queen consent to be my bride?




•Twil hazard yet Romes Glory, and appear
As if some artifice of hers i•• were.
Prince if my words can any credit gain,
You must endeavour to suppress this flame.
Or if of my advice you take no heed,
Stay for the Senates e're you do proceed.



Finding such coldness to such love succeed,

Rome lov'd not me, but hated Nicomede

And whilst to feed my Wishes she does Feign
Contrives my loss then when she makes me Reign.



Sir that my ansvvers may not be too rude,


To these essays of your ingratitude,
Follow your humour, and your Friends offend:
Your Soveraign now, and all things may pretend.
Yet since it is so fresh you can't disown
'Tis Rome which this day seats you in a throne,
Remember what the King but now did say,
You will be nothing when you loose her stay.






Was it thus Attalus thy Grandsires reign'd?
Wilt thou be King to have thy power restrain'd
By such a World of Masters? Ah I find,
Titles thus bought are irksome to my mind.
If for such Masters I must gain a Crown
'Twere better to be subject still to one,
And heaven has given him so great and brave
'Twere base to •light him and become Romes slave,
Then to the Romans let us boldly show
Living amongst them we their Maximes know,
That all they do they to some ends apply
And all their Friendships yeilds to policy
Then in our turn let us be jealous too,
And act for us vvhat for themselves they do.










TO fear this Rout, I see no reason vvhy
What's in a moment born, as soon vvill dye
If darkness does increase its noise, the light
Will dissipate the vapours of the Night.
Less does the peoples tumult me disturb
Then to see, thou canst not thy passion curb.


But led, by love so fruitless and so vain
Contemn'st not her, did thee so much disdain
Let that ungrateful from thy thoughts be chac't,
Now thou above her art by Fortune plac't;
It was her throne, not eyes, thou shouldst adore;
Reigning without her: love her then no more.
Offer that heart to more obliging chains,
Now th'art a King, Asia has other Queens,
Who would not scornful of thy sighes appear,
But pay those vows to thee, thou payest to her.



But Madam, if 



VVhy if she should prove kind,
Theirs danger in't not seen by love that's blind:
Assoone as of her Crown possest thou be
She will engage thee in her hate to me.
But Oh Gods! can her rage those limits keep.
Can'st thou in safety in her bosome sleep?
Thinkest thou that her resentments will not prove
The sword or poyson to revenge her love.
What is't a woman won't in fury do?



You with false arguments co•ceal the true.
The Senate who no powerful King would •ee,
Feard that in Nicomede they fear in me.
To a queens bed I cannot now pretend,
Unless I will our soveraign Rome offend,
And since by it my Interests I betray,
To keep her favour still I must obey,
Those profound pollicies I understand,
By which she hastens to the worlds command.
If any Monarch grows too great and high,
His ruine must remove her jealousie.
Who makes a Conquest gives a wound to Rome,

Which can't endure too great a power in one.
But alwayes thinkes just cause of warr appears
'Gainst those whose greatness may or'e shaddow hers.
They who of Empire best the rules do know,

•ill make us all things to their orders owe,
Their power or'e Kings to that vast height is grown


All stoop to them, while they depend on none,
Madam, too well I am instructed thus,
By th' fall of Carthage and Antiochus,

Least I be crusht like one of them, i'le bow,
And reasons which I can't oppose allow,
Fate this complyance from me now commands,
Since you give Nicomede into their hands,
That Ostage will secure my Faith or be,
A Lyon ready to let loose on me:



This is what I intended to advise
Bnt with this prudence you my soul surprize
These things may change, but let it be your care
To wink at Jealousies which useful are.







Sir is it not a conquest worth the pain
That from a Lover I belief can gain,
Make him with duty that fierce flame controul
And seat again his reason in his soul,



Madam, 'twere well such conquests to pursue
And make this people reasonable too
'Tis time their growing tumults to restrain
Or if you strive too late you'l strive in vain,
On a weak Bas•s you those Fancyes found
Make you believe they will themselves confound

Rome uses not commotions to oppose
With such tame Resolutions as those
But when to popular rage they'l sound retreats
That senate spares hot either prayers or threats
With resolution her affairs she steers
And from her seven hills drives her Mutineers.
Who would a horrible descent have made
If they had longer there regardless staid.
Left to the freedom to act what they please,
As you in this occasion give to these,



Since Rome does so, we'l to her rules submi•



Her great example doth authorize it?
And the King shall but now himself is here.




Prusias, Arsinoe, Flaminius, Attalus.


The whole design does now to me appear:
These Mutineers are by Armenians led,
And have declar'd that Queen to be their head.



I did at first that 'twas her plot suspect,



For all your cares she pays you this respect▪



Sir now the times necessity obey,
Think what to do, talk does but breed delay.




Prusias, Arsinoe, Flaminius, Attalus, Cleone.


Nothing can now the peoples rage withstand
Madam they with loud cryes the Prince demand,
And have to such a height their Furies born
His two accusers are in pieces torn.



Those victims paid unto the peoples hate
We with their Fury may our fears abate,
In those two Wretches blood, their hands being dy'd
They'l think the Prince is amply satisfy'd.



Madam if this disorder had no chief,

I should incline to be of your belief.
The peoples rage no further might pretend
But form'd designs have seldom such an end,
They press at what they have contriv'd before
The first bloodshed opens the way to more,
Fleshes, and hardens, does all horror ch•ce
And unto fear or pitty leaves no place.




Prusias, Flaminius, Arsinoe, Attalus Cleone; Araspes.


The tumult towards the Court sir makes such hast,
And your false Guards do quit their Posts so fast,

I dying may my Loyalty assure,


But cannot lo•ge• sir the Prince secure.



Lets go, lets go then to these rebels give
That head they seek to crown whilst wee'• alive
From off the battlements wee'l to them throw
That precious object which they covet so.







Yes yes; 'tis thus we ought to give,
And they who so demand, should so receive,



But sir you'l thus, these mutiners engage
To execute the utmost of their rage:
The Queen, Flaminius nor your Majesty
Cannot in any hopes of safety be.



What shall • to these Rebells then go down
And with their darling, yeild them up my Crown,
Theres but that choice: their power outmatching mine
I must my Scepter or my Life resign.



Though there were justice in what you propose.
Can you sit of that Princes life dispose?
The power you could pretend ore him is gone▪
He's now Romes hostage and no more your Son.
And though a Father have forgot him quite,
I must remember what's the Senates right:
Which taking of his life you must invade,
Of which • will be no abettor made,
My Galley's now lye ready in the port
And theirs a private passage from the Court:
If then my counsels can't this fall prevent,
To my departure first give your consent,
That thereby to the word it may appear,

Rome is more just then you, and less severe,
Expose not her to that contempt and shame,
To see her 〈◊〉 in her own sight slain.



Sir, 〈◊〉 speak what • think's fit to do?



Yes for there can come nothing ill from you



Heaven then to me, a sure device has shown,
To purchase Romes contentment and your own
Since sir his Galleys ready are to go,
He may with ease take home his hostage too.


The designs favour'd by the private gate,
But all things better to facillitate.
Show your self to the people appear kind,
And seem •o their desires to be inclin'd.
And thas amuzing them give time till he
With all their hopes have gain'd the open Sea,
VVhen if they force• the Court, and •iss the Prince,
Appear confus'd, say Rome has stoln him hence,
Promise your just Revenge shall pur•ue her,
And all that in it her assistants were.
Send after him with the approaching morn,
Flatter them with the hopes of his return,
And with a thousand Arts you may devise,
Still give advantage to the enterprize
How high so e're their transports now appear,
They'l attempt nothing whilst for him they Fear.
Or whilst they shall perceive all force is vain
Thus you assured safety may obtain:
But if they find him we must fly this state,
For at first sight they'l him their King create.
You think so I believe si•?




And think the Gods sent this advice to you.
Then this what better could contrived be?



It gives you glory, life and liberty,
Besides Laodice's still Hostage here,
So that we nothing but delays can fear.



Then talk no more let's follow the advice.




Araspes and three souldiers will suffice,
To guard him, numbers faithless oft appear
Ile to Laodice, and secure her.

Attalus where run you.



I go to try, one project to appea•e the••〈◊〉

'Twil add another to you• stratagem,



Think your concerns and mine are still the same
'Tis for your sake if • in danger be.



Madam, i'le perish or i'le set you free.



Go then the Armenian〈…〉•ee.







Must she who caus'd these harms unpunish'd be



No Madam, a fit punishment i'le find,
For the small Faults of her ambitious mind.



Speak you that punishment who know her crime



A small abasement will serve for a Queen,
To see her plots prevented may suffice.



Say rather that her rashness to chastise,
Scepters and Crown she does deserve to loose:



Great spirits seldom such revenges use,
When they have once o'recome they soon forget
And temperate bounds unto their anger set,



Those that believe you would be soon content



Heaven gave not me a soul more violent,



To raise up subjects 'gainst their Soveraign
To hazard Kingdoms to the sword and flame,
Into the Court to press their insolence,
Call you this Madam, little violence:



We're both mistaken, Madam, and I see,
VVhat I speak for you, you explain for me:
But for what touches me all cares are past
'Twas to serve you that made me hither hast,
Least Majesty might suffer something rude
From the inrag'd fury of a multitude,
Send for the King and Attalus that I

In them preserve the Royal Dignity.
VVhich else an angry people may assail.



Did ever pride o're woman thus prevail
You that the cause of these disorders were,
You that in my own courts my Captive are
You whose blood shall attone these crimes and be
A victim to affronted Majesty.
VVith confidence dare thus your crime pursue,
And talk as if I should ask grace of you.



Madam, whilst you thus obstinate appear,
You don't believe tis I that command here▪


That when I please you shall my victim be
Nor can this Tumult be a fault in me,
Your people are all guilty, and in them,
Justly these acts you may as crimes condemn.
But I'me a Queen and cannot be accus'd,
I• for my sa•ety • these Rebels us'd:
Since •ights of W••r did n•ver yet deny
Raising revolts against an Enemy
Who •o•s me of my spouse, I mine may call



I am so 〈◊〉, and what ere befall,
Be sure when ere these Rebels force the Court
That moment with your head you answer for't



You'l 〈◊〉 your threats, or on my tombe
Soon see a great and royal 〈…〉

But Madam, could you •o't although there were

Zenon and Mithrobates harbor'd here,
Think you my plots have bin so lamely fram'd
But I have likewise your domesticks gain'd.
Find out a man that would his life betray,
That's fond of dying, and hee'l you obey,
Yet o're Bythinia• pretend no sway,
Give me free passage to Armenia,

And that you may your own just power regain
Restore my spouse, whom you with hold in vain



That spouse of yours, you may towards Rome pursue

Flaminius has him, hee'l restore him you.
B•t pray make haste, you'l miss him else, for he
Is by this time at least a league at sea.



Could I believe't 



You may do't if you please.



Fly then those furies which my spirits seize,
After the knowledg of an act so foul,
All generous thoughts are bann•s•• from my soul
But rather as my hostage here remain,
Till with this hand, his freedom • regain,
I'le go and pluck him from the midst of Rome,

With all your subjects, and with all my own
At her own gates i'le give her my Alarmes,


Supported with ten hundred thousand armes,
My rage shall their her tyrannies subdue.



Then you'l in fine reign ore Bethinia too?
And in that frenzy does possess you now
The King must of your Regency allow.



Madam il'e reign, and yet not injure him,
Since he is but the picture of a King.
What need he care, who laws does here ordain
Or whether Rome or • for him does reign.
But see • have an other hostage yet.




Attalus Arsinoe, Laodice, Cleone.


Saws•• thou them Attalus make their retreat?











Ah Madam! what is done
Summes up all our preceding feares in one.
The Prince is scap'd.



Then Madam fear no more,
I'me now as generous as I was before▪



Does Attalus delight to affright me too?



Hope not so well, as to presume it so,
Wretched Araspes led by his ill fate,
With his weak guard no sooner reach't the Gate
Through which Flaminius had past to his fleet
But he fell wounded at the Princes feet,
And his few followers danted at that sight
Fearing the like fate took a speedy flight.



But who, alas! could wound him in that gate?



Ten or twelve soldiers who as guards did wait
The Prince. 



Ah son there Traytors every where,
Few subjects to their Masters faithful are,
But whence of this could you informed be




Araspes self did dying tell it me.
But hear what only causes my despair,
To joyn me with my Father I took care.


But all in vain for coming to the shore.
I saw that Monarch to his fears gin o're.
In a small skiff after the Roman flee,
VV•o was perhaps no less afraid then he.




Prusias, Flaminius, Arsinoe, Laodice, Attalus, Cleone.


No, no, beleive us yet too brave to fly,
Here we'l defend your gloryes or we'l dye.



Lets dye, lets dye sir, and not victims be
Unto the fury of an enemy.
'Tis better we of our own fate dispose
Then leave it to the Pleasure of onr •oes:



By this dispair you that great man offend
Much more then when you him to Rome would send.
Since in my breast he such an Empire hath
You should believe him worthy of my Faith,

I should disown him, had he not a mind
Revenge can't animate nor passion blind.
Did not in him all that is generous dwell,
But here he comes see if I know him well.




Prusias, Nicomedes, Arsinoe, Laodice, Flaminius, Attalus, Cleone:


All's quiet sir, my sight did soon asswage
The peoples fury and has balm'd their rage▪



Rebel in my own Pallace do'st me brave



Rebels a title I shall never have:

I come not here sir to reproach your hat•,
Like Captives grown prou• with their charge of state
Like a good Subject • bring that repose,
VVhich some ill interests sought to discompose:
Not that I would a crime to Rome impute,
She greatness follows with a close pursuit:
And her Ambassador did what he ought,
VVhen to divide our growing powers he sought


But yet sir don't admit him to constrain,
To make her fear, let me your favour gain
Pardon your people, too much heat and rage
In which their love to me did them engage.
Pardon those faults they necessary thought,
Faults which to you have peace and •af•ety brought
Forgive them you too Madam, and let me
A vow'd admirer of your goodness be.
I know what 'twas made you my foe become,
A mothers love would fain have crown'd her son.
I will my self assist in the design,
If you can yeild he take his power from mine,



more conquests Madam does afford,
And to crown him you may command this sword
Choose but ore what place you would have him King
And to his hands I will that Scepter bring.



Ah sir! why do you farther press this strife,
Y'ave in your power my glory and my life,
Can't your ambition their receive an end,
But you'l your conquest ore my heart extend.
Against such vertue there is no defence,
My brest to yield bleeds with impatience.
Joyn then this victory to three Kingdoms wo•

And I in you shall gain another son



Madam, then I yeild too, and must beleive,
My glories do in such a son revive,
But for this happiness which we receive
Man't we Prince know to whom our thanks to give



The Author of it would not 〈◊〉 be known
But took a pledge from me, which I must own
'Twas here he said it should restored be.



Sir if you please accept that pledg from me



By this brave action you best let me know
That in your veins, true royal blood does flow
You are no more th' ambitious sl•ve of Rome

But the Redeemer of a Crown become
Brother with my chains others off are throne,
The Kings, the Queens, Bythinias and your own,


But why conceal your self and save the state?
To see your vertue at the highest rate,

I thought against our injustice twould act best,
VVhen not by this weak service prepossest,
And I on one of us reveng'd might be,
If I had judg'd ill of what now I •ee.
But Madam




Tis enough I now divine.
VVhat was the stratagem you'd add to mine,
And sir my spirits pleas'd to see my Son
(to Nicomede
Has stopt that course of ill, I would have run.



Sir to be plain I think each generous mind,
Might happiness in your alliance find.
But with those Laws which Rome to Kings would give
We can't from her the stile of Friend receive,
Let us then have it free from servitude
Or Enemy will be a name less rude.



This I must leave sir to the Senates care
But thus much can with confidence declare,
That at the least Prince you'l find that respect
Such an Heroick spirit can expect,
And if the name of friend they can't allow,
They'l think to have found in you a worthy Foe.



Since thus our civil Jarrs composed are
To render thanks to heaven let us prepare
And that our happiness may firm become
Pray to the Gods to grant us peace with Rome.


The End of the Fifth and
Last Act.


