



Enter Podesta, Citizens; Scene the Podesta's House.


NOt Knight me? when he knew I was a proud Man, very
proud Man, oppos'd him out o'pride, and a Knighthood
might ha' bought me. He shall repent it.




Welcome home my Lord, I wish you joy of your new Honour.



Thank you Sweet-heart, I am glad I'm in a capacity to do my
Country service, but I'm sorry I can't do you the service you affect.



What's that my Lord?



Give you lasting Honour, The Title I shall bestow on you will
live no longer then a Grashopper or a Silk-Worm, 'twill dye at the
end of the Year, your present Title of Ladyship will then dye into an
Aldermans Wife, for I am not Knighted.











How dare they use you thus?















I was born well, and I affect Honour.



I know it, I know your spirit better then you do your self, and
am pleas'd with your affection to Honour, for Honour is an excellent
guard to Vertue, I know you are punctually just to me.



Am I? I think I am.



Out of a point of Honour I know it, scorning to appear what
you are not; not out of dulness and want of gayety you affect plea∣sures
and follow 'em.







Out of a point of Honour, to appear what you are, I know you,
know your temper perfectly.



So perfectly you amaze me.



Oh! I have a penitrating judgment, know your passion for Ho∣nour,
highly commend it, and would gratifie it if I could, but since I
cannot, I will give you a kind of Honour, Revenge. The methods you
must leave to me.



Give me Greatness, and do you keep Policy.







So, I have nurs'd the Wenn of his Vanity, till it has blinded his
Eyes, and made him mistake his affection for mine; what I really af∣fect,
he is never like to see, and that's only my dear Florio.





Your Servant Sir, I am much beholding to you, and the rest of
  14
my Breth•ren of the City for the kindness you shew'd me to day in re∣fusing
to be bound for me.



I'll answer you Sir, we resolv'd to go prudently to work, we did
not know but they might have laid Treason to your charge, so we re∣solv'd
to see whether they durst have Try'd you, and if they had Try'd
you, whether they durst have brought you in Guilty, and if they had
brought you in Guilty, whether they durst have Hang'd you, and if
they had Hang'd you then let 'em look to themselves.



And who shou'd ha' lookt to me then? a very fine busines•, come,
come, this was scurvy, but I'll stick to the cause whilst I have drop of
blood.





Ha• there's my delicate Mother-in Law, that ever such a curi∣ous
Appendix should be bound up with such a Volum•〈…〉
cover'd with Calves Leather, as that old Fellow is, I will t•a•her 〈◊〉
him, I'll be hang'd if she loves him; and as for Marriage-promises, they
are but Church-Mouth-Glue, they won't hold a couple together Three
Days.



Oh are you come Sir? well, what ha' you done Sir?








Sir? are you asleep Sir?



No, nor a •ed Sir, wou'd I were wi' your Wife Sir.




What are you ••areing on Sir? why don't you give me an Ac∣count
of what I sent you about? did not I send you to search the Ca∣thedral
for Arms Sir?







And what ha' you done Sir?



Sir, I have been searching searching searching 
Sir that Mother-in-Law 



Searching your Mother-in-Law Sir?



The Cathedral, the Cathedral I mean Sir.



S•rrah, you said Mother-in Law.



Why is not a Cathedral a Mother-Church Sir?



S•rrah, you said Mother in-Law.



Why is not a Cathedral according to Law Sir? I spoke jeer∣ingly,
and you k•ow we use to jeer the Church Sir.







Lord Sir, must I teach you the language of your own Family?



Well, did the Priests let you come in patiently?



Ay, ay, fiddle faddle a delicate Woman!




That's very strange, then they are not afraid o' me?



I hope shortly to leave never a Priest in Christendome, they call
themselves the Pillars o' truth, they are rather the Whipping-Posts o'
truth, and Sign-posts of Faction.



I'll handle greater people then they.



I must have this Woman, if Courtship won•t do, Love-powder
shall.




Come Sir, I'll try your understanding.



I am resolv'd upon Love-powder.




I can put the City in Arms, upon pretence of a French Invasi∣on,
but when they see no invasion, and the fright is over, how shall I
keep up that Army?



The best way will be by Love-powder.



How! keep up an Army by Love-powder? you impudent, ill∣manner'd
unnatural Rascal you, do you jeer your Father?



Sir, I don't jeer you.



Sirrah, you either jeer me, or which is almost as sawcy, did not
attend to what I said.



Well, I confess my Wits were a Wool-gathering, and I beg
your pardon Sir.



A Wool-gathering? a Whore-gathering by your story of
Love-powder, you sawcy debauched Fop you, when your Father con∣descends
to talk wisely to you of State-affairs, must your brains be
rambling after Wenches?



Wenches are •itter for me then State-affairs Sir; what a Duce
shou'd such a young Fellow as I trouble himself with State-affairs for?



Who us'd to trouble themselves and others too about State-af∣fairs
more then you Sir? were you not such a tempestuous disputer in
Coffee-houses, that as soon as ever you appear'd in one, both sides wou'd
run away, our Friends out of envy, and our Enemies out of fear.



'Tis my case, no Man will sit by me in a Coffee-house.



Were not your Writings like so many Fire-drakes? no Printer
wou'd meddle with 'em, no person come near 'em.



His things are very near my Stile, and I am forc'd to Print all my
things at my own charge.



And now Sirrah, all o' the sudden, you are unfit for State-af∣fairs;
come, come Sirrah, you are a Villain, have turn'd Cat in Pan;
and are a Tory.



A Tory? that's a good one, when I'm now Writing an Answer
to Absolom and Achitophel.







Tis true indeed, he read part of it to my Maid last night.



He did indeed Madam, and 'tis very fine.



May be that puzzles his Head then.



Nay, if it be so, I shall not be angry with him, for o' my Word▪
a good Answer to that wou'd do us service.



And 'twill require pains.



It will do so, if he employs his time and thoughts so well as that▪
I shall be very well satisfied; what do you call this Poem?







A very good subject.







Is not this a strange thing now, that you who are no Poet, not
understand Poetry no more then a Cat, should lye insulting o're a Man
o' sence, when he is breaking his brains for the service and honour of
you and your party?



Well, well Craffy, I did not know it, I did not know it.



Not know it? then you shou'd not meddle with that you do
not understand, I must break my sleep, and spoil my stomach in study∣ing
to do you service, and be call'd a Villain and a Tory?



Well, well Child, I am sorry, I am sorry.



Sorry? what does your sorryness signifie? suppose your vexing
me shou'd make me Write but a sorry Poem, as twenty to one but it
will, and so I'll go burn what I ha' done, and there's an end.



















No, prithee Child, let me see what thou hast done, and finish
the remainder.







Prithee do now, 'twill joy my heart.



I say I won't.



This it is to breed our Sons Wiser then our selves, we are des∣pised
for our pains.



Look, if he has not made his good Father weep; are not you a
cross-grain'd ill-natur'd Fellow to make your old Father weep? what
if he be not so good a Poet and Schollar as you, he has as good natural
parts, and better.



He is ungrateful to me, for what learning he has, my purse paid
for; but I alwaies find over-much wit and learning make people inso∣lent,
and when alls done, a Fool's a better comfort to his Parents, then
one of these great Wits.



Go fetch the Poem, and be Whipt to you.



Do Mr. Craffy, 'twill obliege your Father and me both.



Will it obliege your Lor'ship Madam? to do that I'll run a
Thousand Miles upon my bea• Head, Madam.





I'm glad he pays so much respect to you, Sweetheart, though
he will pay none to me.



Yes, yes, he will, but great Wits are humour some.



Nay, the Boy has excellent parts, that's certain, but when all
done, tis but a folly to breed Boys up to this heighth, for it does but
spoil them, and all business, for they will be a top o' bus'ness, riding
upon old Mens backs, and so the old Men go lamely, and the Boys ride
madly, and the bus'ness goes awkardly.



Now shall I be wedg'd in, between the old Fool and the young,
by the heavy Beetle of this Poem, and have no opportunity with my
charming Florio, when he comes I'll lay away the Beetle;









Did not you say Craffy fell asleep last night in reading his own
Verses, and when he wak'd, forgat 'em in your Chamber?







Run quickly and bring 'em to me.





Oh! how do you good Mr. Florio?



Thank you good my Lord, the better to see things go so well,
that you are chosen.



Oh! we carried clearly.



Ay, so my Chaplain Dr. Sanchy said, who I think labour'd for
my Lord.



Ay indeed, he took great pains, there was scarce a Man appear'd
'gainst my Lord, that he did not call Rogue and Rascal a hundred times.



He is a zealous Man, and so seldome calls any Man by his Chri∣sten
name, that he is suspected to be an Anabaptist, and against Chri∣stening 
Oh! dear Madam, is your Ladyship here? when I came
into the Room, I saw a Lady, and turn'd my head aside, as my usual man∣ners
  18
is when I see Women, for they ha' been no good Friends o' mine,
and so I did not mind your Ladyship, I beg your pardon.



Oh! it needs not Sir, I am very glad to see you look so well.



Ay truly, Mr. Florio looks very fine and fresh ruddy and plump,
methinks I have hopes of him; what says your Doctors Sir?



Alas! my Lord, they have given me over long since, all my
trust is in an incomparable Nurse.



Pray who is she?



As you came along my Lord, you might ha' seen her ty'd by a
Rope to my door.



Ty'd with a Rope? what is she a mad Woman?



No, no, my Lord, a Cow, my Lord, a Cow.







Ay my Lord, ha' not I mannag'd my self well, to bring my self
from one of those they call one of the Wits of the Kingdom, to be one
of the Calves, and live upon the breasts of a poor Beast, for thence I
have all my subsistence.



Alack! yet your Face says you are as well as ever you were in
your life, I protest it does.



My Face is as false as ever my heart was, it might have more in∣nocence,
for it is scarce two Months old, I mean the Flesh of it.



Is it possible, I warrant if you were to begin the World agen,
you would have none of the mad frolicks you had?



I think I should not, I laught once at mad Fellows that in drun∣ken
frolicks eat •ire, but was not I more mad to belch Fire at Heaven
it self, as I have often done in my abominable talk? but what did I get
by it? he threw it all back agen in my Face, and almost consum'd me.
Man is a shallow Animal, can bear no excess, too much Wit makes him
as mad as too much Wine, and a little over sets him; yet he thinks his
silly Scull contains all things, rules all things, and Omnipotence it self is
afraid of that pittiful Engine.







When all that the most hot-brain'd Fellow in the world can do,
is to make a smoak to darken things, he can't strike Fire enough out of
himself to light him into the nature of a Fly. But 'tis time we went to
Prayers. Doctor Sanchy.









Good Doctor give us a few Prayers.



Ay if you will.



My Lord being a Magistrate, I think Doctor you must read the
Prayers of the Church.



I'll see 'em burnt first, and all Priests hang'd, before I read any
of their Prayers.



The Law commands i•.



Therefore I won't do it, I'll be commanded by nothing, and do
nothing I'm commanded.



For matter o' Law, we can easily come off, no body dare indict us.



But for matter o' Conscience.



Hang Conscience, I do it out o' matter of Honour, and matter of
Revenge, the Priests are Rascals and slight me, and I'll slight their
Prayers.



We shoul'd not be humoursome in our Prayers Doctor.



I'll do what I please, or I'll do nothing.



Pray let him, for we are all oblieg'd to the Doctor for the as∣sistance
he gave my Election.



He had need of it, there was a damn'd Company o' Rogues ap∣peared
against you, I hope to see 'em all hang'd.



There was one great Man.



A great Rogue, he deserves to be burnt.



There was a great lady very busie.



A great Whore, she deserves to be whipt, I hope to see all such
Rogues and Whores whipt out of the Kingdom; but come let us go to
Prayers.





O the Devil, the Devil!







I ha' lost my Hushai, I can't find it high nor low. Who saw my
Hushai?



What the Poem that you read to me, that was an answer to Ab∣salom?







I had rather ha' lost ten pounds out o' my own Pocket.



Then do you like it Doctor?



'Twas an admirable thing! 'twould ha' made the Rogue that
writ Absalom hang himself; look about for this Hushai.



Won't you go to Prayers first Doctor?



Hang Prayers! this is a thing of forty times the consequence we
may pray at any time, or if we never pray at all, 'tis no great matter,
it is but a thing of form to please the people; look for this Hushai. I'll
look for't my self.





Who the Devil has got my Hushai?




Is Mr. Craffy here?



Well Sir, what wou'd you have?



I come from the Club, they stay for you Sir.



The Club be damn'd, I can't come, I ha' lost my Hushai.



What Club is it?



The Club o' young pollitick Whigs, you know 'em.



Oh Craffy, you must go to 'em, they are all persons of Quality.



What care I for their quality, they are but a company o' young
Coxcombs, I won't loose my Hushai for 'em.



Sirrah, you are a sawcy fellow to call young Men o' their parts
and quality, Coxcombs, they are admitted into better Company then
yours Sir.



Ay, to help to pay reckonings, flatter an old Knaves vanity,
and give a Guinny to the burning of a Pope.



Sir, some of 'em have had the honour to sit in great Caballs.



I wonder they cou'd.







Because some of 'em were so lately whipt at School for Block∣heads.
I wonder they could sit any where, they have the marks of Fools
both before and behind, and if ever they speak, the mark's in their
Mouths.



I don't like this Fellow.



Sirrah, I now begin to suspect you agen for a Tory, and get you
to 'em, or I'll not onely Cudgel you, but disinherit you.



Take notice if I go to 'em, I shall be very drunk.



I care not if you be in such company as they are.



Your Wise's Honesty may pay for't, for I shall be very
impudent when I am drunk;

look all for my Hushai.









So, we are rid of one Fool, cou'd we have
as good luck with the rest!






What is become of this Hushai, some conceal'd Rogue has burnt
it out of Envy.




Doctor you must come to the Coffee-house.







Ay, to a person of quality.



That person of quality is a Coxcomb, and you are a sawcy Ras∣cal;
must come?



'Tis the lame Lord.



He is a Rascal.







Oh! then I'll come, but look all about for this Hushai.



Do so, and let me have an account
of it when I come home.




Are you a going abroad my Lord?



Yes Sweetheart, and shall not come home these three hour,
Mr. Florio, you'l excuse me, I leave you.



Oh! good my Lord!
Exeunt Podesta, Brick-layer, and Citizens.
Ha! rid of all my diseases at once!
I mean my Fools, and left alone with my health! my Rosaura!



My life! my Florio!









My Husband! faint, •aint in my arms, help, help, help.







Mr. Florio is fal'n into an Appopleptick Fit, and dyes in my arms.



Alas poor Gentleman! who there?

help in with your Master, and call a Doctor, I'm cruelly afraid he'l go
away in one of these Fits.






My Lord, here's an old Counsellour, Bartoline, lighted at your
door, and is coming up to speak with your Lordship.



This old Lawyer is a strange Fellow, he is very old, and very
rich, and yet follows the Term, as if he were to begin the World.



He has lost all his Teeth that he can hardly speak, and he will be
pleading for his •ee; but he's of our side, and so we must not speak a¦gainst
him.





What pretty Country Creature's this! I cannot but venture in∣after
her; the Podesta's House is publique, and so I shall not be taken
notice of.



Where's my Lord Poshta? hah! where ish he?



Here, here, old Friend, do not you see me?



No, said my eysh are none of the besht.



You follow the Term still?



Ay, and will ash long ash I live, yer'sh no caush wi'out me.



How can you follow all Causes?



Ye'y follow me, ye'y will ha'me.



What young Gentlewoman ha' you brought with you here 〈◊〉



One I may be asham'd on shesh my folly, yat ish cho shay
my Wife I ha' playd ye fool, and Married a young Garle.



Thy Wife? if thou beest her Husband, thou shalt be my
Cuckold.




Welcome to Town Madam.







Ish she not pritchy? you shee I have a shweet chooth in my
head shtill.



Sweet Tooth? you ha' never a Tooth in your head.



Yatsh chrue, but I'll bite for all yet wr' my Wit.



Why would you Marry such a young thing as this?



A Man of fourscore be so fond? he, 〈◊〉.



A Man of foashco yersh no shuch thing, ye are Boysh or
foashsco if you will, after 'hreeshco we ought cho go in long coa•h,
for breechesh are imposh churesh and preechen• cho that 〈…〉
I believe my Lord Poshta you are behind-hand wi' your 〈…〉
ash I, I believe sho hah!



Though I be, I shall suffer no disgrace.



How do you know yat?



Because I married a vertuous Woman.



A vartuoush Woman? why sho did I for ought I kno
may be bo'h mi•hchaken.



No, I am never mistaken.



Oh you'r a happy Man, I ha'no shuch confidentsh in a Woman
I declare it before my Girlesh faish, I'll wash her wachersh.



Do if you please.



And for yat reashon I have brought her hither, deshire you tho'
let her be in your housh; yoursh is a shivil Family, and here she'l have a great yeale of good company, yat will chake off her fanshy from go∣ing
abro•d and playing ye foole.



So, •ow I shall know where to find her.




What wou'd you h•' me keep a Boarding-house?



What do you shtand upon sheremonyesh with an old Friend
fo•• you and I have known one anoyer fortchy years, and when y'are
in bed with your Wife, yersh shome'hing about you dosh confesh you
cho be old. Come, if you'l let me be here, I'll give your Wife a Jewel,
and you a peish o' Plate, and I'll pay a good rate beshidesh; what chay
you cho y'ish now, Huh?



With all my heart.



Will my Lady conshent? for I believe de Maresh de letcher
hoish.



My Will is hers.



I wou'd know 'yat of her.



She is busied now in a work of Charity, about a poor Gentle∣man,
that's faln in an Appoplectick Fit, I don't know whether he•l re∣cover
it, if he does, he can't live long, he's in a deep Consumption, I
shou'd be sorry to loose him, though in point o' Money, I should be a
gainer by his death, for he will leave us a very good Legacy.







Yes, for he's a rich Batchelor.







No kin at all, but he has a great Friendship for us because we
are a strict sober Family, and he is a mighty Religious Gentleman.



Oh! I know this Religious Rogue, 'tis Florio.




Will he leave you money, becaush you are shober? huh!



You must know he was a great follower of naughty Women,
and now he feels the sad consequence, and has a great value for Ver∣tue,
and I believe will leave my Wife a great part of his estate, because
she is a vertuous Woman.



Do you hear Girl? you are fal'n incho a brave housh, where
you may get money by Vartshow and Shobrietchy; Come, my Lord,
what will you have, I'll pay you any rate, Come.



You and I will not fall out.



Ha! is he a providing a Florio for his Wife? I'll provide him a
Florio. By good luck I have an Indian-Gown and Cap at the door, just
new out of the Shop.





What ish yish Gentlemansh name?







Oh! y're ish shuch a Man; I never shaw him, but I have heard
of him, a great debosh, wash he not? and a good witshy Fellow.



Oh! a very witty man, and a wicked man too once, but now
the most penitent creature in the world, and he had need be so, he is
going out of it, he cannot live many Months.



Alash poor man, and when he dyesh he'l leave all hish money to
Vartuoush people will he? huh.



Yes, he says 'tis sowing Seed in good ground; well •ha• some
occasions call me away, you may be here if you will, old acquaintance.



Ay, let him, let him, and come away about your business.




Hark you, hark you! Sho, yish wash very lucky, Girl you mush
make it your buyshnesh cho get iucho yish Genklemansh favour by
your Shobriechy, and you may mump my Lady Poshta of hish Eschate
for oughteh I know.


led by Two Servants.


I grow weaker and weaker every day, my time draws on, Hea∣ven
prepare me for my Change, yet I'll use the means to live. Give me
my Milk.



I my Consciensh, yish ish de Genkleman!



Give me my Milk I say you Rascals: what have I said? indeed
I shou'd not call any thing out of it's name, I ask your pardon for it.



Ah Sir! ask your poor Servants pardon?



Ay and thank you too, if you will give it me. I was so accust∣om'd
in the days of my wickedness to Libell every thing, I cannot
leave the ill habit still.



Ay, yish ish he, yish ish he sharchainly.



Truth is, Atheism is nothing else but a Libell on the whole Cre∣ation,
calling it the Off-spring of paltry Chance, when 'tis the Child
of Heaven, that I ought to ask pardon of every Dog for detracting from
his discent; But give me my Milk, and set me a Chair to repose my sel•,
for I am very weak.



Alack! alack! yish ish de poor Gentleman; But what a 'hing it
ish y'at yish young Fellow shou'd bring himshelush inchoshuch a shad
condition: let me she how he looksh!

Puts on his Spectacles, and looks on Artall, whilst Artall
holds the Pot to his Nose.


Certainly this handsome sick Gentleman is the •ine unhappy
Mr. Florio, I have heard so much talk of, a thousand pitties such a
delicate Gentleman shou'd bring himself to this!



He looksh very white odsha' me 'twash the white
potch ay 'twash the potch, and he looks very rudgy, but men in yat
g••t will do sho, ay yey will do sho.







Oh! now I am shachishfyed, 'tish he.



How hast thou brought on this Youth all the Infirmities of Age?
my eyes are dim, my breath is short, my Limbs are weak, Limbs did I
say? I have none, at least of Heaven's making: I have Imbezell'd all
  25
the Furniture of my Soul and body in vice, though Heaven gave me
an excellent House-keeper to look to it all, a careful wakeful Creature,
call'd a Conscience, which never slept, never let me sleep in ill, but I
abus'd her, sought to turn her out of doors, nay, Murder her, but cou'd
not.



I prochesht yish ish very shad.







Asham'd of her I was, and to all my Atheistical Companions
deny'd her, at the same time she star'd me in the face; 'Tis the Athiests
trick to hide his Conscience as the Tradesman does his Wench, for
fear of spoyling his Credit, and loosing his Traffique with those ill
people, who will not come near him if he owns so scandalous a thing
as a Conscience.



I swear he almost makes me weep.



Why chruly I am chroubled, and I don't ushe cho be sho.



But ala! let him hide her for a time, when diseases and death
come and shake the building in pieces, as now they do mine, the poor
foul Conscience will appear through all the Rubbish, and call out mer∣cy,
mercy, when it may be 'tis too late; thank Heaven for the fair
warning I have had; Is my Coffin ready?



Dear Sir, why does your Honour think of a Coffin? 'tis time
enough to talk of that forty years hence.



Oh! prithee don't flatter my craz'd body, I cannot live, I hang
on the Eves of life, like a trembling drop, ready every minute to fall
and be seen no more.







Oh! dear, and please your Honour, here is company, I
doubt your Honour intrenches on a Gentleman's Chamber?



Heaven forbid! where is the Gentleman? I beg your pardon
Sir a thousand times; my good friend the new Lord Podesta, you know
Sir, is a sober, discreet, frugal person, hates the vanity and prodigali∣ty
of splendid House-keeping, and so I suppo•e, may content himsel•
with a part of this House, and oblige a friend with the remainder; if
you be the friend, I beg your pardon Sir, I wou'd ha' gone up higher,
but truly I wanted breath.



Why chruly, you shay chrue Shir, my Lord yo'sh oblige me with
part of hish housh, which part, or the whole housh, if it were mine,
shou'd be at your shervish, good Mr. Florio.



Do you know me Sir?



No Shir, but I have heard mush of your great partsh, and my
  26
Lord Poshto chellsh me what a good man you are, and I have heard
it choo wi' my own earsh.



May I crave your name Sir?



I am call'd Barcholine Shir, I am a Fellow pritchy well known
among Lawyersh..



The famous Counsellor Bartoline?



I have some Repuchation in y'at way Shir.



I am glad to know your Sir, I think I see a young Woman
there, very young is she your Grand-Child Sir?



Why chruly Shir, I am almosht asham'd cho chell you she is
my Wife.



Oh dear! wou'd you Marry one so young Sir?



I wanched a comfort for my Age Shir.



And she wants a comfort for her Youth, Heaven that made both
Sexes, wou'd have both provided for, can pou provide for hers?



Whatch I want in Provisionsh I make up in a heartchy Wel∣come hah!



But will that suffice her?



It may in chime, cushtome ish a great matcher, I have obsher∣ved
lushty Sou'dies by custome got cho dine and shup very comfor∣chably
on a pipe o' Chobacco.



But they steal many a good bit that no body knows of.



Why chruly she may Shir, but not if she be honesht.



Many an honest Parishoner follows private Meetings, because
he finds no comfort from the Parson of the Parish, but she seems a ver∣tuous,
modest, young Lady, and I wou'd pay my respects to her in a
salute, but I fear my breath may offend her, pray excuse me to her Sir.



Oh! good Shir, well shir, she and I are cho chaken with the
discourshesh we have heard fall from you, y'at we are exshtreamly de∣shiroush
to be frequently wi' you Shir.



Alas Sir! I am unfit for company, my good Lady Podesta indeed
will fit by me half a day here, as by a murmuring Brook that slides fast
away, and soon will be dryed up for ever, and she is content to hear
my little purlings.



Ay yey are very well ingeed Shir, very well, and you wou'd
much obliegsh ush, my Wife wantsh shuch good company, shesh a
•oung creature, yat never in Chown before, and yos'h not know the
World Shir.



Is it possible! sweet Madam, you are fail'd into a dangerous
Gulph which few young Ladies pass without casting away their Repu∣tations,
  27
or Honestys, or both; I have been an Admiral here, and you
see to what I am brought!



Well Shir, affairsh call me away, I'll make bold cho leave you
chogether Shir.



She will be weary of me Sir, for I am weary of my self.



No ingeed Shir, she chaksh great gelight in your dishcoursh,
pray letch her have it Shir, I'll rechurn presently, wheegle him, dee
hear? wheegle him, you may get a good Legashy.













My Perriwigg and Love Aquipage, quickly.



How now! what's this?



An Adorer of yours fair creature, no unsound, false, wicked
Florio, but a sound, young, vigorous, passionate Lover, if you will
not believe my tongue, believe my Nose, the patch covers wholsome
flesh, believe my Leggs, which leap, vault, and run, except from you
sweet Creature.



I am betray'd! drawn into a Snare (but 'tis a sweet one (aside)
help! help! help!



I need no help my Dear.



But I do, help! help! help!
Oh 'tis a lovely Gentleman! (aside.) help! help!
'Tis a delicate Gentleman! (aside.) help! help!



Why do you call so loud? I can help you to what you want.



Help, help! will you force me? (I can't resist him, (aside.) help!
help!



All this is to no purpose.



Oh fie upon you, what a Man you are? A handsome Man I
mean, (aside.) I am out of breath with striving, help! help! Oh my
heart pants! help! help! help!







Enter Artall and Lucinda; The scene continues.


OH! Fie upon you! fie upon you, was ever vertuous Gen∣tlewoman
serv'd such a trick before?



Oh! frequently, scores of 'em are serv'd so, every Easter- Term.



What, Women that are as vertuous as my self?



Ay, full as vertuous.



O Lord bless us! what a place is this! I did not think there had
been such a place, nor such a Man as you in the world, I shall never en∣dure
to see you more.



Do not say so.



No, never as long as I live.



You'l change your mind.



Never whilst I breath.



Yes when I come next, mean while I am your humble Servant.



Your Servant dear Sir.



When shall I wait on you again, Madam?



When you please Sir, I shall at all times be glad of your good
Company.



Your Servant dear Madam.



Your Servant dear Sir.






Wher'sh my Wife, and poo Mishte Florio? huh! where are
yey?



Here's your Wife, but poor Mr. Florio is gone away very ill.



Were you not weary of him? huh!



No indeed, I cou'd have been with him all day and all night.



I doubt you dishemble.



Indeed I do not.



I doubch you had rather been at a Play, or shome other Di∣verchishment.



I swear I had more pleasure from him, then ever I had from
any Divertisement in my life.



Well, be good whilsht I live, 'twill be the betcher for you when
I dye, then I shall leave you Rich enough cho chake your choish of
young handshome Coxshcombes.



Do not tell me of young handsome Coxcombs.



You won't Marry I warrant when I am gead? no not you? a
'housand to one, you will be Married before, nay, I dare hold chenne
pound you are Conchracted now?







Nay, not by a Preish, but by looksh, and shmirkeh, &c. twisch∣ing
of Eye-beamsh, and making a Wedging-Ring of the fine round
  29
mou'h and yush, I believe you have promish'd your shelfe cho a
'housand foolsh.



You wrong me extreamly.



All ye betcher, I'm shure I shall disherve your kindnesse, for
I am labring cho make you a rich Widgow; The Tearme won't lasht
a mouth, and I ha' more breviatsh and Papersh putch incho my hand
shince I went out, yen I can read in 'hree monh'sh, I'm shure on't.



And what must become o' your Clyents Causes?



I yont care, I know what will become o' yeir Money; I'le lock
it up preshently, all for you, gi' me my Papersh, come let me shee

Oh! among other 'hingsh heresh a buy shnesh in which my Brothersh
Neck'sh conshern'd; He ish 'hirchy years younger yen I am, yet he
ish old enough cho be Wiser; He hath play'd de foole and killg a man,
and ye Widow bringsh an Appeale, in which it sheemsh yere arishesh
matcher of Law my Brother shendsh me chenne poun' cho rechaine
me, ye Widow shendsh me twenchy, sho I follow ye poore Widyowsh
buyshnesh, I am for ye poore Widow, I.



Will you Hang your Brother for ten pound?



You shou'd ashke me if I wou'd hang him for chenne shillingsh,
yen I might conshiger it, but chenne ponn' ish a great yeale o' money,
tish a great yeale of money, come let me shee.




Methinks 'tis a little against the Law of Nature.



Ye Law of Natchure belongsh cho Pchivilians Woman, we
comon Lawyeash y'ont studgy ye Law of Nachure, tish none of our
shtudgy no no But come let me shee whatsh here now?
come.





Brick-layer, and a Gentleman.






What's your bus'ness Sir?



I have a Message to you Lordship, from his Highness the
Vice-Roy.



Very well Sir, I attend.



His Highness desires your Lordship not to disturb and frighten
the City, by raising the Town Forces to no purpose



He is of opinion, 'tis to no purpose, is he?







I am of a contrary opinion, and I am seldome mistaken.



His Highness bid me tell you, that for the bare satisfaction of
the Poeple, (though danger requires it not) he is willing you shou'd
keep up half you do.



He wou'd have me keep but half?







Then I will keep as many more.



Is that your Answer?



Yes, and we will justifie it by Law.



Well bred, good humour'd Gentlemen these, and fine Subjects




will vex him worse then this, Articles that may cost him his Employ¦ment.
We'l not onely humbly humbly address to His Majesty, but Im∣peach
him; I'll teach him not to Knight me.



Here is Counsellour Bartoline, the greatest Lawyer in the King∣dome,
and one of our own Party, you can't possibly advise with a bet∣ter
Man about 'em, give him the Hundred pound Fee, the City allows
you to retain some eminent Lawyer.



I will, Counsellour Bartoline, I must speak a word wi' you.



I'm not at leishure, I have Caushesh cho look over, yat are cho
come on cho Morrow.



But we have a Cause in which the whole City's concern'd.



You must deferr it yen, for if I y'ont appear in yish Cause cho
Morrow, 'twill be losht, it wholly dependsh upon me, and I cannot but
in conshiensh atchend it, I have a Fiftshe pound Fee.



We'l give you a Hundred pound, Mun.



How? a Hundger'd poun? huh?







Here, lay ashide yesh Papers,

Well, whatsh your buyshnesh now come huh!



We are drawing up Articles against the Man of the Castle.



Yea Man at ye Cashtle, wosh yat?



He means the Vice-Roy.



Archiclsh against the Viceh-Roy huh?







Gi me ye Papersh again, I won't meggle in't.







No, I won't meggle, I won't meggle.







I may loosh my Head mun, I won't meggle, no, no, come let
me she.




No matter if you do loose your Head, if you have no more ho∣nesty
nor love for your Country, then to refuse to do your Countreys
bus'ness, when you have received your Countreys Money.



I yon't care whosh money 'tish, let it be ye Devilsh money I'll
keep it, now I have it, but I won't meggle in the buyshnesh no 
no come come.




Keep our Money? and not do our bus'ness?



Tish our way. 'Tish our way.



Sir, by your Favour, either do our bus'ness, or pay back our Fee.



Pay back your Fee 'twash never known mun, and I won't
shet an ill pregident; no, no, tish shufficient I won't be against you,
yatsh enough. Come let me shee.



Did one ever know such a Knave? what shall we do? for you
and I must account for this Money.



Let me alone with him, I understand Mankind; Counsellour
Bartoline, do not play the Fool wi' your self, and loose a Thousand
pound, which you may get by this Cause.



A 'houshand Pound? huh!



Yes, this is a great Cause, and the City will go through with it,
whatever it costs 'em.



Come, I'll underchake ye buyshnesh come.



Did not I tell you I understand Mankind?



But I won't appea publiquely dee hear I won't appea.



Give us Councels will do the Man at the Castle's bus'ness, and we
don't care.








Counsellour Bartoline a word wi' you.







I am sent to you by his Highness the Vice-Roy.



Hish Highnesh the Vy'sh-Roy? shpeak shoftly.



His Highness is enform'd you are here, and very great with
these Men.



I great with yesh Men? 'tish falsh, they're Knavsh, I haitch 'em,
I haitch 'em.



Nay, he believes you onely assist 'em as a Lawyer for your
•ees, you have too much Wisdom and Law to engage in their ill and
dangerous designs.



Hang 'em, hang 'em.



And such they have, his Highness is well assur'd.



No doubeh on't, mosht sherchain.



And therefore he's resolv'd to punish 'em.



He musht do't! he musht.



To that end he intends to indict 'em of several Crimes.



I am glad of it.



How far they will extend in Law he knows not.







Therefore he sends you by me a hundred pieces.



He doesh very well very well hesh a wysh Man.







I'll give it him, but not publiquely I won't appea, but I'll
give him shuch advysh ash shall do yeir buyshn•sh.



I'll tell it him.



If he hash a fanshy cho hang'em he shall.








Well, you'l undertake our bus'ness?



Let me alone give me your Articlesh come now I'll
go studgy, come along.




So, this is a notable old Fellow, if he undertakes the bus'ness,
he l do't.



You need not inform me in Mankind.





Where's my Where's my every little thing puts me so
out of breath Where's my Lord Podesta?







I have great (pooh) blows) I am so faint with every little mo∣tion,
and little talk I have great News for you.



Great News, and I not know it? there is seldome any thing to
be known that I don't know.



I•ll tell it you, but I must open a Vein first that I may breath 
•e•ch a Surgeon I play'd the Fool uh! as I came uh! along,
I saw a young Woman with naked (pooh) Breasts going I'm cer∣tain
to pooh to be naught; •o I reprov'd her, but she was very
angry, and sed she was an honest Woman; then I sed she was to blame
  33
to let those two Breasts come abroad, like two Domestick Intelligences to
slander her; so she said she did it to please her pooh her Husband;
so I sed her Husband was a wise Man to make his Wife shew her pooh
 her Breasts in such a Town as this, such Treasure wou'd invite Pick∣pockets
enough to rob him of it. And thus with this wanton Woman I wast∣ed
my pooh my Spirits.



So you have done now more then needs, you might have told us the
News in the time you have told the Story.



'Tis true indeed Well, I'll tell you the News, you may see how
things go, for my part I am glad I have not long to live, to see the Nation
Ruin'd.



Why what's the bus'ness?



There's a French Fleet upon the Coast, and six of the principal Com∣manders
lurk in the Disguise of Pilgrims about Mount Vesuvio, to burn the
Town by night, and let in their Friends.



I knew all this several Hours ago.



Is it possible my Lord? you have excellent Intelligence.







I'm sure 'tis not half an Hour since I invented it.




What do you think made me raise the Militia?



Was it for that?



Do you think I rais'd 'em for nothing, I never do a foolish thing.



And why wou'd you not tell me?



I had some reasons of State.



And what will your Lordship do in it?



What else, but seize 'em?



We must do it very privately, least they ha' notice, for they have
Friends in Town.



You need not teach me my bus'ness, nor that they have Friends in
Town, what meant the Order to put down Two Regiments o' the Mili∣tia?



Was there such an Order?



I was an ear-Witness.



You may see how things go: whereupon I smartly replyed, Wou'd
they have Two down, said I? then I will have four more up, said I, smart∣ly.



That was very well.



As well as I cou'd have advis'd.



Sir, I know what I do.



I protest I thought you had done it onely to cross 'em.



Sir, I have deeper fetches in things then you are aware of.



I see you have.



Now you shall see how I'll mannage this bus'ness, I will leave my Hat,
Gown, and Perriwig here, put on your Hat, Coat, and Perriwig Bricklayer,
and go out so disguis'd, that my own Family shall not know what is become
of me.



That will do very well.



I cannot advise better.



Then I'll go to your House Bricklayer, and there send for Twenty
Men such as I can trust, and Arm them, and when that's done I won't trust
them neither, but take 'em along, and they themselves shall not know whether
they go, What say you to this?







Very well; but why wou'd you not do this before, since you had in∣telligence
of these Men?



For good reasons you may be sure, I never do a foolish thing; come,
give me your things.



What shall I wear my self?



Any Porters so far as your House,


Now will not this deal with Pilgrims?




have you strength to go with us?

Arm'd with a Blunder∣buss
at his back.


To mount Vesuvio? I may as well hope
to carry the Mountain on my back, but if I had
strength I durst not venture.



Why, what are you afraid of?



Pride, Pride, I am mighty apt to be vain, formerly a little success in
a Jest or a Song, or Libell, wou'd ha' made me a notorious Ass; imagine then,
if when I come from this great expedition, I shou'd see my name in every In∣telligence,
my Picture on every Wall, what an insufferable haughty Coxcomb
I shou'd be? Lord, Lord, I shou'd be so proud!



For my part now, I go o' purpose for these things, and intend to
sit for my Picture as soon as ever I come home, I was bid Money for my Face
yesterday.



You who have but one infirmity, need not fear it. But my Vices like
Tories ride in troops, and if one gets into me, a hundred will follow: if now
I am sick I shou'd love your praises, when I am well I shall love your Wives.



He speaks a great deal of reason, we'l go without him.



But who shall guide us?



My Lord needs no Guide.



No, I know where they are to a hairs breadth,
Here comes my Wife, don't let her know who I am; 


I remember I read in Plutarchus, that Brutus wou'd not
trust his Wife Portia with Affairs of State, I'll imitate his Politiques.



No News o' my Lord?



I suppose Madam he's busied about some great affair.



Mr. Florio, I have an humble address to make to you.



What is it good Madam.



I am a Woman more nice and careful of my honour, then any other
Woman is of her face or skin; in my Husbands presence I am secure from
malice, but in his absence I can never open my doors but slander will enter,
  35
even your Religion and Vertue Sir cannot hinder her from following you in,
and fastening on us both.



Slander will have lean food in me Madam.



All's one Sir, 'tis best to avoid her. I would therefore humbly beg
you at all times of my Husbands absence to bestow your excellent conversati∣on
elsewhere.



'Twill be very prudent Madam.



I hope you'l not take it ill Sir.



By no means Madam.
Do you hear what an excellent Wife you have?




I know her Sir.







Sir, you need not inform me.



Who ha' you got wi' you there?



A very Honest Man Madam.



Are you sure o' that? 'cause these are dark times, a Knave will shine
in 'em like rotten Wood by night, And that Man has a notable out-side, he
resembles much my Husband, who is one of the wisest men in this Age.







Sir, she is a Woman of vast parts.



I have a great fancy to secure him.



Pshaw, we shall have a fiddle faddle with her, and spoil our business 
Get you gone, go.





How does he flye? that's suspicious. Seize him.



Away, away Man, I'll follow you.





No good Madam, I'll be bound for him.
Ha! Ha! what a Coxcomb is this? now is he gone he knows not whether, to
catch he knows not whom.



What an Excellent thing, and how Useful in the World is Credu∣lity?



'Tis so, to many excellent Trades,
To the sparkish Fop, the Shopkeepers large faith swells his Feather and gar∣niture,
To the Polititian, the believing empty-headed Rabble are his Blad∣ders.
But oh 'tis of excellent use to a Lover.



And to a Trade you ha' not nam'd a Swearer.



A Lover is a Swearer, a private one, he is not a publique Evidence, a
Swearer-General.



You were once Swearer-General to our whole Sex.



But I recant, and now will I kiss no Book but these sweet Lips.



Hold! not so fast.



Why, what's to do?



I must blush a while.



Blushes are for the Morning of Love, we have travelled many tedi∣ous
hours since that, and without any refreshment, except baiting now and
  36
then at a Kiss, Those lips are delightful places, but not the end of the Jour∣ney.



You say you have travel'd in Love, you say true, you have passed
through many hearts, and I fear have wasted all your love by the way.



I have onely tri•led away some unnecessary travelling expences, here
will I lay out my whole heart.







Indeed it is not.



What security will you give me?



Have I not Pawn'd a Kingdom to you, I was King of Libertines, and
I have left my Dominions, and all my fair female subjects to be a slave to you

Knocking! we're undone! have talk'd away our precious minutes, Heaven
grant it be not the old Coxcomb.




be thus lockt up together.



Venture to ask who 'tis.













'Tis the fool Craffy.



What shall we do with him?



Madam, I must speak with your Ladyship.




Come some other time, I'm very busie now.



This business must be done now Madam.




Dispatch it where you are then.



I cannot, this is private business Madam.




Then you must let it alone, for I neither can
nor will speak wi' you.



You must and shall speak with me, since you go to that, and if you
won't let me in at the Door, I'll climb in at the Window.



You are sawcy Sirrah.



There is no business to be done without sawciness.



What shall we do with this Fellow?



Put on my Husbands Gown, Hat, and Perriwig, and lye upon the
Couch as if you slept.



Will you let me in or no?



You are in great haste Sir.



Yes that I am, my business is earnest.


Florio is disguis'd, and lies down, Rosaura opens the Door,
Enter Craffy Drunk.


So, she's all alone, as I hope to be sav'd!



Well, what's your business Sir.



I have sweet business! delicate business, and I'll do't I'll Warrant
me Drunkenness has given me wit and impudence, if it don't dis•igure
me, I don't care, I am cursedly afraid 'twill put my features out of Rank and
File, they won't march even, and gracefully, and in Battalia.




Well, hast thou given me all this trouble, and now hast nothing to
say?



Yes, I have something to say, and now it shall out. I come 
I come most sweet 



Speak so•tly, for your Father's asleep on the Couch.



My Father there! the Devil take him for his pains, that Blo•k∣head
never did me any good, nor ever will; now he lies like a great Boome
to hinder my Vessel from coming into the Harbour when the wind is fair:
Od I could find in my heart to cut him!



Well Sir, you ha' no business it seems?



Od I'll do my business, and let the old Fool dispose his greasie Bags
as he has a mind; I care not, I'le pass the Rubicon, and be ant Casar, aut nul∣lus 
I come then to tell thee such a story, as no Age, nor History, can do
the like.



Ay, prithee let me hear that.



Ay, prithee let me hear that with a smile, many a Roman General
has fought a Battle upon the encouragement of Birds that have not chirp'd
half so prettily; Prithee let me hear that And thou sweet Rogue,
thou sha't 



The Bruit is drunk, and I never discern'd it.



Then thou delicate Creature, I come to tell thee, I love and adore
thee!



Love and adore me? what does the Coxcomb mean? but why shou'd
I consider the meaning of a Fool in drink?



Nay, my News does come wet out o' the Press, that's certain, 'tis
delicate News, is't not? what say'st thou? Have I no Darts nor Arrows in
my eye? prithee look upon me, nay, look if this Fantastick Woman will
look upon me? prithee look upon me, I'm newly Shav'd, and a Man looks
like a notable smirk Rogue when he's Shav'd, his face is like a Bowl new
wip'd, he may kiss the Mistriss if he has any skill, and I'll try.



Sirrah, attempt any R•deness to me, and I'll waken your Father, and
ruine ye; I am amaz'd he shou'd sleep thus!



I believe there is a Proclamation come out against sleeping, and
the Rogue takes a nap to affront the Government, for nothing else could
make a Whigg quiet so long, that's certain.



So Sir, you are a Ran•ing Tory, begone you had best, before I waken
your Father, and you who are now so •ull o' Wine, be turn'd out o' doors,
and want Bread, consider that Sir.



How! when I have thee before my eyes, dost thou think I can con∣sider
a Crust? what a pittiful hungry thought was there?



Dis-inheriting then and starving, are nothing to thee.



I starve now, Love has dis-inherited my stomach, which, before I
fell in love with thee, had as good a Title to meat as any stomach in Chri∣stendom,
that is, if meat be made for stomachs, and now if I were to go to
Law with a Chicken for Crums, he'd Cast me, I shou'd ha' nothing to shew
for 'em, so that I must enjoy thee that I may eat agen.



Enjoy me Sirrah! do you know who I am, you dare mention such 〈◊〉
Word before me?



Know thee! I, well enough.



Am not I your Father's Wife Sir?



And what of all that?



What of all that?



Thou think'st I warrant I'll be frightned with Incest? with fee,
fa, fum, I am not a Child to be scar'd from a Sack-Posset with a white fheet,
if we must meddle with nothing that is a Kin to us, we must not eat or
drink, for we are all near a Kin to our Victuals, but thou art no Kin to me,
thou art onely tack'd to my Father's side by a Priest, and art no more my
Mother then his Back-Sword is, for that's buckled to his side sometimes; Be∣sides,
I don't know whether he be my Father or no, I'm sure he is not
fit for't.



Whatever I am to him or thee, 'tis sufficient I am nearly related to
Vertue and Honour, and do not dare Sirrah, so much as to talk undecently
before me.



Why dost thou talk undecently before me?







Yes, thy eyes talk Bawdy, thou hast the wanton'st eyes that ever I
saw in my life: Gi' me a Kiss, gi' me a Kiss I say the best you have in
the house, won't you? I'll come to the Vessel my self then.



Bless me! Husband! Husband!



Let him wake if he dares.


Craff. chaces her round Chairs,
Florio Snorts.


Oh Lord! what shall I do?



Ha! does he snort? let him snort agen, he has neither Powder nor
Shot in his Nose.

Knocking at the door, Craffy starts, Rosaura opens it.




Oh Madam! your Husband and the Bricklayer.



How! where are they?



Just coming into this Room.



Cannot your Master possibly get by?







Oh misery! shame! death! what shall I do?



What's the matter Madam?



Ha! what comes into my head! I'll make this fool beat his Father
out; (aside) Oh your Father will be Murder'd, and I abus'd, here are Vil∣lains
got into the house in Arms, one of them they say has a design upon my
Person.







Ay, help us for Heavens sake!







Just coming into this Room, beat 'em out o' the house, as you value
your Fathers life, and my Honour.










their Wastes stu•k round with Pistols, Craffy knocks his Father down, Pietro
gets down the Bricklayer, whilst they are Scuffling Rosaura conveys Florio
away, and lays the Hat, Gown, and Perriwigg upon the Couch, as if one slept
under 'em; after some rowling upon the Stage, Podesta gets Craffy under∣most.


Some one help me to kill this unnatural Rogue.



No, take him alive I charge you, that we may know who put him
upon this horrible damnable Plot, for this is as horrible a Plot as has been
these thousand years.



Sirrah, who put you upon this horrible wickedness?



Sirrah, who put you upon the horrible wickedness of attempting
this sweet Lady?







As Drunk as he is, he asks no impertinent Questions, nor has he com∣mitted
any great Error in the ill-favour'd Entertainment he has given you
for entring my Husbands house in this armed posture, in these dangerous
times, without giving me any notice what he has done, he did by my com∣mand,
and i'le justifie it.



This is a wise Woman.



The Woman could not act wiser if she were my own Wife.



I'le reveal my self to her, Sweet-heart I am your Husband.



Come Sir, lay aside your unseasonable and unmannerly mirth, these
are no Rallying times, or if they were, you are not my equal at Repartee
with me: But now I think on't, see what's become of my Husband some
body, he has slept these two hours upon that Couch, and this rude Scuffle has
frighted him away.



Indeed Madam, I fancy this is my Lord.



Sweet-heart, upon my Honour I left my Gown, Hat, and Perriwigg
upon that Couch, and there's no difference between the Lord Podesta and me
but a Gown.



Then there is Roguery, for there lay a Fellow under that Gown.
I'le swear I heard his Nose go.







Bless me! here's a Plot.



Some of the French Pilgrims to Murder you, and burn your House.



Most certain, fetch a Regiment of the Militia, I'le have a Centry at
every door in my House, two at every Post of my Bed, and one under my
Bolster.



Search all the Tubbs, Pots, Bottles, and Vessels in your House, for
Gun-powder.



Yes, and I'le unpave the streets to see if the Stones be not Hand-Granadoes.



'Tis necessary, and I hope your Lordship will not blame me for de∣fending
your House, though you suffer'd something by it.











Like a Woman that knows Man-kind.



Well, and shall I no praises have,
That beat the Knave?



O 'twas very well done Craffy.







But are not these Ʋnhappy times,
That I can take no Joy
In such a Wife, and great Estate,



And such a Son as I.











COme, Captain, place those two Souldiers behind
those two Doors, and then my House will be too
hot for a Knave.



For the justification of our Proceedings, we will print
a Narrative of the Pilgrim under the Gown. As Paper, in Hol∣land,
passes for Money, Pamphlets with us pass for Religion
and Policy: a bit of Paper in Holland, from a Man of Credit,
takes up Goods here, pays Debts there; so a Pamphlet will
take up Fools here, make Fools there. A Pamphliteer is the
best Fool-maker in the Nation. And this Story well impro∣ved 



The Story's well enough, what need we lye to no pur∣pose?



By your favour, 'twill be to good purpose; a Lye will
give it the stamp of our Party. Lyes are the Supporters of
our Arms, and the Great Seal of our Corporation.



If a Lye will do the Nation any Service, I shall not scru∣ple.



You wou'd ha' no Reason; for that Lye that does as
much good as Truth, is as good as true; Ergo, 'tis true. Quicquid
est idem, est idem, is a Rule in Logick, but you know no Lo∣gick.



But I know a Rule in Divinity, that says, you are not
to do Evil that Good may come thereby.



Ay, that Good may come, and not come: but the Evil
that does Good, is a Good Evil; but no Evil is Good, Ergo, 'tis
no Evil at all: But there's no talking Logick to you, you don't
understand it.




How now, what would you have?



May it please your Honour, My Lord.



Speak to me, I am my Lord, that is, I manage all



It has always been a Custom for the new Lord Pod•st
to send poor Prisoners some relief.



It has been a Custom you say?







Is there any Law for it?







Ay, for we will do nothing but according to Law.



You wou'd not have poor Pris'ners starve, Master



Sir, if they starve according to Law, no body has any
thing to say.







Go, get you about your business.







I hope, Master, you will be kinder to us, Master.



Why, what are you?



Honest, poor People, Master, that always us'd to
have some broken Meats from my Lord Podesta's Table, and
now we ha' not had one bit.



Is there any Law for it?







Ay, for in plain Terms, we will do nothing for any bo∣dy,
that is not of our Party, but what we are forc'd to by
Law.



We are all o' your Party, Master.

All the Beggers, and Man
with the Basket.

Ay, Master, we are all Whiggs, Ma∣ster,
we are all Whiggs.



Master, I poll'd for you.



I poll'd three times over, for my Lord; came in three
several Coats, and past for three men.



Say you so? who employ'd you?







And several of our Prisoners poll'd for my Lord.
Master.



Well, give 'em half-pence a piece.



Half-pence! my Lord half-pence!



Well, when my Year's out, I'le consider farther.



We shall starve in that time, Master.



Go, go, begone, the Bricklayer and I are consulting a∣bout
Affairs of State, for the good of you all, how to secure
your Religion and Property.







Go, go, you ha' no Property, nor, I think, Religion,
you are idle Knaves begone.



The Devil take you a half-penny Lord, is the Po∣desta's
place worth but a half-penny?




Plague rot you a half-penny Lord, I'd ha' seen the
Devil have you, before I'de ha' chose you, if I had known.




A half penny Lord confound 'em damn'd Rebel
Rogues, I hope to see 'em hang'd.





Now let us to Counsellour Bartoline's Chamber, to know
his Opinion, concerning our Arming and Fortifying.



One Lawyer is positive against us.



That's a Tory Fellow, I don't mind Tory Law.



But he spoke a great deal of Reason.



I care not a Farthing for Reason, Law, nor Scripture, if
they side with the Tories. I prefer Whigg-Nonsence, before Tory-Reason:
But come.






No body in the House here? O Sir, you are the Man
I desire to speak with. I suppose you remember me?



I remember you? How shou'd I remember all the Peo∣ple
gat come cho me?



'Tis strange you shou'd forget me, 'tis not long since I
put just such another Fee into your Hand, as this.



Od sha me! now you putch it incho my headge, I do
remember you; you come from ye Vish roy.







He ish a worhy Genkleman, I shall be glad to sherve
him.



The Business is, My Lord Podesta fortifies without his
leave.



Doesh he? yen hesh a Yebel, shay I shay it.



But is there no Clause in their Charter will bear 'em out?



Shir, if yere be shuch a claush, 'twill overthrow yeir
Charcher, 'twill argue the King was deshieved, so his Grant
will be void; 'tish against ye Peyogative, ash I'le prove outch
Common Law, and clea shatchute Law; and if I yon throw 'em
on yeir backsh I'le hang for't, sho chell ye Vishroy But I'le
be privatsh.










O, here he is! come, Counsellour, we must speak with you.



You musht not, for I am very buishy.



But these ten pieces must, and shall speak with you.



Why chruly, I have a great yeal o' buishnesh; but I
have alsho a great kindnesh for boh you; for I hinke you are
very honesht Men, and wish well to ye Nation, and have ve∣ry
good yeshignsh. And I will do you what kindnesh I can, I will
ingeed. Well, come, your buishnesh huh 



May the Subject Subject? I don't love that word Sub¦ject:
But, come, may the Subject Fortifie by Law, without leave?



May he wear a Shword by hish shide without leave? a shimple Shtory.



But a Lawyer told me the contrary.



'Twash not ye Lawyer, 'twash hish Fee; and Fees will
shay any hing.



He said 'twas against clear Statutes.



Yersh no shuch hing ash a clea Shtachute, hant we Law yersh the penning of 'em, and do you hink we won't make
work for our shelu'sh? We hate a clea Shtachute, as a House∣breaker
yoesh a clea Night, I shpeak against my own Pro∣fession;
for I'm an honesht Fellow, I am worth but shix hou∣•and
a year, and I mightch ha' been worth twenchy, if I wou'd
ha' been a Knave; but I love cho make a Consciensh of what I
shay, and do, I do ingeed, ingeed I do.



But we are told that 'tis so against Law, that if there
shou'd be any such Power in our Charter 'twould argue the King
was deceiv'd, and overthrow the Charter.



If such a Power in your Charcher should overthrow it,
  45
'twou'd argue the King had yeshieved you, mum, and who dares
shay yat? yersh a chrick for you, yey chalk like Foolsh and
Knavsh, yey don't know what yey shay, let me alone wi you
buishnesh, dee hea? but privately, very privately. Come a∣long,
come.




This is a notable old Fellow.



I was of his Opinion.





My Lord, will you continue those Guards and Centries
about your House?



Sweet Heart, to ask my Wisdom questions, is to que∣stion
my Wisdom.



I confess, you have reason to stand upon your Guard:
'twere well the People knew it; and your Son Craffy has a Pen
•it for the purpose.



He shall meddle no more with his Pen, it has almost
mop'd him. I wou'd give five hundred pound he had never
seen a Pen in's Life; but I will take him from it before he's too
far gone, and enter him into business: Here he is Powder'd, a
Feather in's Cap, and Chatechising 

his Face in a Glass; but it does not make him one wise answer,
the Boy is spoil'd.



Ay, this will do This will do Nature writ no
good Hand when she penn'd me, because she wrote after a
damn'd Copy, the Fool my Father; but this will mend some
Letters. This will take my Mother.







Drunkenness, like a Hog in a Garden, rooted up my
Flowers, but now the Tulips in my Face begin to lift up their
Heads.







They do i' Faith.



Why don't you come?



Let him alone, all this is not his folly, but mine, who
have let him take more Poetry than his Brains wou'd bear, and
have ruin'd my Child; and though I say it, a delicate
young Fellow.



I fancy he's turn'd Amorous Fopp, for he's broke out into
  46
a Feather, and all those Fooleries that trouble Love-sick Peo∣ple.



Indeed his Feather says some such thing.



And I'le take the Feathers word.



Before mine? do not you teach me to know my own
Boy, nor any thing. I'd give you a hundred pound I were an
Ass.



You may have it cheaper.




I mean in this, that I mistook the Boys Distemper.
Lord, that I should let him spoil himself!



I have a mind to know his Contemplations. I'le go to∣wards
him.



Ha. my delicate Mother-in-law? I'm ready for her:
I'le charge her with Smiles, Wit, Impudence, Modesty, Humi∣lity,
all sorts of Weapons. First, with Humility upon my
Knees. Most Sweet Dear ha! my Father behind That
old Fool is always in my way How shall I get from my
Knees again! The Devil take him. Most sweet dear, Madam,
pray to Heaven to bless me Pray, my Lord, pray to Hea∣ven
to bless me.







Ay, to bless me.



What o' this time o' day.



A Blessing will do a Man no hurt at any time o' day.



Well, the Lord bless thee, and deliver thee from Poetry,
say I, it has utterly spoil'd thee: That ever I should let this
Fellow tamper with Poetry. I cou'd ha' made him I don't know
what I cou'd ha' made him such a States-Man, as these times
cou'd not ha' produc'd. These times, pitiful Fellows, the States∣men
o' these times were all starv'd at Nurse. Some of 'em were
Foundlings, one found under a Rump, another was a Maggot
in English Noll's Nose. A pack of strange Fellows they are all,
in short, Craffy 








You shall never Write nor Read more; but be a Man of
Business.











Yes, my Lord, I mean 



Did you mind what I said to you?



No, Madam yes, Madam, Ay, my Lord, I
mean.



Yes, Madam Ay, my Lord Sirrah, where are
your Brains?



Brains Madam my Lord, I mean.



In your Ink-Pot, Sirrah?



I'm now answering the Meddal.



I thought as much, the Devil take thy Poetry. Sirrah,
meddle with Pen and Ink more if you dare.



Who must answer these things then? There's ne're a man
o' Wit of our Party, but my self, and my things are discom¦mended.
I know several People don't like my Hushai: That
I intend to call my Poem, The Meddal Revers'd, Written by him
who was not the Author of Hushai, nor of any Pen writ of
our side



Come, Poetry be hang'd, and Prose too.



Come, come, my Answer will be the best.







A Flail if I meet with the Author in a convenient
Place, I'le give him an Answer.



Yes; and, Sirrah, you shall never meddle with Pen,
Ink, nor Book more, but be a Man o'business.



I shall be a pretty Man o' business, never Write nor
Read.



Sir, the greatest Politicians of our times, never Write
nor Read, as you may see by their Speeches.
Come, Sirrah, you have Wit enough, and Courage too, and
we have Business, and Enemies to employ both, insomuch I
shall not dare to go to Bed to Night.



Sha'n't you? Then I'le dare to go thither in your stead: I
have shew'd my Mother my Wit, I never shew'd her my Skin
yet. Ile tempt her with that.




I'le have you in the Head of a Party, go to Mount Ve∣suvio.



I'm resolv'd to steal to her when she's a Bed.




Get a Horseback presently, d'ee hear?



Ay, my Lord, in a rich Night Gown, Point de Venice
Shirt, and Velvit Slippers.



How, a Horse-back in this Equipage? Do you know I
bid you get your Horse?



Ay, my Lord, wash'd from head to Foot in Rose Water.



This is mockery, give me a Cane.



O good my Lord.



Come, let him alone.







What's the matter? what's the Matter?



What's the matter wi' your Brains, Sirrah? For when
I come to one side of your Head, they shift o' tother, that you
never mind what I say. Get you gone you Rascal you.



Sweet Rogue, I'le be with thee at Night.




Wou'd the Devil had had this Fellows Poetry: A Gen∣tleman
may carry a little of it for an Ornament and Pleasure, as
a Lady carries an Orange in her hand, but to have a Fool carry a
great Basket on his Head, like a Costardmonger; and break his
Brains.




Clamb'ring up these Stairs, has almost spent me; I'm
ready to tumble down dead.



Poor Man, how bad he is!



I wonder he's come abroad!.



'Tis pity, he's a pretty Fellow.



My good Lord, I beg your Pardon a thousand times
for the Liberty and Confidence I take in your House.



You are very welcome, good Mr. Florio.



You may believe my Lord, Sir, he's your very hum∣ble
Servant.



Your Servant, good Madam. Why truly, we sick Peo∣ple
take upon us a strange Authority, I know not by what
Commission. I▪ think 'tis because Sickness is Heavens Messenger,
and when a Man is upon the Road in a Messengers Hands, all
People give way, and I am riding Post.





Where are you all? where are you all?







Who says there are no Plots?



He that has a mind to be hang'd.



As he shall be. He that will not believe in the Doctor,
must expect no Salvation in this Life.



What's the Plot, good Doctor?



Only to cut your Husband's Throat, and all our Throats,
that's all.



Oh, you ha struck me dead, some help, I faint.



Good Creature, she's swooning; who's there?












Carry her away, don't let us be troubled with Women.



Take her into the fresh Air, and give her some strong
Water; and, do you hear? bring me some privately.









What do you think the Tory Rogues have done? they
have met with our Paper of Association.



What care we for that?



Ay, but they have drawn up one among themselves,
in imitation of ours, cast one in our own Mold, taken our own
words, and discharge 'em upon us.







As you shall hear: We, the Loyal, &c. finding to the
grief our Hearts, a certain sort of People, consisting of Hobb•sts,
Atheists, Fanaticks, and Republicans, have for several years last
past, pursued a pernicious Plot, to root out the true Religion,
subvert our •aws and Liberties, and set up Arbitrary Power.



Well, and what of all this?







And it being notorious, that they have been highly en∣couraged
by the countenance and protection given 'em by the
Rabble, and by their expectations of the said Rabble coming to
the Government. It appears also to us, that for these Designs,
Ignoramus Garrisons have been establisht among us, by whose
assiance these Men have laid a Blockade before the Crown
it self, denying it all relief, unless 'twill own it self a depen∣dance
upon them.



All this is true, and we are not asham'd of it.







And we considering with heavy Hearts, how greatly the
Reputation and Honesty of the Kingdom hath been wasted, in
maintaining the said Garrisons: And finding the same Coun∣sels,
after exemplary Justice upon some of the Conspirators, to
be still pursued with the utmost Devillish Malice, and desire of
Revenge, whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard, to be
destroyed, to make way for the said Rabbles advancement to
the Crown.



Well, and what of all this?







The whole Kingdom in such case, being destitute of all se∣curity
of their Religion, Laws, Estates, and Liberties: Sad
experience in the Case, the Rump Committee of Safety, Nol and
Dick in England: And Massianello here, having proved the
wisest Laws to be of little force to keep out Tyranny under no
Prince, or no lawful Prince.



I wou'd we had 'em.



We have, therefore, several times endeavoured in a le∣gal
way, by Indictments, to bring the said Criminalts to con∣digne
Punishment; but being utterly rejected, and brought al∣most
to despair, we bind our selves one to another, jointly and
severally, in the Bond of one Firm and Loyal Society, and As∣sociation:
And do solemnly Vow, Promise, and Protest to de∣molish
the said Ignoramus Garrisons, which are kept up in and
about this City, to the great Terrour and Amazement of all the
good People in the Land.



And shall be in spight of 'em.



And utterly destroy all that shall seek to set up the said
Rabble's pretended Title, or shall raise any War, Tumult, or
Sedition in his behalf, or by his Command, as publick Enemies,
to our Laws, King, Religion, and Country, and this on penalty
of being esteemed such our selves. Witness our Hands.



Are there any Names to it?



Only Nick-Names to know one another by: As Loyal
Domestick Absalom, and Achitophel, Tory Coffee-house, Towzer,
Heraclitus, and such Names, forty thousand.



Oh, we have six times their Number.



Pray hear the Postscript: Persons to be destroyed, Impri∣mis
the Podesta.



Am I to be Murder'd Imprimis? bloody Rogues.



Then the Doctor: And why after him, unmannerly
Rascals?



Why after me? Sure, good Doctor, you won't dispute
precedency with me.



But I will, good Podesta, with you, or any Man in Chri∣stendom;
what the Devil are you?







Ay, if you compare your self with me, you are a Fop.



Fop! You are an unmannerly Fellow.



How! ho! call one of my Men some body.
Serv. Sir.




Go bid the Arch-bishop of Naples come to me, I'le make
his Fortunes.



Nay, nay, Doctor, Doctor.



He means, bid the Arch-bishoprick of Naples come to
him, but it won't come, Doctor.



You are a Rascal.







Gentlemen, Gentlemen, are you out of your Wits, to
quarrel who should be murder'd first? I need care for it as lit∣tle
as you, I shall lose as few days; for shame reconcile, pray
reconcile.



Then let him not play the Coxcomb, if the Pope dispa∣rage
me, I'd say he were a Rascal.



Well, well, the Podesta respects you, Doctor, give him
your hand.



Give him my hand first? I'd scorn to do't if he were a
Prince.



Then give him your hand, Podesta.



Well come, Mr. Panchy.







Doctor I mean, come Doctor.







So, this is well, now let us know whose Throat is to be
cut next.



The Bricklayers and yours: Cum multis aliis quae nunc pre∣scribere
longum est.



Will they cut mine? They may spare their pains: well we
had more need go to Prayers than Quarrel. Pray Doctor.



Pray, Fools Head! what should we pray for? That's like
your Papists, who think to keep off Devils with Ho∣ly
Water, as if a Devil were like a Cat, he cou'd not endure to
wet his Foot: These Devils are best driven away with Fire-locks.



You are in the right, Doctor.



I'm sure our Cause is in the right.



We have a hundred thousand Men, and they are always in
the right: Set me in the Head of such a general Counsel, and I'le
be Pope, the only infallible Judge.



Ay, and have what forms of Worship you will; when a
Canons the Preacher, who dare shut up the Conventicle, and
nothing opens and divides a Text like Gun-Powder.



Heaven turn these wicked Men, I love their Souls.



Heaven turn 'em, out of the Kingdom, for I love their
Lands; that's my way of turning my Adversaries; and I'le set
'em part o' their way to Night: I'le shove the whole Town a∣gainst
'em that shall be my business.




I'le go arm my self, and then watch upon the Battle∣ments.



I'le go with you.




I'le to my Devotions: That is to your Wife if I
knew where she was.









I might ha' guess'd it by the sudden gaeyty of all things,
the whole Face of Nature smil'd on her sweet favourite.



Upon the ridiculous Cuckold, and his wise Companions,
which you have finely fool'd; for was not this Paper yours, Sir?







What a Ghost every Shaddow appears to a guilty Consci∣ence:
Therefore I had not best consent to your Murder of my
Honesty, for I shall never sleep for fear of the discovery; and
you Men commonly boast of those Murders, and cast a brazen
Image of the dead Creature in an impudent Libel.



If this be not privately buried, it shall be your own fault.



It shall be yours, for I have provided a Chappel fit for
the Work, this Garden-house.



Then will I be a second Ner•▪ I have put all my City in
a Flame.
  53
And now, with Harp in Hand, I will survey
My burning Rome, and whilst it burns I'le play.



Then Nero take thy Harp into thy Hand,
The tuneful Strings will follow thy Command:
Now equal Orpheus in thy Art Divine,
Make all things round thee Dance, with one sweet touch of thine,









Come, pray come in, Sir, ingeed I love your Compa∣ney
mighchily. Come, how isht wi' you, Shir?



Better and better, Sir, that is to say, worse and worse,
nearer my end, which I hope will be the better for me.



Ay, yer'sh no doubt on't, Shir, you're a very good
young Genkleman.



Not so good, as I ha' been bad, Sir.



'Tish no great matcher, Shir, we have all been bad; one
chime or anoyer.



Not so bad as I, Sir, the Devil is not, cannot be so bad
as I, he cannot drink, can he, Sir?



Why chruly, Sir, I believe notch, I yont know what
he can goo, I yont chrouble my self much wid him.



I was one of the Devil's Low-Countries, always under
a Flood: the Devil cannot Whore, Sir, neither, can he?



I yont know, Shir, in chroth, but I believe in general
heisha great Rashcal.



I have not only debauch'd Women, but the whole Age,
poyson'd all its Morals, murder'd thousands o' young Consci∣ences,
sung others asleep, pump'd others with Drunkenness, Sin
I Honour'd and Priviledg'd as a Peer to the Devil, Heaven I af∣fronted,
Libell'd his Court, and in my drunken Altitudes have
endeavour'd to scour the whole Creation of Souls and Spirits,
now is it fit I shou'd be sav'd?



Ay, why not, Shir, yo'nt chrouble your shelf wi' yosh
mattchersh.



I doubt I trouble you, Sir, with my tedious Discourses?



Oh no Shir ye'y are ve'y goodg ingeed: I never heardg
a Parshon chalk sho well in a Pulpet, and I hear 'em shomechimes.



Don't you go always to Church, Sir?



Yesh, Shir, but we Law yesh are sho employ'd all th,
Week, y'at we may be excush'd if we chake a Nap a Shunday
at a Shermon.



You should not neglect the business of your Soul, Sir.



No chruly, Shir, but we have a great yeale of business,
a great yeale of business.



I do believe so, Sir, therefore I don't know how I can
with any Confidence beg the favour of you to be one of my
Executors.



O yesh shir, I'le find a chime for yat I wayant you,
pray employ me, Shir.



Thank you, good Sir, I will endeavour to reward your
trouble.



O good Shir, what you pleash, I shall be glad of any
•hoken of you love.



I have drawn up some Heads of a Will.



You have y'one mighchy wishly, Shir.



Will you please to look over it, Sir, as also some deeds
of my Estate, whilst I lay me down? For I am very faint:
Shall I borrow your Bed, Sir?



Ay, with all my Heart, Shir, Lushenda, Girl.









Why gee come wi'out a Godly Book in your Hand, when
you know how hesh inclin'd?




I ha' none, you must lend me one out of your Study.



I ha' none in my Shtudy, ne've hadg one in my Life,
we Lawyesh yead no Yivinichy Buy one  Come
chake yish poo Genkleman, and lay him upon our Bedg, and co∣ver
him warm, and shit by him, and gee hear, chalke Goly to
him; hesh making his Will, you yont know how you may win
upon him.

Pray Shir go in, and I'le go cho my Shtudy, and come chee in
a minute.




I'm in no haste, Sir, take your time.



No, no, I won't shtay shir, but pray let me lead you, for
you are very weak.







Pray Shir, let me.










What new Larum's this? And I'm enquir'd after to be
made an Ass on; and sent on some silly Errant, and so shan't
come at my Mother to Night: Pox, I'le ha' none o' these Foo∣lish
doings: I'le get out o'the way; and now I think on't, I'le
hide my self in this Room; how now, the Doors shut, there's
somebody in the Room sure. I'le peep I'm shot I'm shot 
I'm shot 






What's the matter? what's the matter? what's the News?



I'm shot, I'm shot, I'm shot.



Guard, Guard, Guard, Train-bands, Podesta, Podesta,
come hither all quickly.



Bless us, what's the matter?











I'm shot I'm shot I'm shot.



Oh, where, where, where, poor Child poor Boy.



To the very Soul, to the very Soul.



Oh my poor Boy, my poor Boy! who shot thee, and
where are the Murderers?



Who should, but the Associating Bully Tories.



Ay, ay, Associators, Associators.



Dr. Br. Oh, Rogues, Villains!



A Whore and a Rascal are Associated in that Room, I
mean your Wife and Florio are there joyn'd in one close abomi¦nable
Bond of lewdness, and Cuckold you, as if they were to
be hang'd if they did not dispatch it in a minute; the sight has
shot me to my Soul, my Soul.



How, Sirrah, have you invented such a notorious
Sham as this, to set me at variance with my Wife, and my Friend?
and to buzz me wi' Domestick Confusions, that I might not ha'
my Brains at liberty, for the publick? Is it possible?



Sirrah, you are a Traytorly Rogue.



I'll call you as much out of your Name, Sirrah, you
are a Doctor of Divinity.



Sirrah, you are an Associating Tory.



Sirrah, you are an Hermaphrodite, Compounded of to
Sexes, Verse and Prose, and engender with neither.



Sirrah, I make better Verses than your self: and Ver∣ses
is all that you are good for: I make Officers and Jury∣men,
And Evidences, and Pictures, and Poppetts, and as good
Verses as you into the bargain. I made your Father what
he is. That you are an ungrateful Fellow to be thus saucy
with me.



Come Sirrah, you are a notorious Parricide, and plot
with Traytors against your Own Father.



Father you are an abominable Cuckold, and plot with
him that makes you one, against your Own Son: I will swear
Fl•rio is in that Room aboard your Vessel and stealing all your
Customs: And here you stand upon the Key and let him.



I will break open the door to shew thou art a Rascal.



Are you mad. Is not this a plain Sham Plot? here are
either Traytors or Treasonable Papers, and they will be found
and laid to your charge.



You speak with a great deal of Prudence; And I'll guard
the door with my life, for my Honour is Concern'd.



Your honour is concern'd, for you're made a Cuckold.



The Honour of my Loyalty is Concern'd; for Sirrah
you would make a Traytor of me: that you might hang me
and get my Estate.



I will call a Guard. Break open the door, and shew that
you are a Cuckold, the Doctor Bricklayer, a Couple of Pimps.
And I see a Guard go by: Guard, Guard, Guard!
Treason, Treason, Treason!



Nay then Militia, Militia, Militia, keep this door here,
Treason, Treason.



Why who the Devil's able to bear this. Give me a
P•ke I'le force my way in.



Nay then Give me a Pike.



Oh Cuckold, Cuckold; Wittal, Wittal.















Hold Gentlemen, I have considered of it: Because this
Fellow is so insolent; and potsiive and may report the worl••  57
hinder Truth from coming to light, to clear the Honour
of my self, my Wife, and my Friend, I will open the door in
the presence of you all, and you shall see what's there: And
so Gentlemen all bear witness.



You shall not open the door.











He shall Break Open the door.



Break open the door.





What are you all madg? are we in Beglam here?
you a Magishchrate, and shuffer shuch dishorgersh as yesh in
you housh, you may be asham'd: if you ha' no yegard cho
your own cregit, ha shome pitchy on a poo Genkleman al∣most
murger'd by the Noish you make. your own friend
Mishe Florio.



Florio! why where is he?



Upon my bedg, giving up the Ghosht.



So Sirrah, and you say he is in this room.



Giveing up the Ghost upon that old Follo'ws Bed?



Now the sham-plot's plain.



Then he has given up the Ghost, and I saw his
Ghost in this Room.



And has Wife given up the Ghost too, Sir?



I don't know, but if they were Ghosts, they were the
lewdest Ghosts that ever I saw.



Come, Sirrah, confess your Rogueries.



What Rogueries? Is it Treason to be mad? If he be
there, my Wits are not here; I'm crack'd, and there's an end.



Sho, shcolding again? I shuppose he'll conshiger your
Shivilitiesh in hish Will, which he's now a making.




So, Sir, we shall loose all our Legacies through your
Roguery; come ask him pardon on your Knees.



I'm cruel afraid he'l dye before we come; let's go quick∣ly,
quickly.



Florio and Rosaura coming out of the Room where they were hid.


Ha! gone! this was good Fortune, away to thy Cham∣ber,
my Dear.



And do you go home.






Pox on't, my pretty Opportunity is cast away in a
Storm; I must make t'other Voyage: I venture boldly into the
Dominion of these Arbitrary Rogues, who have a strange abso∣lute
Authority over their own Consciences, in Lying and
Swearing: But Love, Love, Love.









Gone away in dishconchent?



No, but in great pain, he said his Head was torn in pieces.



Well, I shall be no loosher, he knowsh 'twash not my
fault. Come away Girl.






Now I'le see what's in this House; Fellow Souldier•
Guard me in, and have a care o' me.






My Lord, my Lady's extreamly discompos'd with the
fright she had about your Lordship, and begs there may no•
be so much noise, it almost kills her.



Poor kind Heart, where is she?



In her Chamber upon her Bed.



So, Sir, and you said she was in this Room.



Well, I'm mad, and there's an end.



Tell her there shall be no noise made.




There's nothing in this Room.











What do you say to this, Sirrah?



That thou art an Ass to talk to a Madman, for my Wits
ha' given me the slip all o'th' suddain; I don't know how, nor
which way.



Truly I'm convinc'd he says true, and my Hearts rea∣dy
to break.



I am partly o' that mind; for in the Room is no sign of
a Sham-plot.



He does look wildly, that's the truth on't.



He's mad, he's mad, and I ha' lost my Child, my dear
child, my poor Child.



Well, well, poor Father, don't take on so, my Wits
are not gone far, they 'l come again, I warrant 'em, for I don't know
who the Devil will entertain 'em, they were mad sort o' Wits,
and they are as mad that entertain a Poets Wits.



Oh curse, curse on Poetry, that ever I should let thee
meddle with it, my poor Boy.



Nay, prithee Father don't take on thus, thou'lt make
me cry too.



I am so griev'd, that I will eat and drink and sleep, and
never mind what becomes o' the World.



Fy, fy, you won't be so wicked as that.



Wherefore should I trouble my self, when I have no
body to inherit my Labours?



You ha' Friends enow, the Doctor, and I another.



Puh, a Child's above all: don't we see old Polititians
venture their Necks for half a Child, a Changeling? And I
have lost a Boy worth millions, millions; and so I'le enjoy
my self 'till my Heart breaks, and there's an end.



Come, come, leave off this.



No, I remember a saying of a Wise man:
Who plays the Knave t' enrich his Son, a Fool,
Is like a Fox that ventures for a Prey,
To bury it in some poor dirty hole,
And feed an Idle Dog, that trots that way:
The Beast is torn with fruitless pain and care,
And hang'd at last to make his Foe his Heir.
I shall play the Knave, and be hang'd for a mad Son, and so have
a Tory; beg my Estate, No, no, no.




Let's after him, and get him out of this humour.












I Am strangely taken with this sweet young Creature,
'tis so pleasant to drink at such a fresh Spring, which
never Brute de••l'd, or muddied: This old Fellow is but a
wither'd Tree, that shades it; 'tis so much wholesomer to
love then the sophiistcated Beauties o' this Town, which sick∣en
and kill an Intrigue in few days. Ha! where's my Gown
and Cap•• I came in such amorous haste, I forgot my sick
dress, and I shall never be able to act my sick part with∣out
it; •ut I ha' no patience to go back for't now 
Here she comes! My Dear! where's the old Devil that wou'd
hinder our happiness? Old Tempter I 




I will not tell you.











That he's abroad, your Smiles say it; those Birds
wou'd be gone, if that Winter were here. They say he won't
come home a great while.



You are a Witch I think



We'l lose no time.



Fye! Fye! you must not do such things as these.




O Sir! here's a Gentleman kissing my Mistriss.







Oh dear, my Husband!



Sirrah, you lye; unsay't again, or you are a dead Rogue.



No, no, Sir you did not indeed Sir, I mistook, this is
  61
the sick Gentleman, Mr. Florio.



How? a shick man kish my Wife?



No, no, I am not the sick man.



What are you, yen? call shomebody; cho sheize the
Rogue.



Yes, yes, I am the sick man I don't know what
am, a pox.



Yesh, yesh, I know what you are, a Raschcal; and
you choo have abu'sd mee, a yamn'd Rogue and Shlut.



No, no Sir 



Why do you geny your shelf yen?



Sir, I was afraid you might be jealous, because I was
whispering in your Ladies Ear, my Lungs being weak.



Your Lungsh weak, and huff, and rant like a Bully▪
ah! you are Rogue.



That was only a sudden blast of Zeal for your good
Ladies reputation and mine, 'twill shorten my dayes. I ha'n't
above a Month to live, and I have spent a fortnight's Breath
before hand.



Oh you Rashcal! have I ca•ch'd you in your chricksh•
ha' you sherv'd mee shush.



Why do you censure so rashly? I appeal to your Lat
dy.



Make a partchy Judge? no you have put choo goodg a
Fee in you hand, cho let her bechray your Caush.



You wrong me extreamly.



I wrong'd my shell, cho entcher incho Bondsh of Mar∣riage,
and cou'd not perform Covenantsh, I might well hinke
you wou'd chake the for•eychure of the Bond, and I never
found equichy in a Bedg in my Life: But I'le trounce you boh,
I have pav'd Jaylsh wi' the Bonesh of honester People yen you
are, yat neve' did me nor any Man any wrong, but had Law
o' yeir shydsh, and right o' yeir shydsh, but cause yey had not
me o' yeir shydsh, I ha beggar'd 'em, 'hrown 'em in Jaylsh, and
got yeir Es•chatsh for my Clyentsh, yat had no more chytle to
'em yen Dogsh.



And were you a good Man in that?



I wash a good Lawyer, and sho you shall find cho your
cosht, we' in yish twelvemonth you shall not be worth a groatch.



Oh, I have too good a Title to what I have.



Chytle? I value not your Chytle: Beggarsh ha' not
sho many chricksh, cho make shorsh in yeir Bodyesh, ash we
have cho make 'em in Chytlesh. But I'le chell you what, I'le
draw you up an exshellent Chytle cho the Jayl; and if you
have any Children, I'le shettle it upon you and your Heirsh for
ever; a Jayl shall be the Sheat of your Family. Od sha' me, if
any brishke Rogue wou'd cut hish 'Hroat neatley, and private∣ley,
yat nothing might appear against him but Shircumshan∣sesh,
I'd bring him off, proviged it be not a shimple Rogue, yat
wantsh Money.




At this rate, your Wife shall be never the better for the
Settlement you have made upon her.



No, no more than I am the betcher for the Shettlement
the Priesht hash made of her upon me, the Devil chake him for
hish painsh, wou'd I cou'd find a slaw in't.



Now thou makest me angry, thou ungrateful Knave•
suppose she and I have sinn'd, hast thou got an Estate in the
Devil's Service, and wou'dst thou hinder his work.



Oh! you impugent Whoremashcher!



Sirrah, you have made more Whores than ever I did.







Yes, thou hast debauch'd whole Families by beggaring
'em, made Father and Mothers Bawds to their own Daughters,
to earn that Bread thou hast cheated 'em off.



You lye, you lye; but if I have, I only follow'd my
chrade.



Well, and it may be my Trade is Whoring, and I'le fol∣low
that▪



Follow it wi' your own Commoditchyesh then, and
don't meggle wi' mine.



No more I ha' not, your Clerk is a lying Fellow, and
your Lady a vertuous young Woman▪ and my near Kinswoman;
and since you abuse her, I'le take her into my protection:
Come, Cousin 



Oh brave Rogue! he chaksh away my Wife before my
Faysh: Shirrah, I'le ha' forty Actionsh on you back preshently.



Then in a little time will I have forty Swords at your
Throat, French Swords, I'le let in the Enemy, and cut the
Throats of such Rogues as you, who abuse your Trade, and
like so many Padders, make all People deliver their Purse, that
  63
ride in the Road of Justice. Better be rul'd by the Swords of
gallant Men, than the Mercinary Tougues of such Rascals
as you are.



Bear witnesh, Chreashon, Chreashon, horrible Chreashon.



I defy thee, do thy worst; I am Florio, Prince of Whigs,
never without a chosen Life-guard of Jury-men, with brazen
Consciences, proof against Oaths, like Bucklers against Arrows.
So, come away, Cousin Now will this Rogue fall on Florio.




Oh impugent yamn'd Rogue; Shirrah, be sure you ye∣member
all yish Chreashon, ha' you a good memory?







I mean a ferchile memory, will a 'hing grow in it?



I'le remember enough to hang Florio, I'le warrant him
I'le remember all he said.



And more choo. And becaush the Rogue runsh away wi'
my Wife, he'l shay, I proshecute him out o' Malish; sho if no
Body swearesh against him, but you and I, the Rashcal may come
off: yerefore we musht look out for an Evidensh or choo more.
Go cho shome able Atchurney, they are acquainched with 'em
all, I'le look out for shome my shelf, and run my for Lord Chief
Jushchishesh Warrant, cho apprehend yish Rash•all Go quick∣ly,
quickly.











Impudent, lying, perjur'd Villain, accuse me of being
a secret Strumpet?



And me of being your Gallant? I'm in a sine condition
to be a Gallant to a fair Lady.



All's one, Malice will believe it, and I, though innocent,
shall live in reproach



Not long, Madam, not above a Week; my Doctor has
confess'd to me, I shall dye some day next Week, and then I sup∣pose
this Story will dye too.



How! are you to dye next Week?



Yes, a great Lady will call for me, the only Lady in
the World, I have an Intrigue withall.







The Moon, my Lord, the Moon; she has an Intrigue
with my Body, and never puts on new Cloaths, but at my
Cost: she means to be very fine about Thursday come sevennight▪
that is to say, in the Full; and then the World will see if my
bankrupt Body be able to carry on such a Trade.



All's one, Sir, if you were dead, Malice wou'd live
and entertain Censure.



Well Sweet heart, as long as I don't entertain it, you
need not troubled.



I confess, if I have the comfort of your Love 



You have, you have, Woman; don't make more fiddle
faddle then needs, and hinder us from business of consequence.



Sweet-heart, no body takes a Degreein my University,
but they perform their Exercises, which you two have done,
I have had experience of your Vertues, and pronounce you
both innocent. All the Shame and Grief is mine, that my on∣ly
Son, the Pillar of my Family is crack'd or rotten, mad or a
Knave: I say he is mad.



I say he is a suborn'd Rascal:



I'm o' the Doctors mind.



I'le give you an unanswerable reason to the contrary.







I never discover'd it, not so much as in the Boys Face, and
I'le see through such a Boy as he, as plain as through a new-laid
Fgg. The oldest Face shall no more cheat me, than old Coin
does an Antiquary.



And what am I? an Owl.



I don't say you are.



You two will kindle again.



No, the Boy shall decide the diff'rence, I ha' sent for
him; here he comes.





This Woman is a Whore, and I was in the right.




What say you now? does not the Madman peep through
all his Looks and Gestures?



I'le examine him Sirrah.



Hold your prating damn'd Whore.




De'e see? stark mad.



Who subborn'd you to accuse your Mother of bei•ng
Prostitute to Florio?



Who subborn'd you to accuse the Title of Doctor of Di∣vinity,
of being a Prostitute to such an ignorant Ass?



Sirrah, I am a Scholar, and you are an ignorant, saw∣cy,
pragmattical Rascall.



Nay, if Rogue and Rascal be Latin and Greek, thou art
the best Scholar in Christendom, for no Man living is so ver•• in
those Languages.



When I use those Languages, I, like Adam, give every
Beast 〈◊〉 proper Name.



And when I call thee ignorant Coxcom••, I give thee
no other Name then thy own Sermons do. That thou art an
insolent Fool, is the only true Doctrine thou preachest.



Is he mad, or no?



He is more Knave, than •ool, Sarrah, don't you abuse
the D••tor.



How do I know 〈◊〉 a Doctor, we have only his word
for it, nor that neither when he Preaches.



Sirrah, I'le hang you.



Ay, thou art a Doctor at that.



Ay, and of Divinity too, you impudent Rascal.



Where did you take your Degree in, Beargarden?



In a learn'd University, Sir.



I, the University of Coffee-houses, the University of
Lies, where, if any one speakes Truth, the University 〈◊〉
it's Charter. •here thou'rt a Doctor, and the Bricklayer prin∣cipal
Fellow of a Colledge.



Don't you meddle wi' me, you malapert boy you, the
greatest Lords and Politicians of the Kingdom, of our Party, won't
be so sawcy wi' meas you are, but Court me, and are proud o'
me, and depend upon my Counsel and Countenance.



Depend on thy Countenance! They hav•〈◊〉 de∣pendance 
damn'd confounded Woman? great with a Rascal

Gnaw'd with Diseases, 'till he's as enomous as a chaw'd •ullet▪
and refuse me Jilt▪ I'le make her great with me.



You see what Sa••eys of madness he has of Craffy! but to
what purpose shou'd I speak to him? Craffy, if you have any
  66
understanding; say whether you saw your Mother in the Gar∣den
house wi' Florio, or not?



Why I will swear that 







She's the handsom'st Woman in the World, what Breasts
she has!



The handsom'st Woman? what's that to the business?
Is not this distraction, Gentlemen? Answer to the question,
did you see her in the Garden-house with Florio?




Hark you, Gentlewoman, you know I saw you there; I have
three Witnesses to swear it; meet me there, I'le bring you oft.




Your Witnesses are perjur'd Rascals, and you are an
Ass, who abuse me just now I'm coming to have more inclination
for you, than my Conscience will admit of.




I did not see her there, I did not.



Then thou art mad.



Will you meet me there?




Perhaps I may, if you'l be civil.






Now I swear I did not see her there, but that damn'd Rascal I
did see there; an impudent rotten Fellow, that has never a
sound bit about him, of his own, but is inlay'd like a Cabinet:
that he shou'd dare to kiss and embrace such a delicate Woman as
my Mother, there.






Did he? ay, a hundred times, I saw him, a Rascal.



And yet just now, you said she was not there.



How now? was I there?



I forget my self (Aside.) No faith she was not there.



How cou'd he embrace her then?



In his fancy, I saw her in his Fancy, as plain as cou'd be,
he has a huge fancy for her.



Fancy, Lord help thee Boy, thou hast strange fancies;
take himaway, he's a sad 〈◊〉 take him away, or he'l break
my heart. Lock him up.



Lockme up? how shall I come at my Mother then?
Pox take it.









I think my Judgment is to be rely'd upon.



I wish in his madness he had not torn my good Reputa∣tion,
the only Image of a Man we ought to venerate.



I wou'd have no body's Picture preserv'd but the Doctors.



Nor I. Well, I have news to tell you from another
World, the very Devils have more care of us, than our pre∣tended
Friends. A Spirit appear'd to a Country Maid, and
told her, Naples wou'd be burnt on this Night, if care was not
taken.



Is it possible! where is the Maid?



In the Country, she was coming to Town, fell ill by the
way, so she has sent the Story to the Viceroy, by the Post.



And what says he?



He laughs at it.



He's a fine Fellow.



He's in the right, why the Devil wou'd not the Spirit
come Post himself, but deliver a Message of this consequence to
a silly Country Gossip? The Devil never imployes any but
Fopps of Spirits, he's not fit to be a Devil, I'le justifie it.



How do you know 'twas a Devil? May be 'twas the
Soul of some of our Friends.



Let it be whose Soul it will, I say the Soul was a Fop.
I think People, when they are dead turn Tonies; they never
say one wise word, nor ever come into any wise Company.



The Viceroy is a pure Canary-Bird, I'le have him turn'd
out of his place, I'le prove he is a Mahometan, he was Cir∣cumcised
at Bar bar badoes.



I believe you mean Barbary, Doctor.



Why, ay, Barbadoes is the Latin name for Barbary. I
love to swear like a Scholar, and a Doctor, as I am.



Well, I'le go put all the Town in Arms.





I'le go wi' you, I dare not stay in any House





I dare not stir out o' mine.





My Lord, here is a Great Gentleman lays he must n•eds
  68
speak with your Lordship presently, about affairs that concern
your self.



Look to me, for I know not what he is.



My Lord, I must beg leave to whisper you.



You may, Sir, but I must also beg leave to use 〈◊〉
these are dangerous times▪ some men ha' been almost whisper'd
out o' their Necks.



I come from the Viceroy; he is sensible of your great
Parts and Intere••, and desires to speak wi' you presently; and
if you will be his •riend, he offers you your own tearms, 〈◊〉
Honour, Profit, and Greatness.



Had is it come to this? I like this Sir, 〈…〉.



A Chair waits for you at the door; he desires 〈…〉
may be manag'd with all secrecy 'till 'tis settled.



I will 〈…〉 a Wise Man. Mr. Florie I'm
call'd away about matters of very great Importance, I must take
my leave.



O' this 〈…〉 Night, my Lord?







Wou'd 〈◊〉 Nation were setled once, that we might en∣••y
one another.



It may 〈…〉 speedily. Good Night.







〈…〉 Mr. Florio! are you well enough?



〈…〉, my Lord, my good Name is the Child of a
••ck Man. seldom sound, never thought to be so. I must be
•ender of it: Good Night, Madam; come, my Lord, I'le see
you in your Chair.



No, no, I cannot stay for your dreaming pace: I'm in
haste.







I cannot stay, I cannot stay; good Night, good Night.





Ha, ha, ha, how greedily this Fool swallows the 〈◊〉,
•s the room, that must pass with him for the Court, and secure
him till his Horns be grown, so drest •e cannot know it to be
one in his own House?



That was my care.



You see my Man's new furniture has cheated him.



So shall the Room.



Then we may securely hoise Sail for 〈…〉.
All the Mudd that barr'd it up, we have con•eyed away, and
I will come a Shore on these white Cliffs, and plant my Heart
there for ever.



Do so, and I'le promise thee the Happiness and Wealth
I gain by the Residence of my Prince, shall not make 〈◊〉 un∣gratefully
Factious. 〈◊〉 true to me, and I'le be most Loyal to thee.



Then we'll be the happiest pair in the whole World.









My Lord, you are very welcome to Court.



Your most humble Servant, Sir.



Take not your private Reception ill, for f•w or none are
entrusted with this •ntrigue; 'tis a great State 〈◊〉 and great
Honours, to my knowledge, are designed you, no less than
the High 〈◊〉 of Lord Treasurer.







Sir, I speak what I know; 'twill be some time before
you come to it; and the Viceroy will expect you sacrifice to him
the Doctor, Bricklayer, Florio .



Ay, and my Father too, if he were alive, he shou'd
hang 'em all. Lord Treasurer!



I hope, my Lord, you won't 〈◊〉 some Oaths and 



Nothing, I'le refuse nothing, Sir, for such Honour as
this: Lord Treasurer!



I'le acquaint his Highness with your Arrival: you must
be willing to suffer some attendance, the common affliction of
all Courtiers.



I'le do, or suffer any thing, for so much Glory as this.
Lord Treasurer!



Your humble Servant, my Lord.





Your most humble Servant, Sir: Lord Treasurer! to
what Grandeur am I rising? Some of the Court are coming.





So, I ha' got out o' my Prison.







So, I have shut back the Lock admirably, and got out of
Prison: my Father! but why shou'd I be afraid of him? he
thinks me mad, and will be afraid o' me.



What a notable Boy is this? I thought he was mad, and
he has more Wit than my self, h'as climb'd to preferment before
me; I always said this Boy had nimble parts. Son.







You are surpriz'd to see me in Court.







I am as much surpriz'd to see your Wit, which so subtil∣ly
disguis'd your Policy under pretended madness.



Policy! am I grown from a Madman to a Politician?



Well, I am proud o' thee. Father and Son, both Favou¦rites!
o' my word we shall be a great Family. Well what
says the Viceroy to thee o' me?







Ay, and how art thou in with the Vice-Queen?







Ay, for Women have great power in all Courts. Did'st
now come out of the Vice-Queen's side?



Out of her side!



Her side, that is her part o'th' Court? her Apart∣ments;
thou think'st I'm a raw Courtier; no, Sir, I know Court
Phrases.



My dirty hole, the Vice-Queens Apartment!



Why art so shy to thy Brother Courtier? I'm thy Bro∣ther
Courtier now.



Now wou'd I give ten pound to know which of us two
is mad; if I were sure he were mad, I'd run and beg him present∣ly;
but the danger is, lest I be beg'd my self.



Thou art close wi' me, but I'le be open with thee: I have
sold all the Whigs, and my self into the Bargain; and what
dost think the Court gave me?







The Lord Treasurer's place; I am to be Lord Treasu∣rer.
Boy.











The Lord bless thee, and deliver thee from Poetry, for
thou art a sad sight.



Ha! a noise! the Court assaulted! I am cruel affraid
the Whigs ha' made some attempt upon the Court, and got the
better, then will they catch me in Court, and hang me for a
Turn-coat. hide Boy, hide.



Yet cannot I tell which of us is mad, or where I am.




Porter of the Podesta's House.


Friend, you were best confess where your Lord is, be∣fore
I break open any more Doors, for if I find him in the
House, after your denial of him, I shall punish you.



Indeed, if it please your Highness, he never came
home since he went abroad with a strange Gentleman.



Your Lady you say's a Bed, and will not be disturb'd?



I must disturb her, if it be your pleasure, but she has
forbid any Person coming near her Chamber.




The Governour o'th' City here? then the Whigs are
worsted, and I'le shew my self.



The Governour here! then this is the Court.







De'e see, Sirrah? your Master's in the First Room I
come in.



I did not know it, indeed, my Lord.











Ay, the Viceroy will endure your intollerable disor∣ders
no longer. Arm the City at mid-night, and send your Agi∣tators
abroad to disperse new minted lies among 'em, the Com
wherewith you pay all your Forces. I have order to secure you
all.



I fear you not.



〈…〉and my Habeas Corpus.



How now brother, Courtier! is this your greatness



Ha! am I trapann'd? was this fair o'th Viceroy to en∣tice
me to Court with promises of Honours and Prefer∣ments,
and then secure me?



The Viceroy entice you to Court with Promises?



Yes, you had not seen me in Court else.



Why, when did I see you in Court?



When! that's a strange Question. Where am I now▪



That's a stranger Question. Do you not know where
you are? do you not know your own home?



My own home! why am I at home?







Then the disputes at an end? my Lord, I beg to 〈◊〉
his Guardian.



If I be at home, I have had a fine trick plaid me
and by this Gentleman, I am glad I have you Sir pray let him be secur'd, and examin'd Sir, where am I?








At home! and wherefore did you entice me out o•
my house, and after you had danc'd me to and fro, 〈◊〉
me home again, pretending you brought me to Court.







His Periwig. and false Beard, confess 'twas that his
Master might make my Lord Treasurer a Cuckold 
for this is Florio's man 



Florio's man! then his Master is an Impostor, my
Wife a Slut, and I'm a Fool.



And a Knave, for I believe you went abroad with
designs to betray us.



I shan't inform you Sir.



There's not an honest man in the world.



Now am I to be believ'd, or no? Sirrah you Pimp,
where ha' you pimp'd this couple together?



In the next room.



Force open the door.


sitting Arm in Arm, they offer to fly, and are catch'd.


























Are you sick Sir? I'le know the state of your body.



My wife can tell.



There's another Lady shall enquire a Rack.



That Lady's a scurvy bedfellow, I'le spare her pains.



Are you to dye a Thursday come-sennight?



I believe 'twill be put off a little longer now.



So, you are a healthy Rascal, are you?



Why truly I find my self very finely well, I thank
heaven, very well.



Oh you shamming Rascal!



How! ha' you abus'd mee thus? and are you an Im∣postor.



And wou'd you abuse us, Madam? and cheat us in∣to
a belief you did not know it?



Do you believe I did?



Did not all our eyes see you Arm in Arm?



What o' that? I invoke heaven to witness 







Is it possible 



Never come near my bed, or sight more.



I invoke heaven to witness 







That thou shalt never come near my bed, or sight
more.







The impudence is yours. I modestly conceal'd your
shame and mine, and you would force me impudently to
confess.



Is it my shame that you are a Strumpet?



Yes, she is a true Whig, and has revolted from you,
because you did not pay her nightly Pension well.



I hope you have Sir.



I wonnot say whether I have, or no.



But I will say thou art a Rascal.



I'me an honester man than your self, and truer to
my Principles, you wou'd have left 'em for Preferment. I
  74
retain 'em, our Principles are, he is not to be regarded who
has a right to Govern, but he who can best serve the ends
of Government▪ I can better serve the ends of your Lady▪
than you can, so I lay claim to your Lady.



And you have my consent.



So, I have the voice o• the Subject too; then you are m•
wife, and I'le keep you.



Oh brave! Sir, must this be?



Ask the Law, I must do all things according to Law.



Your Servant, My Lord Treasurer; these are a fine
Crew, Sir, Here's the Bricklayer, Sir, a fine Privy Counsellor, is
he not? he expects also every day to be a Colonel, he is already
a Colonel Presumptive.







Here's the Doctor too, a fine Divine, Sir.



Si•rah don't meddle with me.



He applies himself very much to the Bible, I mean to
kiss it. He Prays much, so help him the Contents o'th' Book,
and they have helped him to many a pound, though they and
he scarce ever saw one another. The Bible is the only Benefice
he has, Sir.



Si•rah, I'le have your Ears.



Never when you Preach, Doctor. They are all very
good Men, never take Heavens Name in vain, that is, Swear,
and get nothing by it; but to get your Estate, or command,
they'l Swear your Head off.







They are moderate Drinkers o' Wine, but will Car∣rous•
Water abundantly, for they'l drink your Rivers, Fish and
all, and put your Land into it for a Toast, if you'l let 'em. And
yet sometimes they have very narrow Swallows, they cannot
down with a little Church Ceremony, but they'l swallow
Church Lands, Hedges and Ditches.



Well, my Lord Pedesta, your Office the Victroy and
the Council will order be manag'd by a wiser Man.



I wonnot part wi' my Office but by Law. I have
done nothing but by the Advice of Able Council Here
he comes.








Counsellor Bartoline, will our Charter justifie us?



In What? keeping a Bawdy housh? your Housh ha•li
been made a Bawdy-housh, notch by me, but by Florio, your
shicke shaint a yam'd Rascal.



I know it to my sorrow. But the Question I ask is,
will our Charter justifie our Arming without the Viceroy's
leave?



I have chold you it will a hundred chymsh, and let the
Vishroy do hish worsht.



•ow! bring that Knave to me.



Sir, the Governour ot'h City commands you to come
to him



The Governour here •od' shame, yen l'me ruined, I'me
ruin'd.



Sir, did not the Viceroy retain you for his Lawyer, and
did not you send him the direct contrary Opinion?



Yesh and pleash your Lordship, and I sent his High∣nesh
chrue Law. I only sheatcher'd Chas among these Fellowsh
cho catch 'em, caush I found 'em arrant Rashcalsh, and cho
shew my Loyalchy, I have drawn up Arti•lsh of High Chrea∣son
against 'em, and you may hang 'em all.



What a Rogue's here?



This was you that understood Mankind.



I'l• never pretend to it more.



There yey are Shir 



Articles of High Treason, with other High Crimes and
Misdemeanours against Don Pedro, Duke of Ossuna, Viceroy of
Naples: How! Articles of Treason against the Viceroy?



Oh, My Lord, My Lord, I ha' given you the wrong
Paper, yat wash a Paper I drew to delude yesh Rogush. Pray
dont chake advanchage of an old fumbling Fellow.







I beg you Lordships pardon on my kneesh.



Oh, Sir, if the Viceroy were at a Bar, you'd bring him
upon his Knees.



Ingeed I am Loyal Shir. I have discover'd a horrible
  76
Plotch, one Flor•o has Plotched cho open the Gatesh, and
letch in the French.











A de•aush'd Fellow, yat prechends to be Sinck, 〈◊〉
Godly, Preachesh up and down for a Benefish. Yat ish 〈◊〉
Mansh Wife he likesh.



Here's the Man you speak of.



Then I desire he may be apprehenged for High 〈…〉
I have choo Witneshesh will Shwear all yish upon 〈◊〉



what means the Rascal?



Yesh are the Men.



What C•untry-Men are they?



I am an Irish man, I'me not asham'd o' my Country



What Religion are you of?



Hubbubbow! ask an Irish Man what Religion he 〈◊〉
shertainly it I be an Irish Man, I'me a good Catholick



Well, and what can you Swear against Florio•



I'le Shwear hesh a Knave and a Rascal, and a 〈◊〉
and hash been in a Plot.







To kill all the Town, and let in the French; yesh indeed.



Kill all the Town by my self.



No, I wash to have a toush and Cobs to help tee.



Cobs! what are those?



Pieshes of Eight and I wash to have ten hundred
of 'em.







To let in the French, and make a Fire in the Town, and
cut all our Troa•sh; yesh indeed.



All our troatsh? wast thou to cut thy own throat.



Sir, we wo•'t have our Evidence ba•led he means
All our throats dost not?



Yesh indeed all our throatsh.



I'le swear I never saw this Fellows face before in my
life.



Hubbubbow, tou hasht drunk above a tousand times
ushqaebagh wi'me, to de carrying on of tish plot.







A brave Liquor tat we have in Ireland, tersh no
  77
such here, I never shaw any here.



How cou'd I drink 〈◊〉 then?



I don't know how tou coud'st drink it, but tou hash
drunk it above a toushand times, and a toushand.



Come, come Sirrah, I doubt you are a Vill•in.



Hubbubbow! tou talk'st like an English 〈…〉,
wilt tou be an English Heretique, and not believe 〈◊〉
Irishman.



Come, come, the Fellow's an honest simple Fellow



Ay, by Shaint Patrick am I.



H'as discover'd a horrible plot, only wants expression.
Is it possible you Rogue you? was this the meaning of all
your canting, and deluding us, to lull us asleep whilst our
Throats are cut?



Thou Monster• not only Cuckold me, but Cut my
Throat.











〈…〉 say the •ellow before.



I'le Swear, I have seen him with thee above •orty times.



And so have I too I'le teach the Rogue to ly with my
Mistriss, I'le hang him if I can.




So the Plot's prov'd, plainly prov'd.




A Plot to murder me •s prov'd, but sure such a Ra•cal
as this who has sworn Contradictions shall not be believ'd.



He is a Rogue, and a Traytor that does not behave eve∣ry
Word he says.





Sir, I have catch'd Mr. Florio here.



What Florio? art out of thy Wi•sh▪



The Florio, that was to let in the Fren••, and run away
with my Mistriss, • ha' catch'd 'em together, and brought 'em



Thou art Mad, our Evigensh has shworn again••• a
noyer Man.



Then your Evidence is Mad, and don't know what they
Swear.



Sir, I know what I Swear as well as you do, and know
Mr. Florio as well as any Man, I have known him this seven
  78
years, and know this Man to be the true Florio, and a Traytor
that plotted to let in the French.



Then thou art a Rascal, and bought off, for this is the
true Florio, and the Traytor that plotted to let in the French.



Then thou art a Rascal, and hired to be one; for I,
and all the Town can swear his Name is Artal.



Oh, the Devil! all our Plot's confounded.



You Irishman, which do you say is the true Florio?



Tish ish de Man I wash bid to shwear againsht.



Bid to swear against? who bid you? confess, or the
Rrack shall make you.



Oh! preedee do not wrack me, and I will confess. Tish
Knave and I had shome acquaintansh, and sho I had shome oc∣casionsh
for Money, and I borrow'd shome of him, and he had
shome occashionsh for Teshtimony, and sho I tought I wash
oblig'd in shivility to lend him shome Teshtimony, and sho he
bed meshwear againsht one Florio, and shaid tish was de Man,
but if •ou wilt forgive me, I'le shwear him off again.



So, Sirrah; and who put you upon this?



An Attorney, Sir; employ'd, I suppose, by this Coun∣sellor.



O notorious mercinary Rogues! who'll believe such
Rogues as they are?







Just now you said he was a Rogue that wou'd not believe
'em.



Ay, when they said the same things that I did: what I
said was confirm'd by Craffy, a considerable young Man, Heir
to a great Estate, and of a spotless Reputation, no Man can say
the least against him.



And what say you, Craffy? speak truth, if you mean to
have any Fars.



Or any part o' my Estate.



Did you ever see this Irish-man with Florio?



I only spoke in a little Passion: I have some of the Do∣ctors
Infirmities, I'm passionate, and apt to swear in my passion.



Be perjur'd in a Passion?



This Fellow's the lyingst Rogue in the Nation, and has
been so from his Cradle.



Just now you said no Man cou'd say the least against him.







My Lord, I'le clear all. This young Woman is my
Kinswoman, I hearing she was Married to that Old Man, brought
to Town, and lodg'd in House which Florio frequented; she
not knowi•g me, I took upon me Florio's Name, and made ad∣dresses
to her; partly to divertise my self, but chie•ly to make
tryal of her Vertue. The Old Man catch'd me in the act of Court∣ship,
grew Jealous, and wou'd have abus'd his Wife, which, to
prevent, I took her from him, he, to be reveng'd, hir'd Wit∣nesses
to hang me for Treason.



I'le shwear he shpoke Creashon, but 'tish to no purpose,
for now 'twil appear Malish.



To Prison with 'em all.



I beg your Lordship to intercede with the Viceroy for
the Old Man, for my Cousins sake, and command him to use
her kindly.



I shall consider of it.



I hanke your Lordship, but my Heartsh broken.



Hang me, if you will: I'le swear I'm murder'd by Sul∣borners
and Shamplotters.







Well said, Doctor, thou wilt give Titles in the last day of
the Reign.



The last day it shall be. The Viceroy, and all of us will
put an end to his Absolute Negative Voice, his great power of
degrading Lords and Dukes, into Rogues and Rascals, if they
will not purchase of him the Confirmation of their Titles, by
capping to him: Nay, of deposing Kings, if they slight his
Councils. We will also Dissolve all his Privy-Council: And so
Gentlemen, henceforward be wise, leave off the new Trade
you have taken up, of managing State Affairs, and betake
your selves to the Callings you were bred too, and understand.
Be honest, meddle not with other Mens, matters especially
with Government, 'tis none of your Right. In short, trouble
not your selves more than needs.
Chiefly you Married Men, for all allow
You Married Men, have private Plagues enow.

