Thunder: The Ghost of Tantalus, Megaera.



THOU merciless, detested, horrid Fury:
To what new Colonies of mocking Fruits,
And vanishing false Streams, dost thou transplant
The Hungry Thirsty Shade of Tantalus?




To Colonies, where thou shalt eat and drink
Thy fill in quiet.



Wilt thou clothe me then
In Flesh and Blood again? For had I them
Thou woud'st permit me to devour my self.



I lash thee hither, to devour thy self;
Monsters I mean descended from thy self.
Thou lazy Ghost hast done thy work by halves:
I chas'd thee hither once, to fill thy House
With Incest, Treason, Blood. Incest I see,
Brother whor'd Brother's Wife: Treason I see,
Brother depos'd his Brother from his Throne;
But where's the Blood? I see no blood at all,
Th' incestuous Traytour is in Exile safe.


Let me have Murders, such as all my Snakes
May rear themselves to see, and hiss Applause.
The Father eat the Nephew he begot;
The Bastard Nephew go out of the World,
A way more horrid than he came into it▪
Let the vast Villany of thy damn'd Race
Reach, and confound the Heavens; make the Night
Engender with the Day; the groaning Day
Bring forth Gygantick darkness at full Noon,
Such as for hours may pluck the Sun from Heaven.
At this black Feast, I'le let thee be a Guest,
Devour thy fill in quiet, when thy Cup
Flowes with the Blood of thy incestuous Race,
Nothing shall dare to snatch it from thy Lips.



Return me to my dark dire Prison in Hell,
And all you tortur'd Spirits hug your pains;
Nor, might you be releas'd, return to Life;
For Earth in Sin and Torment exceeds Hell:
Finish thy execrable work thy self,
The pain is more than I am bound to bear.



Look'st thou for Laws and Equity in Hell?
Thy Sword was all thy Reason upon Earth,
And this is ours.



Oh! hold thy gnawing Whip,
I will obey.



Enter the Palace then;
Here with thy Son didst thou once feast thy Gods,
With thy great Grand-Sons now Feast all the Furies.

Behold a Shadow of thy pains in Hell
Heir'd, by thy Grand-son Atreus upon Earth;
Night seems to offer him her shady Fruit,
And squeeze her Balmy slumbers in his Eyes,
And when he catches at 'em, she pulls back,
So from the Evening's Valley to the Morning Hill
He rowls his time, as Sysiphus his Stone.
The trembling Shade obeys, and pours himself
Into the Palace, which shakes more than he.


Nature's diseas'd and scar'd at his approach;
Trees shed their Leaves, as poyson'd men their Hair;


Streams crowd into their Mother-Fountain's Womb;
The Seas that hung on the Corinthian Neck,
Like Rival Queens in endless enterview,
Swell'd with Convulsion Fits, run foaming back,
Nor can be held by all their watry Train;
And in their fright miscarry of new Isles.
Winds scowre the Air like midnight Revellers,
Mad with strong Spirits they ne're drunk before.
Night us'd to Apparitions, sweats at this,
And calls the Morning up, Morn dares not rise,
But like a timerous Virgin lower creeps.


The work is done! Atreus begins to rise,
And rising raves, descend damn'd Shade; the Earth
Cannot support at once Atreus and thee;
You both will break both Poles. Descend to Hell.





All of the sudden quiet? is the Masque
Concluded then, and Furies gone to rest?
Then Furies may have rest, though I'm denyed:
The Gods grudge me what they bestow on Hell.
What Nights have I? Sure I mistake for Nights
Whole pieces torn out of th' Infernal Blacks,
To wrap the Furies whilst they sport themselves
In this cold upper Air, by tort'ring me.
Confound you Furies, why do you vex me?
Is Earth grown good, that you want work below?
I'm sure my share has wickedness enough,
And find my Brother, and I'le fill your hands;
Mean while torment me not with Nightly pains,
Want of revenge is pain enough to me.
Till revenge Crowns me, I am still depos'd,
A Contemn'd, Artless, Nerveless, Spiritless Slave,
A loaded emptyness, on which my Brother,
Like a God, hangs an Universe of wrongs.
Ho! there!

1. Your Royal Will.




Thou lazy useless Cur, how long wilt thou
And all thy fellow Curs, with flattering Tongues,
Lye licking my wide Wounds, and not hunt out


The Savage Beast, from whom I had 'em all?
My gaping aking wounds can ne're be cur'd,
Till they are tented with his naked Bones.
By Tantalus, my wicked Grandfather
Who fear'd no Gods, by my more wicked self,
Who have no fear of Gods, or Men, or Devils,
Bring me Thyestes all to pieces torn,
E're I be rack'd by one more restless Night,
Or you, and all the Race of you shall dye;
For I'le leave nothing upon Earth to groan
For all your Deaths, but the o're-loaded Trees,
On whose torn boughs in Clusters you shall hang.


2. Sir, Tereus is return'd from the strict search
Of Prince Thyestes.



Ha! go bring him in.



Now speak the Tydings, yet thou need'st not speak,
Thy trembling Joints bow under evil news,
Death fills thy Face, and stands as in the Door
Ready to take possession of the House.
Thy Eyes, like Evening-lights before their time
Consum'd with Storms, are ready to go out,
And let thy Soul in darkness scape away:
But first I'le make it lay its burden down.
Speak, can Thyestes yet be found?






Then from this hour thou shalt be found no more.

1. Great Sir. 


Nor thou! thus will I use you all;

For you are Traytors all, hir'd Traytors, all
Brib'd by Thyestes, you are all his Slaves,
He governs here in Argos, and not I;
I am his Slave, poor Slave; I have not Wealth
Enough, to purchase from his Head one Hair;
Yet he can buy my Peace, my Throne, my Wife,
And after all can keep me on the Rack
In my own Kingdom; in the midst of all
My Slaves and Guards, a Slave can rack a King,


An exil'd Slave a King; so many Friends
In Heaven, Earth, and Hell, has Villany.






Now! what art thou?















And are you sure o' that?
By Heavens, thy Mother was so rank a Whore,
That it is more than all the Gods can tell
What share of thee is mine.



You have been pleas'd
To think me all your own.



I have been pleas'd
To be a Fool, and think thy Mother too
Was all my own, and chaste.



So sure she was,
Though any Chastity may be surpriz'd.
However, Sir, we came 



To make me mad?
Was it for that?



No, Sir, to make you Calm:
You have been pleas'd sometimes to take delight
In most unworthy me, and in these two
Poor innocent young Princes, who did ne're
Offend you yet.



How! not offend me yet?
Then shou'd two flames, all of the •udden burst
Out of the Hill, on which my Palace stands,
The Hill upon whose brow by night I sleep,
By day I take my prospects of my delight,
The horrid flames wou'd not offend me? ha!
By all the Gods, these damn'd incestuous Brats
Are the irruptions of a burning Whore,
More hot than Aetna.




Oh! Sir! howe're my Mother sin'd of late,
Yet I have heard your self sometimes con•ess
You thought her innocent when we were born.


She never saw my wicked Uncle's Face
Till after we were born.



And what o' that?
Are there no men to sin withall but he?
What a vast Monster dost thou make thy Mother?
At the first minute of her Birth in Sin,
To conquer Nature, cancel all her Laws,
Do more than Fiends have done these thousand years?
No, no, so well of her do I believe,
I rather think she always was a Whore,
And by degrees, ascended to this height:
Oh! how I lov'd that Woman! oh! the Gods!
Why in her stead was I not doom'd to love
Some gastly, grim, devouring, Hellish Fury;
Whose Hairs were Serpents, and her breath a plague;
Whose Bones were Gibets, and her Nerves Iron Chains;
Whose Eyes were Comets, and her Voice was Thunder,
Whose Teeth were Hooks all gor'd with humane blood;
Whose Flesh and Blood was a devouring bog,
Compounded of all poysons in the world?
In her abhor'd embrace I had not found
So many Deaths and Hells as I do now.



Gods! if my Mother sin'd against such love,
And sin'd so foulely as some say she has;
Pour all your vengeance on her impious head,
And spare the injur'd King; his heavy wrongs
Are sufferings great enough for all his sins.



Gods! with what witchcraft did this woman deal?
She has transform'd me to I know not what,
I am a mingle of Fool, Tyrant, Devil,
Madman, and Child, for by the Gods I weep,
VVho ne're did so in tender'st Infancy.



Hard were the Heart that would not melt at this.



I am a madman too, I tear my self,
Cause him •ought to tear I cannot reach:
I'm such a Tyrant, were he in my reach,
I'd teach the Fur〈…〉 to torment the damn'd.
I was not always t•us, this hellish mind
VVas the Creation of that cursed woman;
VVhom yet I love, so rank a Fool am I,
And for her sake, her sin-begotten brood,


For which I loathe my self, away with 'em.







How now? Resist my will? Begone,
Or on the floor I'le mingle ah your Brains▪
What hinders me from killing these lewd Brats?
Sure it is Hell, which is afraid to lose
Fruit of a Stock, the like was ne're before:
Hence from my sight you Bastards, or my Guards
Shall bear you hence upon their Holbard points.





Get you hence, Children; leave the King to me:
Go, fair Antigone, your Planets lowr,
I like 'em not; but Children your's shine out:
Prince Agamemnon, Oracles agree,
Shall lay a glorious Empire in the Dust,
And Menelaus be the chiefest Cause.
But yet no Oracle did utter this
Without ill-boding sounds; then Children hence:

Argos perhaps may perish by your Death,
And that sad way the Oracle fulfill'd.




How now, old Dotard, what is thy business here?



Business I have, or I wou'd ne're come here:
A Court is not a place for an old man;
'Specially if in dotage so far gone▪
As to be honest.



Hence with thy old Cant;
That was the unintelligible stuff
Thou taught'st my foolish Youth; which now I find
All non-sence, and not fit for Princes Courts?



What is not Vertue fit for Princes Courts?



No, 'tis an Art of washing o're false Coin,
And stamping Images of Gods, on Knaves:
Thou seem'st the humblest Creature in the World,
The Fool that into flaming Aetna leapt,
To be esteem'd a God, had not more pride.
Thou fling'st thy self into the jaws of want,
To be ador'd, and thought a Godlike man.
He strove to disappear in Flame and Smoke,


And thou in cloudy words of good and wise.



I serv'd so faithfully your Royal House,
Upwards of threescore years, that I believ'd
I might assume the name of honest man,
Since it was all the wages I desir'd.
When did I ever wrong you in my life,
That you shou'd throw this scandal on my age?
I speak for Vertues sake, and not my own,
Lest all men shou'd forsake her for a Cheat.
I'le do her right, as I'm in Conscience bound,
And boldly tell you, Vertue makes my Age
More pleasant, than your Kingdom does your Youth.








He has wrong'd you indeed.
But what have your obedient Subjects done?
And you kill them; to save their lives I came.



They hide the Traytour.



I believe the Gods
Hide him, lest you by death shou'd set him free
From greater punishments which they inflict:
Vengeance belongs to Gods, and they devour
Their luscious Morsels of Revenge alone.



I'le find their Banquet out, and have my share,
I care not what it cost me; let our fam'd
Great House Pelops tumble on my head,
So damn'd Thyestes perish under me.



You'l make your self as odious as he;
Almost as impious too.



I wou'd be more,
I wou'd do all that Villany to him,
That he can only wish were done to me,
I have no other way to prove my self
His Elder Brother, and a lawful King.
For he of us that is the greatest Fiend
Ought to be King of Argos, 'cause he gives
The greatest proof of Tantalus his blood.
And I'le appear no Bastard to the World.



What will your People say?



I'le make 'em say
What I command.



Falshoods perhaps you may.



That is the great Prerogative of Power,
To tax the world for Praise as well as Coin;
I'le make 'em praise my actions good or bad.



Yes whilst you live you may, but when you are dead
The world will curse you to Eternity.



My Name will live then to Eternity.



So will your Soul, but lost.



Let 'em but live,
No matter how.



Fear you not Men or Gods?



The Fear of Gods ne're came in Pelops House.



Think you there are no Gods?



I find all things
So false, I'm sure of nothing but of wrongs.



Then fear your injur'd Subjects, for the beams
Of Vertue breed the Golden Mines of Praise;
But Vice the Iron of Rebellion.



Let them fear that! oh! I am mad, I burn,
Furies with flaming brands are in my breast:
Their Snakes with their own poyson almost burst;
And every Vein o' mine contains a Snake.
Ho! there! bid Mycenae get in Arms,
I will pour all my Kingdom upon Greece.




And who shall guard your Cities then?




They are their Temples, and belov'd abodes.







Away! or I will spurn thee hence;
I am transported from my self arm! arm! 
I'le do! 



What will you do?



I know not what,
Something that all the Gods shall tremble at.




How miserable a thing is a great man?
Take noysie vexing greatness they that please;
Give me obscure, and safe, and silent ease:
Acquaintaince and Commerce let me have none,
With any powerful thing, but time alone:
My rest let time be fearful to offend,


And creep by me, as by a slumb'ring Friend;
Till with ease glutted, to my Grave I steal,
As men to sleep after a plentious Meal.
Oh! wretched he! who call'd abroad by power,
To know himself can never find an hour.
Strange to himself, but to all others known,
Lends every one his Life, and uses none,
So e're he tasted Life, to Death he goes,
And himself loses, e're himself he knows.





Philisthenes and Antigone meet.




OH! my Philisthenes, sad news! sad news!
My cruel Fathers Feaver of Revenge
Grows on him every hour, night brings him all
The restless shades of Hell, day all the Flames,
He's ever calling for thy Fathers Blood:
How greedily wou'd he drink thine more sweet?
But do not fear; as soon as Night appears
Away we'll fly from this accursed place,
Devoted by our Fathers to all ill:
By thine to Incest, and by mine to blood.



Oh! Gods! what dreadful miseries must befall
Th' unhappy Off-spring of two such bad men?



Our Innocence and Love will guard us safe:
I have prepar'd a Chariot for our flight
To the Aegean Sea, and there a Boat
Lies lock'd at Anchor, in a Creek so small,
It seems a little Closet of the Sea,
Where Mayden Calms lye hid from Ruffian Winds:
The Creek appears a wrinkle made with age,
In a high Promontories bending brow.
The little Harbour is o're-look'd by all
But a poor humble Fisherman, whose Hut


Is all the Castle that commands the Port:
There needs no Porter where there is no Door.
Nothing they think can creep out o' that Chink.
The honest Fisherman expects us both
E're Night be old; then let us fearless fly,
We cannot lose our way, for we transport
Our Journeys end along with us, our selves.



What Beauty, and Love, do I to Misery lead?
Oh! Love! I lead thee from thy Fathers rage
To a more cruel Tyrant, merciless want!
My Fathers sins have press'd him down so low,
He stoops to eat the Charitable Bread
Of a poor aged Man, Peneus by Name.



I knew that man: oh! that's a good old man!



Where he conceals my Father, I know not;
He would not trust the secret with my Youth,
For fear I shou'd be cheated by ill men;
But from my Father oft he Presents brings,
Such as his miserable Fortune yields:
Their chiefest value is my Fathers Love.
Now shall I steal thee from thy Fathers Court,
And cannot give thee for it a poor Cave?



I foresaw this, and all my Jewels brought:
Those with our Love will make a great Estate.



Oh! you kind Gods! which way have I deserv'd
Such wondrous Love, from such a wondrous Maid?



What have I done with 'em? I have 'em not 
I have not lost 'em sure.
I left 'em in my Chamber, I did ill,
For I abhor to thrust my head again
Within that cursed House, which is a Sink
Where Jove throws all the scum of all ill stanes;
And Furies watch'd my absence, I'm afraid,
To set my Jewels in some baleful Charm:
But I'le go fetch 'em; hide! oh! hide, my Dear!
Down to the darkest corner of the Vault.



Oh! let me see thee, as long as e're I can.



No, no, 'tis dangerous, down, down, my Love!
Oh! Cave, be faithful to thy precious trust,
And all the youthful Lovers in the World,


With flowry Wreaths shall crown thy rocky brow,
Shall make a Temple of thee, and adore
Night's little Picture that adorns thy Walls,
Night Lover's Goddess, and Eternal Friend.
Farewell my Love.



Farewell my Dear! my Eyes

Are fastned to her steps, and I must look
What-e're it cost me.





And 'twill cost thee dear.



Betray'd? ha! what are you?







Oh! I am lost!



Indeed young man, thou art
So lost, I pity thee; and wou'd it cost
No life but mine, by Heaven, I'd set thee free.
But were it known, 'twou'd cost a thousand Lives;
My single Life wou'd to the raging King
Be but like a little Pillar to the Sea;
Not stop the Waves, but make 'em foam the more.
And that 'twill be discover'd is as sure
As there are Spies and Villains in a Court.



What have I done, the King shou'd seek my Life?



Thy Father sinn'd both for himself and thee.



I from my Father receive no Estate,
'Tis hard I shou'd inherit all his Faults.



May the King use thee as thou dost deserve.



Since you have so much pity, I dare beg
For my Dear Love; (whom I must see no more!)
I know you over-heard our talk!







Oh! spare her Life; and do not tell the King
She loves unhappy me.



No, no, dear Youth,
For our own sakes we'll hide it from the King:
Small trust he'd put in us, if he shou'd find
His daughter false.



She is not false; but Fate


Deals ill with her, to cast her Love on me.



Ah! cruel Chance, that brought me to this Cave,
To ruine this unhappy lovely pair.



Ah! poor Antigone! ah! wretched me! 

Ex. Phi. with the Guard. At another Door enter Antigone.



Methought complaining sounds came from the Cave;
The sounds of differing Voices were compos'd;
I'm in a horrid Agony with fear!
I cannot stay, yet forward dare not go.
Forward I must; how deadly cold I am,
As if death stood between the Cave and me?
If I meet not my Love, I shall with Death:
He is not in the Cave; where is he wander'd? 
My Love! Philisthenes my Love, my Love!
Where art thou hid? Come hither, I am here,

Antigone is here! my Love My Love.
Oh! nothing answers, he is seiz'd! he's lost! 





Ha! what is she, that sleeps in open Air?
Indeed the place is far from any path,
But what Conducts to melancholly thoughts;
But those are beaten Roads about this Court.
Her Habit calls her, noble Grecian Maid;
But her sleep says she is a Stranger here.
All Birds of Night build in this Court, but Sleep;
And sleep is here made wild with loud Complaints,
And flies away from all; I wonder how
This Maid has brought it to her lure so tame.








She wakes to moan;
Ay! that's the proper Language of this place!



My Dear! my poor Philisthenes is seiz'd!
I know 'tis so! oh! Horrour! Death! Hell! oh!



I know her now, 'tis fair Antigone!

The Daughter and the Darling of the King,
This is the Lot of all this Family.


Beautious Antigone! thou know'st me well;
I am old Peneus, one who threescore years
Has lov'd and serv'd thy wretched Family,
Impart thy sorrows to me, I perhaps
In my wide Circle of Experience,
May find some Counsel that may do me good.



Oh! good old man! how long have you been here?



I came but now.



Oh! did you see this way
Poor young Philisthenes? you know him well.



Thy Uncles Son? Thyestes eldest Son?



The same! the same!



No, all the Gods forbid
I shou'd meet him so near thy Fathers Court.



Oh! he was here, one cursed minute past.



What brought him hither?



Love to wretched me.
Our warring Fathers never ventur'd more
For bitter hate, than we for innocent Love.
Here, but a minute past, the dear youth lay;
Here in this brambly Cave lay in my Arms;
And now he's seiz'd! oh! miserable me!




Why dost thou rend that Beautious Ornament?
In what has it offended? hold thy hands.



Oh! Father! go and plead for the poor Youth!
No one dares speak to the fierce King but you.



And no one near speaks more in vain than I;
He spurns me from his presence like a Dog.







She Faints! She Swouns! I frightned her! 
Oh! I spoke indiscreetly! Daughter! Child!

Antigone! I'le go! indeed I'le go! 



There is no help for me in Heaven or Earth.



There is, there is, despair not sorrowful Maid,
All will be well I'm going to the King,
And will with powerful reasons bind his hands;
And something in me says I shall prevail;
But to whose care shall I leave thee mean while?
For, oh! I dare not trust thee to thy grief.



I'le be dispos'd of, Father, as you please,


Till I receive the blest or dreadful doom.



Then come, dear Daughter, lean upon my arm,
Which old and weak is stronger yet than thine,
Thy Youth has known more sorrow than my age.
I never hear of grief, but when I'm here:
But one days diet here of Sighs and Tears,
Returns me elder home by many years.









Thyestes eldest Son fallen in my Hands?
I find the Gods are tyr'd with holding up
The ponderous Villain, long above my Sword,
And mean to let him fall, in the mean while
They fling his Race like Vipers from their hands.
Bring in the Youth 
Enter Guard with Philisthenes.

How now Boy? what Affair?
What vast Affair, in value worth a Life,
Made thee adventure to this dangerous place?



Love to my native soyl; I came to see
The Court and Kingdom of my Ancestors;
And this great Palace where I had my birth:
For I was told King Atreus was so good,
He pardon'd and forgot his Brothers faults?



How bold and ready art thou in a lye?
Who cou'd inform thee I had pardon'd faults
Which cannot be forgiven by Men or Gods?
To what strange thing didst thou believe me turn'd
To a tame Beast? no Beast but loves Revenge:
To a mild God? He cannot be a God
That wants Revenge. 'Tis a Gods chief delight,
They mark it for their own: what then a Tree?
Alas! why did not thy good Father come
And whore my Wife under my Bawdy Shade?
So dumb a Husband need not have been fear'd,


Nor such a piece of Lumber of a King.
And thou didst come to cut me down, in hopes.
My Subjects were as weary of my Life,
As thy lewd horrid Father has made me.



I scorn an act so Villanous and base.



What crowd is this assembled in my Breast?
My Soul's a Theatre with Furies fill'd.

The Ghastly throng fling all their eager looks
Upon a Table spread with mangled Limbs,
And smoking bowls ore gorg'd with reeking blood;
Their Eyes grow larger with the pleasing sight;
And the deluded Guest, who eats his Son,
Stamps all their Cheeks with a malicious smile
The Vision takes! the Story's great and brave,
I'le give it my Revenge to Copy out.
Now with my Daughter I'le entice this Youth
To cheat his Father with a proffer'd Crown.
To meet a Crown, he'd rush on thundring Jove,

Plunge in the Sea when Winds and Billows fight,
Or on deep quicksands, that wou'd swallow hills;
Nay, worse than all these joyn'd, he wou'd meet me 
Yes, and he shall (Aside.) Philisthenes, bold Youth;
Something in thee has made Friends in my heart,
Who by plain force have master'd my Revenge,
After a long and fierce and dubious fight,
And make it bow to offer thee thy Life.
What sayst thou, Youth? hast thou a mind to live?



Let Nature answer for me.




On the ill terms of being Friends to me?



What God puts those good thoughts into your Soul?



Thy own desert; I love thee, noble Youth.



Oh! I am overwhelm'd?




The sweet Youth weeps,
And prostrates at my Feet; this must not be:
Rise, rise, my own best blood, my own best self,
The Hope and Pillar of our falling House:
What wilt thou disobey my first command?



Which of the best of Gods have done this good?



Come to me, near my Heart, within my Heart.
As soon as ever I beheld thy Eyes,
Something flew from'em, like a Charming God,
And bid the Furies leave my troubled Breast;
They strugled hard, but now they are all gone;
And now my heart is free for all my Friends.
Oh! that I had thy Father in my Arms;
In what perfection wou'd be my full joy?



And can you be so excellent to forgive
My Father too?



Ay! sooner than my self.
My barb'rous Rage I never shall forgive.



How good are you? For you had been most kind,
When you most heavily was wrong'd.




Dear Youth, let all thy Fathers Errors dye;
My mortal spite shall only be at them,
And his too lasting hatred. Wou'd I knew
Where my poor wandring exil'd Brother rov'd,
That I might send, or rather go my self
To Court him to my Arms, and to a Crown,
To be my Friend, and be my King, his turn.



And do you mean it, Sir?




Dost thou suspect my Truth?



I do not, Sir;
But I am so transported with my Joy,
I know not what I think, or what I say.



Then know'st thou where thy Father is, dear Youth?



I do not, Sir; but good old Peneus does.







Yes, my poor Father, Sir,
Has all his bread from him.



Oh! false old Rogue! 

Alas! poor Brother, art thou fall'n so low,
To live upon old Servants broken Meat?
But, good old Peneus, thou giv'st what thou hast,
By all the Gods thou shalt have thy reward.
See, here he comes! come hither pious man.





What means this change? 




I am to give thee thanks
For my own innocence, my Brothers Life;
It seems, 'tis thou, that hid him from my Rage,
And given him Bread, and starv'd my fierce revenge.



Who told you this?



Nay, be not startled, Man;
No other hurt is meant thee, than my Love;
But I'm so bad a Man, men shun my Love,
And think the Gods curse all whom I embrace.



I'm sure you once were good, but potent wrongs.
To flaming vengeance grappled you so fast,
I thought no Art or Strength cou'd set you free.



A thousand things conspir'd thy strong advice:
The tempting sight of this most noble Youth;
And last my Nature tyr'd with standing bent
Always to ill, bowed down by force of wrongs,
Starts up for ease, to its own posture, Love;
Love of my Bother, this dear Youth his Son;
And of my Sov'reign happiness, my Wife:
What think you, Sirs, did I not love my Wife?



Your passion for her hatred shew'd your Love;
Though some believe she's wrong'd as much as you.



Faulty or not, so powerful was my Love,
My wounded dying Love, had greater strength
Than all my rage in its most vigorous Youth,
And held me from her Life, that still she lives.
'Tis true, in heavy sorrow, so she ought
If she offended, as I fear she has,
Her hardships though she owes to her own choice.
I've often offer'd her my useless Couch;
For what is it to me? I never sleep.
But for her Bed, she chuses the hard floor.
My Table is spread for her; I never eat:
And she'll take nothing but what feeds her grief.
Hair-cloth and Chains she wears, but by that means


She makes me wear'em, 'cause I feel her pains.



Oh! how Report has wrong'd this excellent King?



But now I've hopes to see my Brother's Face:
My spacious Arms extend to Heaven and Hell;
And I've the choice of both, which is soon made.
Oh! Peneus! bring my Brother to my Arms,
And greater joy shall lift the down-cast head
Of Pelop's House, than ever it beheld.
I'le give my Daughter to my Brother's Son,
And then our joys are fastned at the root.



I shall run mad with Joy. 




Is not this Art?

Methinks on this so fine Carv'd Pedestal,
An Image with two Faces I discern.



Dear Peneus, hasten on thy Embassy.



An Embassy that's worthy of a God;
And wou'd I were a God, that I might find
The wandring Prince, and finish this blest work.



Know'st thou not where he is then?




Ah! Peneus, why do you distrust the King?



Ah! poor deluded Youth 




He fears I'm false;
I blame him not, for I am a bad man:
I deserve all the wrongs I have indur'd;
All I desire is leave to pardon wrongs.



Oh! Father of my Father, thou whose great
And pious Charity preserv'd his Life,
Do not destroy us all by needless doubts.



Gods! guide me in this doubtful Labyrinth.

Let me not be misguided by vain doubt,
To be the death of seeming new-born joy:
But if the King dissembles, (oh good Gods!)
Let not my age, and this unknowing Youth,
Be worse misguided both, to be the death
Of his dear Father he, I of my Friend.



The wary wise old man distrusts me still.
Oh! Brother, thou hast Friends, but I have none.



Yes, I am, Sir, your Friend, as much as his:
But more to Faith and Honesty than both▪



Well, I will put my Kingdom in thy hands.
Behind the Palace, in a sacred Field,
Secur'd by twenty Walls, and watch'd by Guards,
Rests all the Fortune of our Royal House.
A shining Ram whose yellow Fleece is Gold;
The Sands of Tagus are not half so rich;
Whoever has possession of this Beast,
Has all the Fortune of our House in pawn,
An Hostage all our Gods cannot redeem,
They are in perfect Friendship with that Prince
To whom they send this Wealthy Minister;



By long Experience, Sir, I know all this.



Ho! there! go catch and bind the Sacred Ram.
A Field discover'd; a Golden Ram seen in the Head of a
Flock of Sheep; a Guard round the Field; they bring the Ram
to the King.

Peneus, this present to my Brother bear,
As a rich Pledge of my Eternal Love.
Give it to him, on no Condition,
But that he come and take his turn to Reign.







Still dost thou harbour doubt?



Whether I Dream or no.



Oh! on my knees,
I beg with Tears suspect the King no more;
I've had no joy in all my Youth till now,
And now good Fortune, like a Noon-day Sun,
Breaks out upon me, if with Cloudy doubts
You darken all again, I shall run mad.



I'le say no more; be witnesses ye Gods,
If never Joy come more under this Roof,
If it be any, any fault of mine.



Sir, I will bear you witness the short while
My poor life lasts; which lies in Peneus's hands.
If he will still keep up this wall of doubt
'Tween joy and me; I'm at my Journeys end.
Resolve me. Peneus, will you let me dye?



No: but I quickly shall, my feeble age.


Can never climb up this high hill of joy,
But I shall faint before I reach the top;
Howe're I'le go as far as e're I can:
I'le send, for bring is too much joy for me
(Most excellent King) your Brother to your Arms.
But I go hence so surfeited with joy
I shall not live to see you any more.



Oh! stay, thou richest blessing of our House;
The dear Philisthenes shall go alone.



He is to his Father wonderfully dear;
But he is young, his Father may distrust
The weakness of his soft and easie youth.
My wary faithful age he will not doubt;
That I must go my self; farewell, good King.



Farewell, thou pious, sacred, blest old man.
Farewell sweet Youth, henceforwards my dear Son.



Sir, I wou'd call you, cou'd I speak for Tears,
Father, and giver of my best new life.



My Dear Antigone shall know thy Love;
I'le tell such Stories of thee, thou shalt find
At thy return her Love exceeding thine.




Peneus thy hand! I am so stun'd with joy,
I cannot see my way.




And Guards attend 'em Farewell to you both,


I think I've counterfeited rarely well.
He who wou'd rule so damn'd a World as this,
Where so many dissembling Villains dwell,
Must cheat the Devil, and out-dissemble Hell.










I'M torn! I'm torn! by Sorrow, Rage, Despair!
No Tydings yet of my Philisthenes?

I dare not, dare not ask, lest on my head
I pull the Thunder of some dreadful news.
Like a low Vale between two raging Seas,
Of Fear and Hope, I lye, and hourly expect
A deluge of delight, or of despair.
But oh! the Seas rowl fastest from despair:
For I like not this new and strange Command
Sent from my Father, to come visit here,
In her sad prison, the afflicted Queen.
(For if she sinn'd as some believe, I hate
To call her Mother) but of late she was
A hated, out-cast, and forbidden thing.
My Father wou'd not suffer to come near
This doleful dwelling, any thing he lov'd.
Then he has heard our Love, and is enrag'd;
If so, my dear Philisthenes is dead,
And with my Mother I'm condemn'd to dye.
It must be so! I grow exceeding ill.



Oh! help! the Princess! help! she faints away.



No matter what I do let me alone! 
Oh! my Philisthenes! 'twill not be long
E're I be with thee! Call the men that Guard
The Queen, my wretched Mother.












Come to the Princess.







Know you this Signet?



Yes, it is the Kings.



I must have entrance here.







Let the Queen know that by the Kings command
I come to wait on her.



I'le tell the Queen.




Now Gods prepare me for th' afflicting fight.
For if report be true, the alter'd Queen
Is the most doleful Object in the World.


Legs, she lies on the ground, a Lamp burning by her.


My Daughter see me by the Kings command?
What does he mean? No good to us, I fear?



Is that the Queen? Is that my Mother? oh!



My Daughter there? Antigone! my Child!












O! my Tears! my Tears!
I cannot speak!



Weep in my Bosom Child,
And let thy poor sad Mother weep in thine.
Come rest thy self, my Daughter, sit thee down
On the hard Floor, thy Mothers only Bed;
And hear the mournfull'st Story in the World.







Oh! my lov'd, my dear,
My precious Comfort, dearer than my Life.
My Life! What is my miserable Life?
Dear as my Life was in my happy state.
And happy! oh! too happy once I was;
My Massy happiness tyr'd out my Fate,
It cou'd not carry it to my lives end.
Never did Woman love a Man more dear
Than I once did, and still do love the King;
Be witness all the Gods to what I say,
And ne're was Woman more belov'd by man.
  23Than I was by the King, until oh! Child,
I cannot speak how sadly I have been wrong'd.



Oh! my Dear Mother! I believe you indeed,
All the Gods know I ne're thought otherwise.




Thyestes! (oh! Hell is in that Name▪)
Me his own Brother's Wife, his dear lov'd Wife,
Me whom his Brother trusted to his Care,
Bruitishly forc'd 








To get, by fraud, the Sacred Golden Fleece,
The Monument and Instrument of Fate,
To gain the Kingdom to secure his Sin,
And retain me a Pris'ner for his Lust.



All this I've heard, and ever did believe;
But no kind God wou'd e're conveigh this Faith
Into my Fathers Soul.



Oh! no, my Child;
Then think, oh! think, what are thy Mothers wrongs;
And what her dismal alter'd sad Estate.



Oh! Gods! was ever any thing so sad?



Oh! I have know the time, I'd not have let
Such dirty Earth as this come near my Feet,
Which now is all the Lodging that I have:
I wou'd not once have vext my curious Eye
With seeing such a Garment as I wear,
Nor suffer'd to have come into my sight
So vile a Creature as my self appears.



No more, no more, dear Mother.




These outward pains are pleasures, when compar'd
With what I feel within me; for the loss
Of all my honour and my Husbands Love.
The Heavens are not so spotless as my Soul,
Nor Gods so fond of Heaven as I of him;
Yet am I thought a Strumper, nay a lew'd
Incestuous monstrous Strumpet! Furies Hell 
Stand from me, Child, for I shall do thee hurt;
My Wits are going; when I think of this
They always leave me stand away dear Child.


Who says I am a Strumpet? is it thou?
Lyar! 'tis well I have thee in my Arms,
I'le throw thee piece-meal to the Furies thus!




Oh! Mother! Mother! 'tis your self you rend.



How now, contend with me? This is a Whore.



Help, the Queen's mad! 



Ay! help me from a Whore
That comes to get my Husband from my Arms:
Oh! this is right the Picture of the Age,
A shining Strumpet, and a tatter'd Wife.
Indeed! and am I thus abus'd for thee?
Some Water there! I'm burnt out o' my Bed,
My Husbands Arms, by a hot flaming whore.



Oh! Mother! Mother! I'm Antigone

Your Daughter! oh! the Queen will kill me! help!



The Fire goes out! alloo! the ashes flye!




So, now in the King's arms I will go sleep.




Help! help the Queen! what are there none in call?
Ha! her Heart strongly beats, breath comes and goes
Upon Lifes errant, with no little force.
Then all is well I hope! she sweetly sleeps.
Her raving Spirit's in a wild uproar,
Thrust her in tumults to the Vaults of sleep,
Then shut the door with violence upon her.
Sleep on, dear Mother, heal thy wounded mind
With these sweet balmy slumbers; though, alas,
'Tis only heal'd for new and deeper wounds.
Oh! were there ever two so innocent;
And yet so miserable as we are?




Where is the Queen?



Peace, peace, she's fallen asleep.



The King is coming here to visit her.











See in her Sleep she smiles,
  23〈1 page duplicate〉  25〈1 page duplicate〉
  26
Her Spirits rebound at mentioning a Name
That has such sweet agreement with her Soul;
As strings when tun'd alike, if one be touch'd
The other leaps; and now she starts, as if
She fain wou'd break through all the Gates of Sleep
To meet the Voice that bears the pleasing sound;
And now she wakes.



Oh! I have had a sweet
Reviving slumber; not these many months
Have I been so refresh'd. Antigone!

Now I perceive whence I had all my rest,
From the delight my Soul did take in thee.
But, oh! my Child! was I not very ill
Before I slept? did I no hurt at all?



Yes to your self I fear.



If that be all,
It is no matter; 'tis as it shou'd be,
I am the Center of all Miseries.
What wander from me, leave their proper course.




Madam, the King 



The King, ha! what of him?



Sends you these Robes, and begs you wou'd be pleas'd
With these to hide your misery from his sight,
And let the wondrous joy he means to take
In seeing you, be pure from any grief.



Will he see me? and can the sight of me
Be joy to him? Why does he tell me this?
He does not well to make the miseries
Of his poor ruin'd, injur'd Wife, his sport;
I love him dearly, (witness all ye Gods)
In spite of all my sufferings and wrongs.



Oh! Mother! Mother! sudden beams of hope
Shine out upon me; oh! there is a change!



Madam, upon our lives we tell you truth,
The stormd toss'd King is on the sudden calm▪
We know not what shou'd charm the billows down,
Except the good old Peneus





It was the Wisdom of that wond'rous man.




The King is near.



Fling the Robe loosely o're;
I never yet dissembled with the King;
Nor hid from him was ever yet my heart:
The wretch I am, let his own Eyes behold,
I ne're deserv'd to be thus cast away.




Kneeling? this must not be! Rise, Madam, rise.



I do not kneel, Sir, as a Criminal,
But as an innocent poor VVoman, thrown
By grievous wrongs into a state unfit
For you to see; I fall upon the Earth
To hide my self, and save your generous heart
From the affliction it must bear to see
My woful change, whether deserv'd or not.



Kneeling's a state I cannot bear to see.



You may be, Sir, assur'd I'le quit it then.




Now seat your self Madam, I think you'l own
I lov'd you well.



I were ungrateful else:
And I lov'd you as dearly the Gods know,
And I have ever been your faithful Wife,
And ne're deserv'd to lose that glorious Name.



Well, Madam, I will shew I love you still,
If you have wrong'd me, be it to your self.
The Gods forgive you freely, as I do:
If not, Gods bring your innocence to light.



Oh! Gods! good Gods! grant! grant! so good a prayer.



However, Madam, whatsoe're you be,
All things are so forgot, as if the Gods
Had made a Queen o' purpose for my Love,
And you were newly come out of their hands,
Just when they finish'd you, and said 'tis well,
We cannot add one beauty to our work;


So I receive you to my arms and heart.



Oh! this is too much joy for me to bear,
You build new Palaces on broken Walls.



Madam, Eternal Gates are lock'd and bar'd
On all past deeds, ne're to be open'd more,
By this new happy meeting of our Lips,
Which have been Strangers now these many Months;
You are as dear to me, as when you came
A fond young beautious Virgin to my Arms.



How bounteous are the Gods in the Rewards.
Of suffering Innocence?



Oh! my dear Queen!
Never admit past sufferings in thy thoughts,
I'le have this joyful day without one Cloud.
And joy shall shine through all my Family:
Even my Brother shall not want his share.







Yes, I can forgive, even him;
Nay, have invited him home to my Court,
Both to receive my Pardon and my Love.



Invite that wicked man home to your Court!



You do not know how dearly once we lov'd.



Nor you believe how much he injur'd me.



I know his violent desires by mine;
We were so one, one Fire must burn us both,
And where Fire comes all things asunder fall;
Our Union ruin'd us, but I'le build
Our Friendship more magnificent than ever.



Then will my Life as wretched be as ever;
The sight of him will like a Winter Cloud,
Darken and Freeze the Joy I have in you.



I send not home for him, who did you wrong,
But him whose penitence has done you right,
Wicked Thyestes you shall ne're see more,
But new Thyestes so to goodness chang'd,
You will know nothing of him but his Name.
Oppose not then what all the Gods design,
These breaches threaten ruine to our House;
But the good Gods design our House shall stand.
Did you ne're see a weather-beaten Wall


Breed up young Ivy to support its age?
By Heavenly care from us bad men is sprung
An excellent Race, to bind our Friendship close,
And stop up all the breaches in our House.
The Gods ne're made a more accomplish'd Youth,
Than his sweet Eldest Son, Philisthenes.








And I have sworn to marry him
To my beloved Child, Antigone.




With all the pleasing wonder mixt with dread,

A crowd behold a shining God descend,
Have I been looking for this glorious news,
'Tis lighted on me, and I'm overwhelm'd.



Child, you have seen your noble Kinsman oft,
What think you of him? Cou'd you love him? speak.



My thoughts are always in your keeping, Sir.



Well answer'd, Daughter: Love your Kinsman then,
Give him your Heart; but give him not such hold,
But you may take it back, if ill shou'd chance,
And ill may happen; I have sent the Youth
With good old Peneus, to invite to Court
My exil'd Brother; if he shou'd not come,
I shou'd relapse into my grief again.
The Noble Youth, at parting, left with me
A wealthy Token for you, his dear Love:
But you shall take no Presents from the Son,
Unless the Father first accept of mine:
Which for my Comfort beg of Heaven he may.



Oh! how devoutly will I make that Prayer?







Now my dearest Wife,
And my Antigone, embrace me both.











Oh! my perfect joy,
Come let our new-born pleasures breath sweet air;
This Room's too vile a Cabinet for Gold.
Then leave, for ever, Love, this doleful place,
And leave behind thee all thy sorrows here,
And dress thy self as this great day requires;


'Twill be thy Daughters Nuptials, and I dreamt
The Sun himself wou'd be asham'd to come
And be a Guest in his old tarnish'd Robe,
But leave my Court t' enlighten all the Globe.








Astonishment! Confusion! how came I
To be the horrid Villain that I was?
I had it not from Nature; if I had,
Why did it not break out in many years:
How cou'd I carry such a load of sin
And feel no pain? Did Custom dull my sence?
No, for as soon as e're my greedy Eyes,
Numbring the Treasures of my Brothers Bed,
Had stoln more Appetite than I cou'd appease,
I bowed beneath the weight, and cou'd not rest
Till I had laid it on his Bed again.
Perhaps I felt no sin, because I liv'd
In th' Element of sin, my Brother's Court.
Things in their Element lose all their weight;
Water in water feels as light as Air.
No, 'twas not that; I was the first that brought
Incest and Treason to my Brother's Court.
From my own self came all my Villany;
Had I not been a Dunghill, Beauty might
Have shin'd as wholesomely on me, as others.
I loath, detest my self, and flye mankind,
Counting the worst of men too good for me.
Heark! I hear voices! nay, and I see men;
They're very near me too, I'le hide my head.






Here dwells your Father.







Here in this Cave.



Ah! lonely, poor abode.



'Tis his own choice: I proffer'd him my House,
Where I had Rooms to hide, and ways to fly,
In case of danger; but he rather chose
This melancholly Desart, and this Cave.
I'le call him out to you. Thyestes! ho!
Ho! Prince Thyestes! know you not the Voice
Of your old faithful Peneus?











Is that my Father? oh I how sadly chang'd?



Who hast thou here, old Friend?



One you may trust,
Half your own self, your Son Philisthenes.












Welcome to my arms,
My Hope, my Comfort! Time has rowld about
Several Months since I have seen thy Face,
And in its progress has done wond'rous things.



Strange things indeed, to chase you to this sad
Dismal abode, nay, and to Age I think.
I see that Winter thrusting it self forth,
Long, long, before its time, in Silver Hairs.



My fault, my Son, I wou'd be great and high;
Snow lies in Summer on some Mountain tops.
Ah! Son, I'm sorry for thy noble Youth,
Thou hast so bad a Father; I'm afraid
Fortune will quarrel with thee for my sake▪
Thou wilt derive unhappiness from me,
Like an hereditary ill disease.



Sir, I was born when you were innocent,
And all the ill you have contracted since,
You have wrought out by painful penitence.
For healthy joy returns to us again.
Nay, a more vigorous joy than e're we had.
Like one recover'd from a sad desease,
Nature for dammage pays him double cost,
And gives him fairer flesh than e're he had.


For a spoil'd Cottage, she bestows a Brief.
On all her works, that doubles what he lost.



Your Son Philisthenes, has told you truth:
The King your Brother, by what God transform'd
I cannot tell, is turn'd an excellent man.
He has no memory of all Errours past,
Except his own; the chief of which he counts
His too immoderate passion for revenge.



And can this be?



Will I not tell you truth?



By thy own goodness, art thou not deceiv'd?
Thou d well'st in open truth, and when thou com'st
Among dark men, thou knowst not what they are.



Oh! Sir, my reason is not dim with age,
What e're my Eyes are; time which steals our sight,
Is for the Thievery by Nature fin'd,
To make us recompence in inward light.
Know, Sir, I did not lend your Brother Faith,
Without a Pawn, as wealthy as his Crown;
The Golden Ram, let this prevail, not I.



I stand amaz'd, for what wou'd this prevail?



To make you glorious in your Brothers Throne,
Your Brother happy in the sight of You.



And me in the possession of my Love:
I love his Daughter, fair Antigone,

And he has sworn to place her in my Arms,
When-ever to his Arms I can bring you.



This is too much; a man that wou'd revive
His famish'd Friend, wou'd never cram him thus:
He choaks my Faith with gorging it too fast,
And surfcits sickly Friendship with a Feast.



Can you suspect, when you have such a pledge?



If the King be so good, 'twere a new Treason
To blast him with my fight.




Restores intirely all your innocence,
And now your presence wou'd restore your Joys.



Things are miscall'd, I ne're was blest till now:
When I was great, I had not one delight:
Who needs a Taster has small joy in tastee.


Who needs a Guard for safety, ne're are safe▪
And who needs watching, has but little rest.
What solitude so bad, as throngs of Knaves?
What dwelling so uneasie as is his,
Who in a thousand Rooms can take no rest,
Till his proud Palace has beat back a Sea,
And lifted up a Forrest on its brow?
Say Poyson come not in a Princes Cup,
Care will, and that's as bad; say Care shou'd not,
Intemperance may, which is as bad as both;
A lingring Poyson that consumes our time,
Our Nights in drunkenness, our Days in sleep.
Say he ne're see the bloody face of War,
A thousand Dishes are a dangerous Camp,
Where very often men have met with Death,
Among those fair pretended Friends of Life;
Nor is his rest the more for silent peace,
In Calms of peace, when all without is still,
Factions within will make a Kingdom rowl.



No doubt these Evils, and a thousand more,
Attend on Royal greatness; but what then?
Will you adventure nothing for your Friends?



Oh! Father! humbly on my knees I beg,
Go to the King, if for my sake alone.



For thy dear sake alone I fear to go,
I fear to make thee guilty of my blood.



What reason have you to distrust the King?



He has had heavy wrongs, and no revenge.



Is Poverty and Exile no revenge?
Shame and Repentance is revenge enough
To a good man.



It cannot be denyed.



Can you not say he once was a good man?



The best of Kings, and Brothers?




Shew any hate to you, till you wrong'd him?







Did he then requite
Your hate so ill, as you return'd his love?







Why judge you then of him so ill?
Since you cou'd make him turn from good to ill,
May not the Gods turn him from ill to good?



It cannot be deny'd.



Are you not turn'd?
Wou'd you fain act o're all your Crimes again?







Do you excell him so,
That goodness shall be reconcil'd to you
On easie terms, but on no terms with him?



I think him a much better man than I.



Since you are chang'd, why may not he be so?
I leave it to your choice, believe the King,
And make up all the breaches of your House,
Or begin new Confusions by your stay;
Affront the King, and make him shed the blood
Of your dear Son, and me your just old Friend,
Hew Nations down to make his way to you,
Whilst Curses in full cry shall hunt you out,
As the great common mischief of the world:



No more, no more, I'm overcome I'le go 



Oh! Gods! I thank you for so good success
In my good Embassy.



And in my Love.



You Divine Guardians of these innocent Woods,
My only Friends of all the Heavenly Powers;
Who here so faithfully have hid me long,
And blest my mind with penitence and ease,
If you can bear the wickedness of Courts,
Go with us thither, and preserve us there:
Not but my life to Justice is a debt;
But let not my dear Son, and good old Friend,
Prove guilty of shedding their own blood and mine,
By undertaking such a good Design.
For who will Vertue follow, and obey,
If when she is their Guide, men lose their way?









OH! wondrous pleasure to a banish'd man!
I feel my lov'd, long look'd for Native Soyl;
My former Incest (horrid to be nam'd)
Gave me not greater pleasure, than this new
Innocent Incest with my Mother Earth.
And oh! my weary Eyes, that all the day
Had from some Mountain travell'd toward this place,
Now rest themselves upon the Royal Towers
Of that great Palace where I had my birth.
Oh! sacred Towers! sacred in your height,
Mingling with Clouds, the Villa's of the Gods,
Whither for secret pleasures they retire.
Sacred, because you are the work of Gods;
Your lofty looks boast your Divine descent,
And the proud City which lies at your Feet,
And wou'd give place to nothing but to you,
Owns her Original is short of yours.
And now a thousand Objects more ride fast
On morning beams, and meet my Eyes in throngs.

And see all Argos meets me with loud shouts.







But with them Atreus too.



What ails my Father, that he stops and shakes,
And now retires?



Return with me my Son,
And old Friend Peneus, to the honest beasts
And faithful desart, and well seated Caves;
The Beasts declare their Natures without fraud:
Trees shelter man, by whom they often dye,
And never seek revenge; no Villany
Lyes in the prospect of an humble Cave.



Talk you of Villany, of Foes and Fraud?



I talk of Atreus.




What are these to him?



Nearer than I am, for they are himself.



Gods drive these impious thoughts out of your mind.



The Gods for all our safety put 'em there:
Return, return with me.




I cannot stem the Vengeance of the Gods.



Here are no Gods, they've left this dire abode.



Oh! Father! Father! if not for my sake,
For all our Family, all the Kingdoms sake,
Bring your dear fellow Exiles peace and joy
To Argos, who does Court'em with a Crown.
Oh! look upon the Splendour of a Crown;
See from the rising King it dawns this way;
Oh! look upon it Father.




As I have often look'd upon the Sun,
When I have seen him heave a thousand Waves
In brimming Spouts, up to his Lips to drink,
To spit 'em all in the Seas Face again,
Or on some Desart, where they only serv'd
To cool a while the thirst of burning Sands:
So are we all by Royal splendour suck'd
Up to the Clouds, to be let fall again
Upon some dreadful unexpected Fate.



True Race of Tantalus! who Parent like
Are doom'd in midst of plenty to be starv'd.
His Hell and yours differ alone in this;
When he wou'd catch at joys they fly from him,
When Glories catch at you, you fly from them.



A fit Comparison; our joys and his
Are lying Shadows, which to trust is Hell.
What? Shall I trust my Brother and a Crown,
Two the uncertain'st things, I was about
To say, the falsest things in the whole world?



I must be wretched then.



Well, for thy sake,
Though I trust not the King, I'le trust the Gods.




The King is near, and now his Eye is laid
Firmly upon you, and has seiz'd you fast.



The beast is snar'd! and I'm as fierce for prey,

As the big Spartan Dog, when the fell Bore
Laggs within reach of his long stretching neck.
He breaks the Couples, from the Huntsman gets,
And knows no Master but his love to bloud.
My love to bloud will from my Fraud get loose:
But what a thing he is? Exile and Grief
Serve him so slovenly up to my Board,
It palls my Stomach; but I'le garnish him
With Princely Robes. Oh! Brother! to my Arms 
My Arms, dear Brother; render me your long
Desir'd Embrace.



Oh! I have forseited
The Title of your Brother; do not, Sir,
Revile the honour'd Name, by giving it
To me your humble penitent poor Slave.



Away to everlasting. banishment
The odious memory of all moments past,
And all their Progeny.




Excuses for my Crimes, and what were truth;
But this amazing Piety and Love
Render me past excuse, the worst of men.



Must these dire thoughts, like Harpies, hover round
Our Friendship still? Hence with 'em to abodes
More hid from man, than those from whence you came.
And rise! oh, rise to my embrace! what means
This low unfitting posture?




Than words can speak; I never kneel'd before:
Then guess the honour I wou'd pay to you.



I in the kindest manner take the sense,
But do not like the Language of the Knee;
'Tis between Brothers an ungrateful Tongue.


Then rise to me, or I will kneel to you;
We will be equal.



That shall never be:
I'le rise to your commmand; and so I still
Bow in obedience low.



Once more your arms,
My dearest Brother.



My most excellent King.



Now dear Philisthenes! thy arms, sweet Youth.



Sir, give me leave to fall and kiss your Feet.



Indeed it shall not be.







No, hang upon my Neck, thou art my Son:
Wilt thou not own the Title of my Son?



Not own it, Sir? 



Now last let me embrace

The standing blessing of our Family.



Had I been only born for this good hour,
And all my fourscore years a desart Road,
Without one joy to ease my Pilgrimage,
This Journeys end had made amends for all.







Now Father, do you credit us?





Still there are Clouds that darken my delight,
My Brothers Garments Brother spare my Eyes,
And with these Royal Ornaments conceal
These Reliques of deceas'd unhappiness.

The Attendants give Thyestes rich Robes.


Sir, These foul Garments are the Livery
Of a good Master, sorrow for my sins.



But you shall have no Master in my Court;
For with these Ornaments receive my Crown.

Takes his Diadem from his head, and gives it to Thyestes.



A second Usurpation? Gods forbid!
If my more fitting Garb offend your Eyes,
Let me lye hid among th' attending Crowd.



You shall be hid no more.






Whilst you are so; Friendship so makes me yours,
In lessening your own self, you lessen me.



It is more great to give, than wear a Crown.



And to refuse more glorious than to give;
That is the share of greatness I will chuse;
And you invited me to take my share.



I did, then both of us will be thus great,
I in my Crown, you in excelling me.
But see my Aerope, my dearest Queen.




My shame, my horror, my Eternal Hell.



Your spacious goodness, Sir, has farther reach'd
Than guilt cou'd fly; and has invited home,
To all the glories of your Court, a man,
I'le boldly tell it him before his face,
For whom Hell has not punishment enough.
There is a Creature, for whom Heaven has scarce
Rewards enow, opprest with heavy wrongs,
And is not suffer'd to breath open Air.



What is this Creature?




Which before man and Gods I claim for mine.
And I intreat you, nay, conjure you, Sir,
Not as you are my Husband, but my King,
The Representative of the Just Gods,
To bring my innocence into the light,
And if the Sun himself has not more spots 



You'd have my Brother speak your innocence?
What need? I have exactly weigh'd your cause?



I'le have the Ballance hang'd upon Sun beams,
That Heaven and Earth may see my innocence 



My Throne exalts it into all mens view.



Sir, it exalts your goodness, and not mine:
Unless you Crown my Fame as well as me,
I only bear the luggage of your praise.



The world may be assur'd I've not a doubt.



But nothing in the World shall have a doubt.



By the Eternal Gods, the Whore commits



Incest in fancy with the Villain here,
Before my Face: The very sight of him
Has got her Spirit big with Insolence.



Sir, you but lately offer'd me your Crown;
I for a moment will assume the gift,
And be a King; that is, be uncontroul'd,
Whilst I declare the Queens wrong'd innocence.



What need all this? I know what you wou'd say.



I ravish'd her, and Hell did ravish me.



And I, who have been wrong'd by both of you,
Must, for my Recompence, be disobey'd.
Nature (I find) has to the Birth and Death
Of every thing annex'd tormenting pangs.
Pangs wait upon the Birth of our new joys,
And our past ills dye with Convulsion fits.



My innocence is clear'd, and now dispose
Of me, Sir, at your pleasure.







Then thus I will dispose of all of you.
My Broher to my Friendship and my Crown.
To my delighted bosome, my dear Queen.
To my Antigone, this noble Youth.
This good old man to my rewards, and thanks. 
Do you all weep for joy? Come dry your Eyes; 
My Love shall be too hot for such light dew.
Now let the Trumpets reparation make,
For frightning Argos with the sounds of War,
And set hearts dancing to the sounds of Peace.
Let the pale Mothers trembling for their Babes,
Now dandle 'em in their Arms with smiling Cheeks.
Return the Husbands back to their young Wives,
And let not Armour hinder their embrace.
Let Swords wear Rust, the Livery of Peace,
Let every Door be with a Garland Crown'd,
And all the Conduits surfeited with Wine,
Till they o're flow with infinite excess.
And now prepare the Temple, Altars, Priests,
For the great Ceremony of the Day.
Call my Antigone to meet her Love.
Brother, lead on indeed you must you shall 

  41Ex. Thy. Atreus, Aerope, and as they go off Antigone enters,
runs to Philisthenes, and emberaces him.










Oh! my excessive joy.
And is this possible? oh! God! gods Gods
When I lost thee at the unfaithful Cave,
Did I e're think to find thee with this joy?



When I was seiz'd and dragg'd before the King,
Did Ie're think that this shou'd be my Death,
To dye in thy embraces with delight?



This was the art of the Celestial Powers,
To hold their Jewels up at a high price.



The Gods give nothing cheap, but misery.
What have I suffer'd for this happiness?
I have a large account to bring thee in.
And thou shalt pay it all, I will extend
All the Estate of Beauty which thou hast.




The Temple is prepar'd, the Priests attend;
The Court expects you with impatience, Sir.



Is't possible? And does Love stay for us?
Pardon us Love, thou ne're didst so before:
Since thou art so impatient for thy work;
By all the Gods I'le find thee work enough.



Thyestes, Philisthenes, Antigone, Peneus, Atten∣dants.
The Nuptial Ceremony perform'd; they come out of the
Temple. The Scene continues.


Now, Madam, you shall entertain the Bride.


The Bridegroom I have chosen for my Guest.
And Daughter, you shall spare him for an hour,
To Gods that fill our lusty bowls with Wine,
We usually pour some in gratitude.


Daughter, I've fill'd your Life brim-full of Joy,
And you shall offer the first hour to me.
So long the Bridegroom is my Sacrifice.
Stay in the Temple, noble Youth, a while,
I will return to thee immediately,
I wou'd unfold to thee some mysteries.


Aerope and Ladies lead out Antigone at one Door: At another
go Atreus, Thyestes, Peneus. Philisthenes follows as to
wait upon the King after a short pawse Priests bring in
Phi. stript and bound.


Ha! what means this?



'Tis by the Kings command.



What does the King intend?











Why shou'd we lye?



'Cause ye are Priests.
It is your Trade to lye, you live by lies.
Your Temples are your shops where you sell lyes.



What lyes sell we?



Why, any lyes you please;
Fools take 'em off your hands at any rate.
You Cheats, you Murderers, you Quacks of Hell,
You keep mankind diseas'd to vend your Drugs.
The King was cur'd of his disease, Revenge,
And you have sold him some Religious lye,
Has poyson'd him with Cruelty again:
And I among you shall be murder'd here 
Barb'rously murder'd.



Who shou'd murder you?



Need I doubt that, when I am among Priests.



Why do you wrong us thus?



How, I wrong you?
Can any one wrong Priests? Kings wrong themselves
And all the world, they do not hang you all.
For Kings are never safe, nor Subjects good,
Where Priests prevail; you keep the Power of Kings,
And only let 'em have what share you please.
You take the foolish peoples Consciences,


And give 'em back what honesty you please;
You keep the Keys of Womens Chambers too,
And let men have what share in 'em you please:
When you deliver up a Marriage Lock,
You still reserve a Key for your own use:
But Men or Women may play any game,
And cheat their fill, if they will pay your Box.
Oh! my Antigone! Antigone!

Thou little think'st thy beautious Eyes have had
Their last, last view of poor Philisthenes,

A bloudy Carcass, or a moaning Ghost
Is all that ever thou wilt see of me;
For I am in Priests hands, and the world knows
How little they will leave of what they grasp.
Why do you use me thus, you Murderers?



You wrong us, we abhor the bloody name.



Will you not murder me?







Nor aid the King to do't?



Nor aid the King:
But we must sacrifice you.




What differs that from murder but in name?
Oh! how these Villains cheat the world with names?
Were Wolves, or Lyons e're the tamer Beasts,
For being call'd Lambs, give murders, Massacres,
Good names, they are transform'd to ex'lent works.



The King has vowed you to th'infernal Gods.
And 'tis our duty to assist his Vows.



And shou'd the people enter into Leagues,
And vow the King to the infernal Gods,
For money you wou'd aid their hellish Vows,
And curse all honest men that wou'd not aid.
Religion's made by you a Lottery Book,
Which cheats the world of every thing they have.
Oh! Gods! deliver poor mankind from Priests:
But oh! who can deliver wretched me?
For I am in their dark Dominion here;
One of Hells strongest frontier Garrisons.









Yes, Sir what is your will?
Why have you order'd me to be thus bound?











Thou art Thyestes Son.



That's not my fault.



But a damn'd fault of his,
To dare to multiply his cursed self,
And send a filthy and incestuous Stream
To poyson all the Ages of the World;
But here it stops, I'le turn its course to Hell.



I thought y' had pardon'd all my Fathers faults.



Thou art a Boy, thy Father is a Fool,

Peneus a Dotard, all run up to Beard;
I have ensnar'd you all, to feed my Fiends,
As men hunt savage Beasts to give their Dogs.
But Tyrants Furies are so highly fed,
That mine will scorn the Souls of such damn'd Fools.



Y' embrac'd us all with Vows and Oaths and Smiles,
And promises of everlasting love;
Can such disguises well become a King?



They are thy Fathers own cast Vizards all.
He embrac'd me with Vows and Oaths and Smiles,
Then made my Wife an everlasting Whore.
Now more the Caldron and the Fire. 







To serve thee, as thy Father has serv'd me;
He has enkindled such a Fire in me,
As boyls my Flesh in my own scalding bloud.
I'le boyl thy Heart in thy own purest bloud,
To treat thy Father at thy Bridal Feast.



Oh! Hell! all Hell is in your words and looks!
Why start you not at your own dreadful voice;
For 'tis a Devils voice, and not a mans;
And Hell pours all its rage into your Breast.



Then Hells an Ass to throw away its rage,


On a heart, full as it cou'd hold before▪




Are these my Nuptial joys?



Such as thy Fathers fins provided thee.



Oh! my Antigone! Antigone!

Tyrant thank her for all the tears I shed.



Canst thou be tortur'd with the loss of her?



More than with all thou canst inflict besides.



By all thy torment then, guess half of mine,
Thou losest but the half of what thou lov'st,
Only her sight a while, and with no shame.
My Aerope was once as dear to me;
Her Heart was stollen, and body whor'd for me,
That I have lost all of her, and with all shame.



I must acknowledge, Sir, your wrongs are great



And my revenge shall equal all my wrongs.



But why on me? unless you mean to spare
My Father; and if so, pour all on me.



I cannot wound they Father, but through thee



Oh! spare me! spare me! for your own sake
See the Gods threaten you in Prodigies.
Your Palace nods to bid you have a care.



My Palace shakes for fear of its own Fate;
It did assist thy Father in his Crimes.



The Temple Columns bend, to beg my life.



Did Gods come down to beg thy hated Life,
Into their Faces I wou'd spurt thy blood.



Then you'l not mind their weeping Images;
Like frightned women in cold sweats they reel.



Let frightned women mind 'em.




Dart fiery Javelins fiercely at your Head,
But miss it, 'cause their hands with horrour shake.



Then I am here the only thing unmov'd,
And I dare do, what nothing dare behold.



Yes Tyrant, I dare see, and suffer too,
With greater courage, all thou canst inflict,
Than thou darst look on thy own frightful Soul.



How now! what is this?





Tyrant, thou never spok'st with me till now.


The wretched thing that tumbled at thy feet,
Was but a Garment which thou kep'st in pawn▪
Whilst my Soul went to see Antigone▪

And take its leave; but now I am come home,
My Breast will meet thy Dagger when it dares.



I thank you Gods I did not kill this Boy,
For of the sudden he is grown a man.
Come Priests.



I, ever while you live call Priests,
If you wou'd have a solemn murder done.



Bind with a purple band the Victims head:
Perpare the Incense, Fire, Knife, wine and Meal.



Oh! spare your pains, Priests are not to be taught
The way to murder Princes decently,
As to your sorrow you may quickly find
If any Rebels shall e're need your blood.
But I will give the remnant of my breath
In one full sigh to dear Antigone!

What have I suffer'd long for a short hope,
Which in a moment perishes with me?
A short sweet hope was all I had of thee;
And a long mournful memory will be all
Thou, dear Antigone, wilt have of me.
But I will render it so glorious,
Thou shalt not be quite void of Nuptial joys,
As I am not in hopes thou all thy life
Wilt love my name, as I dye sighing thine,

Antigone! oh! my Antigone▪




Then dye! 'tis done 'tis well 'tis excellent.




So now Thyestes I shall bring thee in
A dreadfull score for all thy pleasant sin;
Much dost thou owe me, and much shalt thou pay;
Gods ask of him the blood is shed to day.
I lodg'd the Traytor, and he rob'd my throne,
And whor'd my Wife, for which I seize his Son,
If you have title to the blood that's lost,
Pursue the Robber, not the plunder'd Host.
















Sit with us, Sir?



He waits upon the Bride.
The Queen, the Bride, and Ladies are all sat;
They are before-hand with us, let us haste
To overtake 'em.





Let us bless the Feast
With the Brides health Sir, to the fair Brides health.




My most dear Brother, I will do you right.




A deeper bowl; this to the Bridegrooms health.



This to the Gods for this most joyful day,


Now to the Bridegrooms health.



This day shall be
To Argos an Eternal Festival.



Fortune and I to day try both our strengths,
I have quite tyr'd her left-hand misery,
She now relieves it with her right-hand joy,
Which she lays on me with her utmost force;
But both shall be too weak for my strong Spirit.



So! now my Engines of delight have scru'd
Aside.
The Monster to the top of Arrogance,
And now he's ready for his deadly fall.



Oh! these extreams of misery and joy,
Measure the vast extent of a mans Soul,
My Spirit reaches Fortunes East and West.


She has ost set and risen here, yet cannot get
Out of the vast Dominion of my mind.
Ha! my proud vaunting has a sudden check;
See! from my Head my Crown of Roses falls.
My Hair, though almost drown'd beneath sweet Oyls,
With strange and sudden horrours starts upright.
Something, I know not what, bids me not eat;
And what I have devour'd, within me groans,
I fain wou'd tear my breast to set it free.
And I have catch'd the eager thirst of tears,
Which all weak Spirits have in misery;
I who in banishment ne're wept, weep now.



Brother regard it not, 'tis fancy all.
Misery like night is haunted with ill Spirits,
And Spirits leave not easily then haunts▪
'Tis said, sometimes they'l impudently stand
A flight of beams from the forlorn of day,
And scorn the Crowing of the Sprightly Cocks:
Brother 'tis morning with our pleasure yet,
Nor has the sprightly Wine Crow'd oft enough;
See in great Flaggons at full length it sleeps,
And lets these melancholly thoughts break in
Upon our weaker pleasures, rouze the Wine,
And bid him chase these fancies hence for shame,
Fill up that reverend unvanqush'd bowl,
Who many a Gyant in his time has fallen,
And many a Monster, Hercules.〈…〉.



If he descends into my groaning breast,
Like Hercules, he will descend to Hell.



And he will vanquish all the Monsters there.
Brother, your courage with this Hero try;
He o're our house has reign'd two hundred years,
And he's the only King shall rule you here.



What ails me? I cannot heave it to my Lips.



What▪ is the bowl too heavy?







The Wine will lighten it.



The Wine will not
Come near my Lips.



Why shou'd they be so strange?


They'r near a kinne.







As possible, Father and Son not nearer?



What do you mean?



Does not good Wine beget good blood?







Your Lips then and the Wine may be a kin.
Off with your kindred Wine, leave not a drop
To dye alone, bewildred in that bowle.
Help him to heave it to his Head, that's well.


Thyestes drinks; a clap of Thunder, the Table oversets, and
falls in pieces; all the lights go out.


What ponderous Crimes pull Heaven on our Heads?
Nature is choak'd with some vast Villany,
And all her Face is black.



Some lights, some lights.



The Sky is stun'd, and reels 'tween Night and Day;
Old Chaos is return'd.



It is to see
A young one born, more dreadful than her self,
That promises great comfort to her age,
And to restore her Empire.



What do you mean?



Confusion I have in thy bowels made.



Dire thoughts, like Furies, break into my mind
With flaming brands, and shew me what he means.
VVhere is Philisthenes?




Ask thy own bowels:
Thou heardst 'em groan, perhaps they now will speak.



Thou hast not Tyrant what? I dare not ask 



I kill'd thy Son, and thou hast drunk his blood.



Oh! Villany so vast it broke the Poles;
And through the spacious flaw, Hell rush'd on Earth.



Thy groaning bowels call'd up Hell to Earth;
VVild beasts will follow one anothers howles.



Hell came to have an interview with thee,
The greater Monster; one whose Villany
Has scar'd away the Sun; he wou'd depose


Himself, e're lend thy wickedness his light.



E're lend my Justice, but he cou'd lend all
His wealth to help thee to corrupt my Wife;
That he and all the Gods may flye for shame;
They all combin'd to that; Gods step'd the Mouth
Of blabbing Thunder, left it spoyl'd the sport,
Nature cou'd see that sight, and not be sick,
Nor in disorder rowl; as she does now.



I must confess, thy impious self, or I
Wou'd make Hell strain to out do us in sin;
But of the three thou art the overmatch,
For Hell has bounds, thy wickedness has none.



My just rewards of wickedness have none.



Oh! Gods! If I deserve this punishment,
Revenge the Heavens plunder'd of their light:
Compose of lightning a false dreadful day,
And take no aim, but dart it at us both;
Hit one of us, and tis no matter which,
You strike the wickedst man that lives on Earth.
You will be merciful in burning me,
Make me become my dear Son's Funeral pile.
All Gods have left us but the Powers of Hell,
Those only are fit to bear us Company;
And with a Sword I fear to end my grief,
Left I in my own bosom stab my Son.



I never had thee in my power till now;
I had thy Fortune, Children, and thy Life;
But now these tears confess I have thy Soul,
And now I'm well rewarded for my pains.



If now I shou'd not grieve, I were no man;
But a more horrid Monster than thy self.
What was my poor Sons fault?



That he was thine.



And being mine, wou'dst thou give me, give me
His blood to drink?



Who injur'd me but thee?



Bear witness Gods! he owns the innocence
Of this poor Youth, whose bloud he made me drink?



What Gods? the Guardians of Nuptial Beds?



Must sin with sin be punish'd?




Becomes a Vertue, that chastises sin.



Oh! my poor Son!



All these are tears of rage,
'Cause I' a aforehand with thee in this sin.
Thou with my Children wou'dst have treated me,
But that thou wert afraid they were thy own
Incestuous Bastards all.



I' ve done with thee,
And leave thee to the Gods for punishment.



But I've not done with thee; for though thy eyes
Please me with weeping, so they shall not scape.
The sight of the remainders of thy Son,
And of her death thou lov'st above thy Son,
Shall tear 'em out, and then the work's compleat.
Open the Temple Gates, and call the Queen.
You mingled Lusts, now you shall mingle pains,
And through your Eyes, the passage of your Lusts.
Here shew the Father the Sons torn remains.




Oh! my Philisthenes! my mangled Son!
Had ever Hell such cruelty as this?



Nor man such Treason and such lust as thine,
Nor injur'd Monarch such revenge as I.
Thy former Villany, and present Tears,
I'le cast in Brass, and in Effigie
I'le drag thee round all ages of the world.




Stand off, I am not mad, but I shall be,
If this be true; it never can be true,
Oh! Sir, I've heard 



What have you heard?








What's the matter with you? speak!
What have you heard?



You have Kill'd Philisthenes.




There was no secret love between you? ha?






What is the matter both with Heaven and Earth?
For every Face below is white as Death,
And Heavens Face above is black as Hell.
Sir, you was pleas'd to send for me they say?







But I had come if you had not.
I was with my two little pretty Sons,
My Agamemnon, and my Menelaus.

When of the sudden, with a thousand groans,
The Air brought forth a monstrous Shade, as black
As Hell had vomited a Lake of Pitch.



Thy sins were then in labour, and brought forth
This bloody Vengeance.



Oh! most dreadful sight!



The worst I ever saw, except thy self.



My Child is murder'd!



By thy own lust.



No, by thy Perjury, inhumane Prince.



How durst thou name, or think of Perjury.



That Villain clear'd the innocence the wrong'd.



I never will believe either him or thee.



This bloody spectacle says that too loud.
I see a Dagger in my poor Childs hand.
I thank thee Daughter for this Legacy.
Now hear me Gods, for hear me well you may;
Born high on Innocence, I reach your Throne,
If e're in thought I yielded to that sin,
For which I suffer so much misery;
Kindle a Hell o' purpose for my Soul:
But if I undeserv'd have born all this,
Then build a Heaven fit for my reward,
And I will lay the first Foundation Stone.
Thus, thus, thus;


Nay Villain I will lay you firm.

This for the loss of my dear Husband's Love:
This for the loss of my dear Daughters Life:


This for the ruin of my honest Name:
This for my Life I am about to lose.
Now I have done my self this little right,
I can with comfort dye! oh! Sir, farewell;


You loose a faithful Wife, what e're you think,
Made by great wrongs unfit for your embrace
But most deserving your kind memory.



Oh! Sir! come here and see your workmanship.



Oh! my deluded miserable age!
Have I toyl'd fourscore years for Innocence,
And am I made a murderer at last?



Hence Hypocrite! thou never hadst conceal'd
My lewd and Trait'rous Brother in thy House,
So nurtur'd all his horrid sins, when born,
But that thou wert a bawd to 'em before.



An ex'lent thing it is to serve your house.
For Charity to him I'm call'd a bawd;
For serving you I'm made a Murderer.



For serving my revenge I give thee Life;
But for concealing him, thy feeble Life
I cumber with the load of all this blood.



The scarlet Livery of your Family;
I wear your badge; Furies will know me now,
They are the Stewards of your Family,
They'l pay me all the wages I deserve.



Go, for thy wages then to Hell begone 
Begone I say, and see my Face no more.



Wou'd I had never seen the face of you,
Or any of your impious Family.





Thrust the old Traytour out, away with him.
I do no more by him, then Gods by me;
For I am driven by them from plague to plague.
Man is a vagabond both poor and proud,
He treads on beasts who give him Cloaths and Food.
But the Gods catch him wheresoe're he lurks,
Whip him, and set him to all painful works.
And yet he brags he shall be crown'd when dead,
Were ever Princes in a Bridewell bred?
Nothing is sinfully begot but he;
Can baseborn Bastards lawful Soveraigns be?


Confess it, was there? have you been so false?



Oh! Sir, you fill my heart with dreadful fears:
The news is true 







That you have kill'd 



That you have lov'd my Enemy? is that true? 



He is not, never was your Enemy.



But did you love him?



Yes above my Soul.
VVe both lov'd long, above expression lov'd,
Unknown to any but our faithful selves.



Hast thou abus'd me so? why then let that
Which has thy Lover take thy Soul.







What shou'd have damn'd Thyestes Son, but Hell?
If thou wilt take Hells leavings there thou mayst.


Atr. points to Phi. Ant. runs to him and falls at
his feet in a Swoun.


Oh! my Philisthenes! my murder'd Love?



And, oh! my murder'd hopes! I thought this Maid
Had Vertues wou'd support our falling House;
I thought o'her side I was thunder proof,
And she's as false as any of our Race,
A Traytress to her Father and her King.



Now 'tis my turn, fell Tyrant▪ to insult,
Thou hast devour'd thy own beloved Child
As well as I, the Gods have given my heart
This Cordial of Revenge before I dye.



She's none of mine.



May they be curst that wake thee from this Dream,
Till thou hast shed thy Daughters innocent blood.



Oh! horrour! horrour! my Philisthenes

All mangled, torn, and gory! horrour oh!



How durst thou, Traytress, love my Enemy.



He had more worth than all our Race besides,
None of our Race did e're deserve to live,
But this sweet Youth, and me for loving him.



How dar'st thou talk thus? Fond Idolatrous Fool!



After this murder, what have I to fear?
Nothing but Life, and keeping of my Wits.


Oh! with these words you have more cut my heart,
Than had you pierc'd it with a thousand Swords;
For now I find 'twas I shed all this blood.
Oh! Gods! oh Father! oh Philisthenes,

What have I spyed? The Knife that kill'd my Love?
Oh! you good Gods!

I thought a Priest shou'd once have joyn'd our hands;
But now this Knife shall mingle our hearts blood.



What art thou doing there? thy looks are wild,
I like 'em not to thy Apartment go,
I can repair thy loss, but the whole world
Can never repair mine, shou'd I lose thee.



I have so wounded my obedience,
By loving that dear Youth without your leave,
That 'tis too weak to hold my mighty grief,
Which forces me to dye without your leave.
Besides, Sir, all the Gods have call'd me hence,
And sent their pleasure by this Instrument.

I come Philisthenes 




Oh! hold her hand 
Too late, too late,
The Fatal blow is given;
Where had she that accursed Instrument?
She's past recovery! oh! my dear Child.



Oh! you just Gods! 




Thy Villany did help to murder her,
Thy guilt is greater, and I'm more enrag'd.



I scorn thy rage, for what have I to fear?



Look here, and think what thou hast not to fear.





Ay, but look there, and what have I to fear?





An age of lingring torments.




In this one minutes sight of that poor Youth.



Then I will add.



New will refresh with change.
  54〈1 page duplicate〉  55〈1 page duplicate〉
  56
That Tyrant then does best, who uses worst,
A mutinous Impostour, so accurst:
I'le breed with care these Boys for mischiefs born,
That men may feel new Rods when th' old is worn.




