


Gisgon and Batto looking through Prospective Glasses.



NIneteen, twenty, one and twenty Towns o' fire.



Nay, I see two and twenty, an't like your Honour.



I see the t'other now under a Mountain. Well, tho our people are Rogues, and go to Hell, our Houses go up to Heaven.



Regulus plays the Devil, an't like your Honour: He beats us by Sea and Land; over-runs all our Country; is now come up to the Walls of Carthage, and here he burns our Forts and Towns, under the nose of our capital City.



I won't trust this knave: But these confusions I hope will make my friend Prince Asdrubal King. aside.



Your Honour is a gallant Gentleman. If the Prince gets the ma∣nagement of the Commonwealth into his hands (as I hope he will) you'll be at the top of affairs; but you'll be above troubling your self with busi∣ness. If your Honour pleases to employ me, who have been in business all my life, as a Merchant, a Banker, a Farmer o' the Customes 



And hast cheated in 'em all; thou hast cheated the Commonwealth of a thousand Talents.



Ah dear! I wou'd I had, an't like your Honour. I am not worth much.



Thou! no, who'll give any thing for thee? but your Bags are, Sir. Were not you rated to the publick charge?



Rated? ay, but I swore off.



Nay, thou wilt swear off thy Ears, to save thy Money. Sir, you have as good an Estate as I have: And I am a man of quality, and you are but a Pedlar. Is that fit? you are a Pedlar I say, tho you trade for thou∣sands. If you had any Honour by birth, you lose it by trade, and are a pedling fellow.



I honour! an't like your Honour, I don't pretend to it; if I did I should be undone. I live by my credit, and if I should pretend to be a great man. and a man of Honour, no body would trust me; for men of Honour think they may do any thing.



We men of quality do sometimes endeavour to humble such me∣chanick fellows as you are, and punish you for your insolence. I married a Persian Lady of noble birth and fortune; and the King did me the Honour to dance at my Wedding; I shall be proud of it as long as I live. Now you are a Mechanick, and marry'd a Wife no better than your self; and your Wife has the insolence to vye for finery, and dresses, with my most noble Lady. I tell you what, humble your Wife, or I'll break your pate.



I cannot, an't please your Honour, she humbles me.



I'll humble you both then. How now! what graceful person comes this way? oh! 'tis my very venerable friend, the Priest of Hercules.



He has the marks of a jolly rich Priest; a rubrick Nose, and a ca∣nonical belly.



You'd have him as errant an Ass as you are, Sir; starve in the midst of wealth. He eats and drinks like a man of sense. Here he comes.


My very venerable friend, how does your Reverend person?



Very aw (yawns) well aw 



Your Reverence I think is drowzy.



Yes in troth, I crop'd my Nap something short last Night, and now it springs again. Drowziness twists Vine-like about my Chops, and arrests me for the Hours I borrowed of her.



What? you were up at study?



No in troth, I study not of late, it makes me fat; 'tis a great hin∣derer of digestion.



Not of digesting Books, my reverend friend.



I ha' not leisure now to digest Books. I laid in a good stock of Academick sense when I was young, and faith that serves me now. How dost thou do, Batto?







This is an honest fellow, Senator.



No, no, a knave, a knave.



He comes to my Temple sometimes, and gives me my dues: if a man does that, I forgive him a great many frailties: I love to season life with a good even hand; Vertue, Morality and Piety, are very wholsome things, but not over toothsome. We must mingle a little liberty and frail∣ty with 'em, and then they relish well.



Your Reverence speaks like a Gentleman. But I am not of opini∣on, because a man o' quality now and then makes bold with Heaven, therefore every Jack Sawce may do it. I think a Gentleman shou'd be in∣dulg'd.



Sir, a Prince is to have his will, for he's the Image of the Gods; a Gentleman is to have his pleasure, for he is the Image of his Prince; a common fellow is to drudge, for he is the Image of an Ass.
Shout.



Did not your Reverence hear the shouts and huzza's of the people af∣ter our splendid friend Prince Asdrubal. A word wi' you He's in a fair way to be King. aside.



Silence, have a care. (A shout.) Hark, I think he comes.



Ay. 'tis he! 'tis he! and all the World after him, I am over-joy'd.



Sir, I am in raptures, I cannot govern my joy. I most ardently embrace your knees.







Sir, I can never have enough.



A word wi' you, Senator, you will betray all. (aside.) No body will believe these Transports of Joy, at the Princes advancement, are for the sake of the Public.



Damn the Public! I care not a Farthing for the Public.



Every body believes that; therefore these Raptures are plain con∣fessions of some other aims. (aside.) Well Fellow Citizens, you are in a fair way to be great and happy; you address to a Prince, who has power and vertue, can, and will save you.



To serve you all, I'm sure I have a Will.
If I want Power, that is not my Fault.
And here are coming some to take away,
That little Power I have, I mean the Guards,
They'r coming to oppose me, and themselves;
For I'm it may be the best Friend they have.



There's Lord Hamilcar in the head of 'em.



He's a wise man, did not your Highuess offer to marry his Daughter?



I did. I thought him then a man of Honor.



Well, let 'em come, we 'ave strength to deal with 'em.






Lord Asdrubal, why wilt thou force the Senate
To use your ill? your noble Ancestors
Highly oblig'd your Country; their deserts
Have pleaded for you, and we lent an ear,
Till your extravagance ran to this height,
And in the Town made a wide dangerous rent;
When mighty Regulus is at our Walls,
And our united strength can scarce preserve us.











Then pray bear patiently some words from me.
I've suffer'd tamely many wrongs from you,
And the whole Senate. For the sake of peace,
My private wrongs I never will revenge:
But for the sake of peace and publick good,
The injuries your self, and many more
Have done the Common-wealth, I'll ne're forgive.
No, with the hazard of my life, I'll try
To right my Country upon all of you.



My Lord, we understand you well enough.
We know what Serpents lurks under these Flowers,
Ambition; you are lab'ring to be King.



'Tis false, I take the Gods to be my witness.



Why do your fav'rites then insinuate
In every place, that y'are of Royal Blood?



Am I to answer for my followers?
And I have Royal Blood, is it a fault?



Now I am concern'd to speak. For a Person of Quality, I am a to∣lerable Scholar. I read books, and books of Heraldry delight me much. I dabble much in the fountains of great Families. By consequence I am not ignorant of his Highness Prince Asdrubal's extraction; I know he is descend∣ed from King Strato, the Royal Ancestor of Queen Dido of ever blessed memory.







Why, then he is descended from King Sicheus.




Then his Highness shews the more humility, by submitting to serve.



I declare my self the humblest Servant of the poorest man here.



Here's a fine Gentleman.



A delicate Prince; it does my heart good to look upon him.



I never will renounce my Royal Blood;
But any Title, or Desire to reign,
I solemnly renounce, before the Gods.
What can the Crown give me? many more troubles,
Little more Greatness, than I now possess.
My Patrimonial Lands are a large Empire.
I love my ease too much to wish to reign.
It is my Fault, I was so long a rising
To serve the Commonwealth, I am afraid
I'rise too late; and things are gone too far.
Now I'm disturb'd, I'll not take any rest,
Till I have fix'd (or done my best to fix)
The Commonwealth in Safety and Repose.
Therefore my Lord, give up your Power this minute,
Or I will try by force to make it mine.



This is no Season for domestic Strife.
My Lord consider.



I've too long consider'd.



Will you give us some leisure to consider?



I'll give you Forty hours, if in that time,
You do not find some reasonable way.
To give the Commonwealth speedy Relief,
I will repair to utmost violence.



Well, you shall very quickly hear from me.
Ex.



You see my Friends, what a great Stake I lay,
That you may win, for I can be no greater,
Nor richer than I am; but in your Love;
But you I hope will get all your desires.
Exit.







Thank the Gods, for giving you such a man!



Look if they huzza; huzza, for shame, huzza!
Ex. shouting.



This Prince Asdrubal, has some great design in his head, or he would never take all this trouble upon him. It is for some extraordinary Pleasure. I fancy 'tis for a Crown; and if he gets it, he'll to pleasure again. We Men of business shall have the management of all things, but his Wo∣men. He will keep Generals to be beaten for him, and such Men as I to be hang'd for him. He'll commit Faults in his own Person, and think to be hang'd in ours. But he is mistaken; for when we have got the Money, and impoverish'd him, we shall be honored for being rich Cheats, and he'll be despised and punished for being cheated. No man forgives Poverty or Folly.










Where is the Spartan General.




The new Recruits, encamp'd before the Town,
But he's return'd, I see him come this way.
Exit.





Oh welcome! brave Protector of our State,
What News out o'the Feild? I need not ask.
I see a mournful paleness on your cheek.



There is a burning Face you do not mind,
The Face of Heav'n scorch'd with your flaming Towns.
The great victorious Roman Regu•us,

Is not content to take your Seas and Lands,
He also means to conquer all your Skys;
Look out you'll see him scaling Heav'n by fire.



What need he? he's already Master there,
Since his bold landing here, no happy Star,
Has corresponded with our falling State;
As if he barr'd up all the Roads above,
As he does those of our lost Provinces.



Would he could bar up all the Roads of Hell;
That Hell might have no correspondence here.



Ay, that commerce has brought our Commonwealth,
From a stupendious height of Power and Wealth,
To be a Beggar, and a public Charge,


Depending on our Neighbours Charity.
Had not you brought your Spartans to our aid
We must ha' sunk; and we are so corrupt
I think it is a sin to buoy us up,
And destroy men who ought to be ador'd,
To preserve men who ought to be destroy'd.
The meanest Roman seems the Son of Jove,

And mighty Regulus seems Jove himself.



Well we must make a speedy desperate push,
Or else between the glorious Regulus,

And corrupt Asdrubal we shall be crush'd.

Asdrubal gets the ground we lose in Town,
And Regulus our Provinces abroad.
And this good man, our honest careful spy
Tells me, the Romans look the next fair wind
Shou'd land 'em here, at least two Legions more.



My Lord, they are expected every hour.



Then we can soon determine what to do.
If they are now too great a weight for us,
What will they be when they have this supply?



'Tis true, therefore to day I'll to the Scale,
And I have hope, for I perceive of late,
In my brave Enemy some levity.
He's wanton with success and plays with you,
As if he were asham'd of being grave
In such a trifling thing, as fighting me.
I hope to make good use of this to day.
Mean while, my Lord, pray make this Town your care,
Your Province is as dangerous as mine.
For you must deal with treacherous Enemies.



My Lord, I'll take what Post you please to give me.
For our Republick, ay and Nature too,
Have made you my superior.




Are not you Father of my fair Elisa?

And in her love the maker of my Fortunes?
And shortly you will be my Father too.
Oh! what a noble Friend y'ave been to me?
To oblige me you have expos'd your life.
I was so bold for your fair Daughters love,
To Rival Asdrubal, a mighty Prince;
And you as bold gave me the preference.
And by that means have brought his rage upon you.
How brave is this? and oh! how generous!
For I'm a Subject to the Spartan State,


Where Kings are poor; and he's a Prince in Carthage,

Where Subjects have more Riches than some Kings.
But see the lovely Elisa comes this way,
Have I your leave to talk with her a while?



You need not ask it, she's more yours than mine.
For I have given you all my right in her;
And now retire to give you liberty.
Exit.



Your Lordship has no more commands for me?



Only to hide with care from every man,
That I employ you to the Roman Camp.
For if the factious men shou'd come to know,
They'd put a false malicious sense upon't;
And from it work much mischief.











Oh! here's my Lord.



My Love! thou tremblest, Dear!



Have I not cause?
All Carthage has been shaken with the shouts
Of the vast Crouds that follow Asdrubal.

They say he will be King; well if he be,
I'll be a Ghost; he hunts me eagerly:
But I abhor him; I had rather be
The ashes of your Wife, in a cold Urn,
Than in Golden Bed his living Queen.



Oh! my kind Love! how shall I answer thee?
We Spartans shun all lux'ry, even in words.
We plainly dress our bodies, and our thoughts.
I can but say, I love.




They who buy Plate by weight, regard the Mettal,
And not the Art about it; words receive
A higher price from truth, than art or wit.
I know thou lov'st me, for thou hast for me
Despis'd a hundred shining beauties here,
Who languish for thee.



Thou hast shunn'd for me,
Not only wealthy Youth, but Wealth it self,
I have no Gold, nay more, I must have none.
Our Sparta abhors riches as a Pest.
We will not suffer the least Symptom there
Of Wealth or Luxury to shew it self.
I dare no more shew fair Elisa's breast
Cover'd with Rubies, than infectious heats.
Nor her white slender Fingers hid in Rings,


Than with foul Tumors. Finery we loath,
And think the breaking out of a rank mind.
Yet thou art willing, Dear, to go with me,
And leave thy Robes and Jewels.




The Liveries we Slaves to Fashions wear.
Alas! I have not seen 'em many a day.
Since I've seen thee, I have seen nothing else.
My eyes and thoughts have all been upon thee.



My Dear! yet we in Sparta are not poor,
There's no one there without a great Estate.
For every one owns the whole Commonwealth,
Which must provide him ev'ry thing he wants.
The Law takes measure of us all for Cloaths,
Diets us all, and in the sight of all,
To keep us from all private Leagues with Wealth.
There every Town seems but one Family,
Where all attir'd alike, and modestly,
Do at one common Table eat plain Food.



Why say you Sparta forbids Luxury?
You live in all the Luxury of Heaven.
Love, Peace and Vertue are the Joys of Gods.



Indeed we ha' not much domestic strife;
We measure all things equally to all.
So none like Billows rise to make a Storm.
Even Priests and Lawyers live in quiet there.



Have you no Titles and Distinctions there?



Only what Merit makes; we mind not Blood,
Nor a vain Title floating on that Stream.
Only great Actions there beget great Sounds.
Your high-sprung Blood in Sparta will be lost:
I mean all your Precedencies of Birth.
You must give place to aged Matrons there,
Whose greatest Riches are their silver Hairs.



Let me have the Precedence in your Heart,
And let who will take all the World beside.



Oh! we shall be luxurious in Love;
But that will be no breach of Spartan Laws.



Well, when shall we enjoy this happy Life,
And leave our Carthaginian Prison here?
So the victorious Romans make this Town.



I do not know, I'll try my Fate this day,
This day shall be the last deciding Battle.
I'll be a Conqueror, a Slave, or Ghost.



A Ghost? a damp evapo'rates from the word
Which sickens me to death.







D'ye laugh at me?



My Dear! thou put'st me in mind of Novices▪
Who when they first meet danger, duck at Arrows,
But when their maid'nly terrors are all o'er,
Laugh at themselves, as thou wilt do in time.



Sure when your life's expos'd, I shall not laugh.



A Soldiers life lies wholly in his honour;
And that lives best in danger. If thou hear'st
My honour's lost, shed pitying tears for me;
And think thou art a widow though I live:
But if my honour lives, though I am kill'd,
Triumph; and shed no tears but those of Joy,
For that's the manner of a Spartan Wife.
And so farewell.



Thou shalt not go.








Then can you cast me off? Oh! cruel man!
Lead, lead me to my bed and bind my hands,
Or I shall do some violence to my self.
Shall I be thus when I am married?
I do not find all Soldiers wives are thus:
Marriage perhaps may teach me wit, and I
May learn to let my Husband fight, and dye.
Exit.













OH! how dost thou do? when wast thou with our Chapmen the Romans?



I just came from 'em.



How went off our Commodities?



Our Swords went off but dully; there having not been a Battle a good while, they ha' not lost many Swords. But they have shot away a abundance of Arrows against the Town; and were in great want of Arrows. So they gave us any thing for our Arrows.







We are a couple o' pure Rogues. We sell Arms to the Romans, to cut the Throats of our own Countrymen, the Carthaginians.



Ay, but we sell our Arms so dear, we cut the Throats o' the Ro∣mans too. What News of Italian Wine? Could you meet with a Bargain?



A rare Bargain. You must know Regulus is a severe man; he won't suffer any man in his Army to drink VVine, unless he be sick. So, Sir, there came the other day a Ship from Italy, loaden with VVine, and thought to come to a great Market here, because all the Vineyards here are cut down and spoil'd. E'gad, Regulus having Wine enough to serve sick men on oc∣casion, would not suffer a drop of it to be sold to his Army, so I bought it for a Song.



That's well; it comes in rare season; Wine is very scarce among us, and our Countrymen will have Wine. Drunkenness is an honorable Qua∣lity amongst us. VVine they will have, and have no stoppage of VVine here, give my Trade the Strangury. In what Condition did you find the Roman Army?



A very good one.



I am glad of it. Then the Blockade will continue, and so Corn must rise. 'Tis true, thanks be to the Gods, there is a pretty good conve∣nient Famine amongst us, which makes Corn a good Commodity; and I have a large stock. But I'll keep my Corn a while longer, and make the best o' the Famine.



Oh! you inhumane Rogue! your Corn already grinds all the Town, hast thou no Conscience?



I don't see any body has any Conscience, after they come to years of Discretion. Most People have it when they are young, as they have the Small Pox; but when they are once cured of it, they are seldom troubled with it any more.



If thou hast no regard to the Gods, thou mayst have a little to the Commonwealth.



Hang the Commonwealth. Does not every body cheat the Com∣monwealth as much as he can? why should I be honest all alone by my self?



Does your Priest of Hercules teach you no better?



He has no more Religion than myself. Drinking has cup'd the hu∣mor out of him. VVell, is this all you have to say to me?



No, I have News for you worth a Talent every Syllable.



VVhat is't? what is't?



I'll trust you with it, for I know how to make my Pen'orths out of you. If you be false to me, I'll get my own Pardon, and hang you. Apply your self to my Lord Hamilcar.



To him? The People are ready to knock out his Brains, and have set up Asdrubal.



The People are Asses, and meddle with that they do not understand, State Affairs. A Roman Tribune has engaged to put Regulus into the Spartan General's hands. 'Twill be done to day, and then the People will knock out Asdrubals Brains, and set up Hamilcar.



Nay if the Romans begin to sell one another, we'll deal with 'em. I'll to my Lord Hamilcar presently; but for fear this business should not succeed, I'll to my Lord Asdrubal too.



VVell, Sir, remember I have you by the Neck. If you get into business, put me in, or I'le hang you.
Ex.









Oh! Sir! how rarely your Highness dissembled to day?



VVhat did I dissemble?



Your desire to the Crown.



Who told you I desire the Crown?



Did you take all this trouble for a parcel of Fellows, they call the Country? You are of more worth than a Thousand such Countries! I love a Court, and Pomp, and Gallantry. I hate a Nation where the People are ador'd.



Adore the People, they are Antigods, nothing they make, but eve∣ry thing they mar.



They made too much in Carthage; a great man is only Clay, till they breath life in him.



Oh! Sir, I am glad to hear so much come from you, we shall have more shortly! I'd feign see you a King, great as the Persian King, as absolute
  12
Head, Hang, Starve whom you will! Ah that's great! that's right!



Would you like it?



Ay! why not Sir? You should never have my Head I warrant you. Why should you? I'll do whatever you please.



And would your Reverence like it too?



I ha' more reason to like it than he has, because I shall ha' more share o' power than he. He can have no Power but what his Prince gives him; but I shall give my Prince Power, and therefore he'll take none from me.



And will you do what I please?



You shall be pleased with what I do, and that's all one. I will give you this world to do what you will with, when you are alive, and heaven when y're dead, what would you have more? And I being so useful to you, you will for your own sake be as useful to me. And we thus sharing Power, are by consequence to help one another to as much as we can.



Sir, this is a very fine Gentleman, and a Wise man.



I know what's what. Some half-witted men will throw away this World to get Heaven, and some will throw away Heaven to get this World; for my part I am for 'em both. What good Manners do we shew to Hea∣ven by slighting the good Creatures, which Heaven has made? I take Prayers and Liquor both down Supernaculum, I leave not a Tittle of one, nor a Drop o' t'other.



This Gentleman, Sir, will make a rare Companion and Counsellor both. Well, Sir, I beseech you promise us to be King. If you will not Sir, I'll humbly take my leave of you; and be gone to my Tenants and Vassals, where I'll be a little King myself. There if a man asks me the reason why I do a thing, I cut his Pate; there's my reason, Sirrah, says I.



Indeed, Sir, your Friends will have no heart to stand by you, if your Enemies the Senate will reap the Benefit of all your Friends do.



I will unbosome my self to you. I go to lodge a secret in your Breast, will be your deaths if ever you reveal it. Know then, I've tryed all Pleasures but Reigning, and I will Reign because 'tis a new Pleasure.



Huzza! now things will go right, Sir, if you reign for pleasure, then pleasure will reign; and I am a man of Pleasure. I know you will do no business in your own Person; you will not go to bed on your own legs; you'l ride on Necks o' Slaves to bed to Concubines.



Oh! sie! Senator! The Prince will make a vertuous King.



Not over vertuous, you know it.



I don't know it, I never see any fault in a Person of Quality; I ha' more manners.



I shall make bold with a little lewdness.



Well, if you shall, Heaven bless you, Sir, that's all I say. Truth is, I wou'd not have a man have too much Vertue; for a man all Vertue, like a Pye all Spice, will not please.



He is not fit to rule, whom Vertue reigns,
He's fit to rule, who has at his Command
Vertue or Vice, as needs of State require.



A notable wise Maxim, and has much truth in it.



We shall have rare times. Pray, Sir, lets ha' no Soldiering. If we must be Soldiers, let's be Soldiers o' wit and pleasure here about the Town; see no Fight, but a Cock-fight, or so.



I can and will fight, if need require.



Now we talk of new Pleasures, Sir, pray give me a Command at Sea. I'd fain have a Command at Sea, because I never was at Sea in my life.



You'd have me Reign, how shou'd I get the Crown?
The People follow me for their own Ends;
That I shou'd guard 'em all from being enslav'd.



I'l undertake, Sir, be Rome's humble Servant,
She'l make you Master of this Commonwealth.
I'l recommend to you a cunning Rogue,
Who trafficks with the Romans privately,
And shall help you to correspond with 'em.
'Tis the rich Batto.




How? I put my Head
Into a mercenary Rascal's power?



Come, Sir, I'll put my Head into his power.
He will not sell it, it will yield him little.
I'll venture to talk with him.




For he once serv'd Hamilcar.





Profit will make him serve Man or Fury.
Enter a Gentleman.




Batto desires Admission to your Highness.



Let him come in.


How now, your business Batto?




Only to wish your Highness prosperity and glory; and to tender my humble service to you, who (though I say it) am able to serve you, Sir; I've been in publick Business all my life.



Come, you are an ill Man, who so great as you, but t'other day, with my Lord Hamilcar?



Sir, I found him a good Man.



How? do you call an Enemy to the Commonwealth a good Man?



An't please your Highness, ours is a trading Town, and we trading Men, account a Man a good Man, if his Bond be good, and his Security for Money good, we look for no other goodness. He was once a very thriving Man, and I confess I have a great respect for thriving Men. But when once a Man gives over thriving, I have done with him.



Ours is a trading City, and the Trade
Fills us with dirty Streets, and dirty Souls;
Our Sea brings Mud up to our very Souls.
When I command the Town, I'll make it trade
With Honour, Vertue and Piety, something more.



Here's a Prince! your Reverence bred him;
He is an honour to you.



Indeed I have much comfort from him.



But suppose I be a Knave, (as I hope I am not) I'm sure I say my Prayers often, and go to Temples at all idle hours I can spare.



Idle hours! y'are an idle Fellow.



I beg your Reverences pardon, I mean I go as often as I can, for I'm a Man of great business. But suppose I be a Knave, I'm fitter to serve your Highness in the Revenues than any Man else, be he never so honest, because I ha' been more employ'd in 'em than any Man has. 'Tis true, an honest Man won't cheat you, but if he be ignorant, he'l let a thousand cheat you. Employ me, Sir, and if I let you be cheated by any Man but my self, I'l be hang'd. And I'l take care to enrich you, that I may cheat you insensibly, and you never discern it.



The Fellow talks Sense; nay, if I let Business lie still till I meet with an honest Man, I may wait long enough.



D'ye hear? his Highness is thinking to employ a Knave, there's hopes for you.



Hark you a word You traffick with the Romans.




Oh dear! who tells your Reverence such a Falshoo'd?



Deny it not, I know it, and can hang you,
But on the contrary I will encourage you.
The Romans are a godly Nation,
And our's a vile; I, and more godly Men
Have a design, by help of the good Romans,

To give bad Carthage a Religious Master,
That is this Prince. Though he was wild of late,
He's now reform'd, and is a heavenly Man.
Help you to make him King, when he is King,
You may be sure of a very rich Reward.



Well, I will serve his Highness.
That is, if he succeeds I'l stay till then 

If he does not succeed, I will inform
The Senate, and help them to hang up him.
If he gets all the Town into his power,
I'l help him to be King, and hang the Senate.




See, what's the meaning of that Shout.
Enter Gentleman.



The Spartan General, and Hamilcar, have treated with Regulus about delivering the Town.



Now the truth comes to light.



A Roman Tribune was privately convey'd under ground to Lord Ha∣milcar's house about that design. The People have learnt the Story, thou∣sands are run to the Lord Hamilcar's house to pull it down, thousands are come to your Palace to beg you to protect 'em against the Romans and Hamilcar both.



Where's the Spartan General?



Gone out o' Town, to bring Regulus in.
The people have shut the Gates, and are resolv'd to kill him if ever he comes near the walls.



I'l among the good people, and serve 'em.











Ah me! to many Deaths decreed,
My Love to War goes every day.
In every Wound of his I bleed,
I die the hour he goes away,
Yet I wou'd hate him shou'd he stay.


Ah me! to many Deaths decreed,
By Love or War I hourly die;
If I see not my Love I bleed,
Yet when I have him in my Eye,
He kills me with excess of Joy.




Go bid the Musick cease, I find it vain.
Dark thoughts of late have my mind their haunt.
I thought to lay th' ill Spirits by sweet Sounds,
But 'twill not do, who's that Commander there?







Oh! a gallant Man 
And one I love, because he loves the Consul.
Go call him hither, I wou'd speak with him.


Good morning, Lepidus, what news to day?



Oh! Madam! joyful News! the gracious Gods


Have stoop'd to be our Pioneers to night,
And undermin'd the Carthaginian Wall;
Thrown to the ground no little part of it.
We have an open passage into Town,
And we'l accept the invitation.
The Consul will in person view the Breach,
Then order an Assault.





I taste no Joy in this.







I am distemper'd with oppressing Fears,
Which deaden all delight to me I've none
Even in my lov'd, my ador'd Regulus.




How? none in Regulus?




None even in him.
My Sorrow comes from him.



What is his Fault?



He has no Fault, from thence my Fears arise.
We always find, Men have a check by death,
When they approach near Gods in excellence.
If they will be ador'd, they must ascend,
And put off mortal Natures. Had he Faults,
To moderate my Bliss, and make it fit
For humane Creature, I shou'd have more hope.
But nothing mortal, must presume to reach
At perfect happiness, the lot of Heaven.



You hunt out Griefs; as they were hard to find;
And study Arts how to perplex your self.
Consider, Madam, how belov'd he seems
By Fortune, how she fondly clings to him,
Caresses him with strange extravagance.
At his first landing here, she tore in two
This Empire, and gave him the fairest piece.
Now she has torn yon' Wall, as she were mad,
To have him nearer, faster in her Arms.
And the truth is, he has her now so fast,
She cannot if she wou'd break from him now.



I know his Fortunes are like his Deserts.
In great Excess, but all Excess destroys.
Excessive Lustre, like excessive Heat,
Frail Man bears not. We very rarely find,
Men in intemp'rate Glories are long-liv'd.
Oh! he is near his end.



Nay, this is strange!



I must lament his death before he dies,


For when he's dead, I shall run mad with grief;
And the dear Man will fall unmourn'd by me.



Misery deserves not sure this great Respect;
That you shou'd run to meet it e're it comes.



You make me mad; have I more fear than you,
Or any in the Camp? did not this Morn
Spread Terrors through you all?



Then have you heard? 



I cou'd hear Thunder sure;
Thunder, which seem'd to burst the Firmament.
And I cou'd see the ruddy Face of Morn
Turn'd o' the sudden black; one wou'd ha' thought
The Night had wheel'd about, and strangled her.
Night ne're was clad in such thick woven Blacks,
As were of late, spread like a Funeral Pall
O're day, as day were dead.







Why d'ye abuse me then, and hide the truth,
As I were th' only Woman in your Camp?
The boldest of you all, was turn'd this Morn
To things, like heartless Women at the least.
And by a Woman too, by something less
The shadow of a Woman. I've heard all 







Day turn'd away its Face,
That a dead Beauty boldly might appear
In all the wretched nakedness of Death,
To the great Man, to whom she once was fair,
The Consul. Did not his late beautiful
Chaste modest Wife, the dead Apamin,

Appear to him this Morning in his Tent?
Ay, and to you, and many more great Officers
Assembled there.



She did, if we dreamt not.



Oh! you were far from such repose as sleep.
The Fantom whiter than the Shroud she wore
Dissolv'd you all into a thin cold dew,
You lay all vanishing beneath her eye,
Which brightly shone thro' the dim mists of death.
She was the firmest substance of you all,
Bating the Consul; he remain'd the same,
And was the only living person there;
Whom yet she seem'd to say, with speaking looks,
She pitied much, she pierc'd his eyes with hers,
As with their points she wou'd upon his Soul
Engrave her pitying thoughts.




But they were much to blame who told you this,
And frightned you; I wou'd no more ha' don't
Than thrown a poyson'd Dart into your breast.



VVhy should you hide from me what is my own?
I've in this dismal story too much share,
More than my understanding can dispose,
'Twill make me mad. Ah! may I lose my wits,
E're I lose him; that I may have no sence
VVhen the Blow comes.



VVhy do you think 'twill come?



VVhat else should move the dead Apamia

To bear the light, which living beauties shun,
But to have him? Oh! that's her Errant here!



I'll not presume to combat with your fear;
One will soon do it, who can conquer it,
He conquers all things, 'tis your. Regulus,

Your griefs and fears have reach'd his ear and heart,
And he will come to ease your soul and his.

He's come; I see his Guards, I see himself.
I s•••our Father the Proconsul too.






Most beautiful reward of all my Labors,
In whose kind Love I am before hand paid,
And overpaid for all my Sword can do;
Permit me to be careful of my Treasure,
And lodge you safely in the Fort of Clypea.

The Enemy have met with some Recruits,
And make a shew of fighting us to day.
If fighting will oblige them, I will serve them.
Retire my Love from danger, for the sake
Of me and Rome, else I shall fight to day
Greatly disorder'd by my fears for you.



I know the pleasure which you take in Glory.
That a brave Enemy who fights you well,
Does entertain you well. I would not dare
To call you from the Glory you pursue
VVith so much ardor, were I not compell'd
By many Thousand Omens and Presages,
VVhich seem to me the Messengers of Heaven.
I beg you for the sake of Rome and me,
You'll stay till some few threatning days are past.



Stay till those days bring all the ills they threat,
Succor to Carthage, infamy to me.



To joyn in consort with a womans fears.
And beg a Consul to forsake his Post.
To please a VVoman, and to cure her frights,
VVould not suit well with a Proconsuls voice:
Yet Consul for my Daughter this I'll say,
Her fears are all for you. She has no sence
Of her own dangers. I have seen her oft
In bloody Fields gaze on your Victories
With the same unconcern she'd see a Masque.
Yet I must counsel you to what she prays,
That you would let some frowning hours go by.
I do not second her, let her fear on,
It suits her Sex, and is a proof of Love,
I plead for one more excellent than she,
I mean Religion. I beseech you Sir,
Give her those rights which are her due by Law,
You know our Laws give her the casting Voice,
In all our Councils both of Peace and War,
No Roman dares start a great Enterprize
Till she has given the sign, and she has mark'd
This day for bad, by many a black Portent,
And charg'd you not to interfere with it,
Lest it should drop some horrors on your head;
As this learn'd Augur better can inform.



'Tis true, Sir, all the flights of birds to day,
And all the entrails o' the victim'd Beasts
Threaten much ill.




To our own Laws, Augur, I reverence you.
You are our Scout to discern coming ills,
Our Spy on Heaven, and I'll be rul'd by you
When I am not otherwise advis'd by reason,
Which I think soars higher than birds can do,
And can discover more of Heaven's will.




Ha! all the Heavens are troubled once again.



Let 'em be troubled.



And it thunders loud.




Well, let it thunder.



Would you take advice.



Of Thunder? 'tis no Counsellor o' mine.






Oh! Sir! I see another Counsellor.
Look there, in you dark cave, so dark the night
Seems to skulk there in day to rob the day,





Let her stand there, I see her.







Nothing, Love, you frighten Fulvia.




I heard you name the dead Apamia,

What should make her leave Heaven, but for you?
She has some knowledge you are hasting to her,
And rushes through the bars of death to meet you.
But I've more right to you, than she has now,
Her death has cancell'd all your bonds to her.
But those you made to me are new and firm,
I'll keep my right, I will not let you go.



Must I give such a fatal proof of Love,
To leap from Honor into wanton Ease,
And be no more a Consul? well I'll do't.
Consul and Shame suit not.
Now come my Dear, let us to private shades,
For darkness and dishonor best agree.
My noble Friends eternally farewel,
For after this I must not shew my face.
I pray conceal what has befallen me;
Report you saw me like great Romulus

Assum'd to Heaven, is not this a Heaven?


'Tis like one, it resembles Fulvia,

'Tis not that warlike Virgin I confess,
But 'tis her Image; and my Love is such
To Fulvia's Image I will sacrifice
A Roman Consul.



I will strive no more
Since 'tis your pleasure. Go; but I believe
After this fatal day we shall not meet,
Except in Fetters, or in Blood, or Death.



Something within my heart divines the same.



Your fears are against reason, the Recruits
Come to the Enemy are few and heartless,
Dispirited, and cowed by fear of us,
And if we baffle them Carthage is lost;
At our next meeting Fortune shall be fetter'd,
And this short parting shall be all the Death
Your fears have boded.



No, we will not part.



Yes, you must to the Fort, I to the Field.



I'll to the Field, so was I woo'd and won.
Your Battles were the Courtship of my Love.
And so will I return your glorious Love.
Nor Enemies, nor worlds shall part us long.


Stars shew your selves worthy to shine in Heaven
By guarding this great man, but if you must
Resign him up to death, (I shake to think of it)
If among all the doors Nature has made
To let us into death, I can find one,
My Ghost within few hours shall be with his.



Thou hast well vow'd, daughter, perform thy vow.



Could we not meet elsewhere, there were enough
To make me rush on death, but our next meeting
Shall be attended with unequall'd Glory.



Nay we'll be great and blest befal what will
We will so dye, if Death must be our doom,
We'll triumph o're all ages in our Tomb.
Ex.













THE Spartan General is a Souldier,
He manages with skill the advantages
I let him have.



I do not think it safe
To give so great a man advantages.



The chief advantage I bestow upon him
Is opportunity to perish bravely.
He has Recruits indeed, but what are they?

African Slaves whose Lords I've often beat,
I blush to fight so base an Enemy.



You would blush more should you be beaten by them.



You let 'em have a Chance for Victory,
Which, Sir, you may deny 'em if you please.



Yes we may lodge our selves on yonder hill,
Like frighted Birds on Trees to keep from danger,
And be the mockery of the Enemy.
Which of you can endure the Shame an hour?
See he comes bravely on and tempts you all.
Who's not fir'd by that alluring sight;
And finds not in his blood a lust to fight?










Sir, we beseech you, do not venture your self.



We beg you, Sir.



What should you venture for?



You know for what, a Crown.



Sir, you may have a Crown without venturing. Do not yonder men fight for you?



If I do not fight, I shall have an inglorious Crown, I must fight for Glory.



You may have Glory without fighting too. The great Persian King has got much Glory by wal, and never saw a fight in his Life.



A great Prince, Sir, like a great Palace, will ring with the blows others give. Your Name will have a noble sound, from all the blows which make many a Coxcomb ake, though you ne're strike stroke.



This is prate, I must not lose mine Honor.



Sir, if you will go, I beseech you kill me. Your danger will put me in such torment, I shall not be able to bear it. I would not follow you for all the world, and see an Arrow come near you.



Sir, you are going to be a King, keep State. Do not let every paltry Sword be familiar with your Person.



Sir, I, who am but a Gentleman, scorn as much to let a base Fel∣low fight with me, as eat with me.





Good news, Sir, your Enemies are beaten. Lord Hamilcar is taken Prisoner.



Huzza! well Sir, you are a glorious Prince. What Soldiership you have shown to day?



Do you laugh at me? You would not let me discover Soldiership.



We would not let you play the common Soldier, and run your self into danger; but you shewed such Generalship as I never saw, and I have seen many a General, and many a General in my time. They may talk of their Reguluses, and their Reguluses; Sir, if you ben't a better Soldier than Regulus, I'le hang for't.







Come, Sir, I know Generalship when I see it. Now, Sir, the Crown is within your reach, send me to Sea; I'le do you Honor there, I'le keep you such a Table 



Shall I humbly offer you my advice, Sir? Make all Persons depend upon you. Crush them that will not. Advance them that will. But above all, favor those upon whom you depend, that is to say, us Priests.



Go, fetch my Lord Hamilcar. now he's mine.

His Daughter will be mine. I have hold of her
By a strong tye, Affection to her Father,
I love her beauty, though herself I hate,
For the disgrace and scorn sh'as thrown on me.
If I can ever get her in my power,
She first shall please my Lust, then my Revenge.



So, so, here comes the noble Criminal.
Dear Countrymen you see the power of truth.
I charg'd this Lord with Treason against the State;
Great was his power and policy, but truth,
Greater than both, breaks out in spite of 'em.



Dear Countrymen, y're all out of your way;
And 'tis no wonder men in darkness rove,
What light have you in mysteries of State?
What business there? could you come by a light?
I pray who made you Privy Councellors?
The Senate never did. A Roman Tribune
Was i'my house to day; know you for what?
No, when you do, you'l be asham'd o' this.



My Lord y're of a Noble Family;
But the more great you are, the greater bonds
Lie on you to be faithful to the Public,
From whence you have such great advantages,
Truth is a Debt you owe the Commonwealth,
A man of Honor ought to pay his Debts.
I should be glad you'd fairly discharge yours,
For my own sake, that I might come off cheaply
Without the torment of tormenting you;
For I can pain no man, and scape my self.



Here's a sweet Gentleman.







My Lord you wrack me now, by shewing me
Such shameful baseness in a Nobleman.



Is it possible? have you no tenderness
Nor for the Commonwealth, nor for your self?
He'l force me to inflict those torments on him,
Which I can never suffer tho he can.



Was ever such a noble soul, to have such a concern for his Enemies?



Oh! Countrymen! you'l have a delicate Magistrate!





Oh! here comes one I hope, can ease us all.

Batto you've had great dealings with this Lord,
And must know very much of his designs;


If you'd discover to us, what they are,
You'd greatly serve your Country and your self.



How? I turn Evidence when the trade comes to nothing? no such matter, I ne're like the trade when 'twas at best. Besides I have nothing to evidence. I could make a Story, but what should I make of the story? it may be a Rope for my self. A great man, if an unmanageable thing, I don't care to deal with him. Though he's down now, he may get up again, and knock my brains out. (aside.) An't please your Honor, I only dealt with his Lordship about money matters; if he had any treasonable designs, he had more wit than to tell me, he knew I abhorred them, and would discover them. Therefore I had a pretty good opinion of him, because he employ'd me. So I can say nothing against him, I'm sorry for it.



I must be forc'd to fly to violence,
Most unexpressibly against my nature.







Ha! what I wish! I see his Daughter come.







Oh! where's my Father? Oh! my Lord! my Lord!



Daughter, away! away! you ruine me.
I was not half undone before you came,
For you my better half was then secure.



I cou'd not hold from venturing my own life
To preserve yours.



Prethee what canst thou do
To preserve me that will not ruin me?
Wilt thou give up thy honour?







That thou wilt do only by marrying him,
Since thou art promis'd to a Nobler Man.



I'll try to fool him into clemency.



Oh! he will not be fool'd.



Yes by a woman.



Madam, I hope y'are lab'ring to preserve
Your Father, both from death and suffering.
I seek to do't; whose ruine he hath sought,
Can you prevail with him to own the truth?



My Lord, you know he's innocent, at least
You do not know of any guilt he has.



We do not know, what's needful to be known,
We know so much that I shall deserve death,
If I consent to smother all the rest.
Madam I have much tenderness for you.
Indeed I'm very unwilling to let fall
Your Fathers heavy doom in your soft ear,
Therefore I pray retire out of harms way.
Attend the Lady out.



Oh! hold my Lord.
Can you destroy the Father of a Woman
Whom you once dearly lov'd? You swore you did.



To save the State, I cou'd destroy my self.



My Lord, the World knows well, you love a Woman
Above the Commonwealth, above your self.
And if you can be cruel to a Woman,
What must the Men expect when at your mercy?
They must all please your Lust, or be destroy'd.
For, oh! my Father did refuse me to you,
From thence arises all your Rage against him.



Madam! I am so far from private Piques,
Let any Man discover me a way
How publick Safety, and your Father's Life
May stand together, and with all my heart
I'll pardon him, what e're he did to me.
Nay more, I'l lay my Life under his Feet.



How good are you? for I'l ne're pardon you
The Mischiefs you ha' done the Commonwealth.



Oh! hold, my Lord! you will undo your self.



No Madam, no, this Provocation
Defends him from me; I'l forbear him now,
Because I will not shew private Revenge.







What a brave Spirit is here?



I have been much mistaken in this Lord.



There appears something very great in him.

Had he been always thus, I shou'd have lov'd him.



Dear Fellow Citizens! I am accus'd
Of Cruelty, Revenge and Treachery.
I ought to clear my self of all these Vices
Before I enter on Authority.
Then how revengeful I am, pray observe.
My Lord Hamilcar has been long, and yet
Continues my most cruel Enemy.
I have consider'd, Sirs, and do believe
The Publick may be safe in honest hands
Tho' my Lord lives, therefore I beg his Life.



Here is a noble temper.



More to engage you to bestow his Life,
I'll wrap my Life in his, and with your leave
I'll wed his beautiful and virtuous Daughter.



Ha! Are you thereabout?




You ask the Peoples leave to wed my Daughter,
Sure I've most Title to dispose my Child.


I'll ne're give my consent, if she gives hers,
May she be punish'd as she does deserve.



My Lord, my Lord; you shew so bad a heart,
The Publick is not safe while you'r alive.
Madam, once more, I beg you retire.
Attend the Lady hence.



Oh! hold, my Lord!



What wou'd you have me do?



I know not what.



You see your Father will not save himself.
But, Madam, you may save him if you please.



I must consent, or he will rack my Father.

Well, Sir, I yield.



To be my Wife?







Then I am happy, and your Father safe.



Daughter, be gone I charge you.



And leave you to the Rack?




You are a Rack.
Your shameful Falshood to the gallant Spartan

Tortures me more, than any Rack can do.
Whilst he's defending us, we betray him.



I'll to this Traytor give nothing o'mine

Except this Dagger; this shall to his heart,

Even at the Altar.



Oh! 'twill be foul Play!
You'll stab your Honour and Integrity:
'Twere better both of us shou'd lose our Lives.



My Lord, I had much rather grieve your heart,
Than let Racks tear it out I will proceed.
My Lord, I'm yours.










There goes the Game. Now I know where to make my Court. I'll get some fine Pendants for her. I think I have gold Tweezers in my Pocket.




Oh! Blessing on you, Madam; you make the Prince a happy Man.



Oh! pretty Creature! what sweet work will be here to night be∣tween 'em? I sha'nt sleep for thinking of it. Well, much good may do you both; in good Faith, and Troth, I wish it with all my heart.




Gisgon, Will you assist this pleasant work?



Assist it, Sir? Ay, Sir, with all my Soul.
What part shall I have in it, Sir?




A Bridal Entertainment, and my Bed.



With all my heart.






Sir, y'are undone! here's Regulus in Town.







What, is the Town deliver'd up to him?



No, Sir, he's taken Prisoner by the Spartan General, assisted by the Roman Tribune, who was at the Lord Hamilcar's house to day, and came thither for the great design they have now brought about. Now, Sir, your own Friends the common People join with your Enemies against you, and threaten to tear you i' pieces for abusing 'em.





Secure 'em all, my Love 














Oh! you are come in season, to preserve
My Honour, and my most dear Father's life.



I have heard all. I'm told Lord Asdrubal


Pray will you lend it me.



With all my heart!
I'll ne're refuse my Enemy any thing
May help him to a Wife, and a false Wife.



My Lord, I had prepar'd
A scurvy Bridal Entertainment for you.
'Twas this, my Lord 




Madam, y'ave not deceiv'd me.
You had deceiv'd me, if you had been faithful;
For from a Woman no Man looks for Faith.




I fear I'm lost.








Can you read Books without a light?







Yet you'd read our Councels i'th' dark;
And know without doors, what we do within.
To Prison with the Priest, and Gisgon too.



I'm a dead Coxcomb! I'm troubled for my honourable Family.





I wish your Honour Joy with all my heart,


And your Excellence, and your Ladyship. I am so glad o' this turn.



Why? what shall you get by't?



The satisfaction to see honest Gentlemen in power, and Knaves punish'd.



Well said; you shall get something by this turn.
I'll give you a Lift.




I humbly thank your Honour,
You were always my good Friend.



I'll help you to a hanging.







Yes, yo've traffiqu'd with the Romans,

And sold 'em Arms.



Oh! I'm hang'd, I'm hang'd!




Now, Sirs, I hope you will learn modesty.

And no more censure things above your reach.
We do not know the mysteries of your Trades,
Because we never were instructed in 'em.
Pray who taught you the mysteries o' State?
What strange conceits Men have of governing?
Men must serve Years to know a Handicraft;
Yet all pretend to skill in Government,
By natural light and instinct, as Birds build.
Men will pretend to't who want common Sense,
Yet are not laugh'd at neither; every Man
Willingly lets the Frolick go about,
So he has leave to take it in his turn.

Now my brave Friend 





My Lord, you'll lose your words.

I can hear nothing but Elisa's voice.



My Joy's too great for words.



And mine for thoughts.



Alas! what makes me weep?




Which I am pleas'd to see Well, General,
Where left you Regulus?





I know not where.

I saw Elisa, and Joy hurried me
Out o' my Wits I think to meet her Arms.



Oh! now I see him in yon gaping Throng,
Well, I'll conduct him to the Senate House.



Do what you please, but do not trouble Love.
Oh! it is new a busie time with me;
And in the sweetest best affair in Love.
For Heav'ns sake release me now to love.




I will, I will, then go together, go.











My Soul, more than my Soul.









Here comes the glorious, tho' unhappy Man.
Most noble Consul.



Do you mock me, Sir?








I'm Consul now no more.



You may be, Sir, you have at your dispose
The destinies of Carthage, and of Rome,

Shall I attend you to the Senate house?



Whither you please, to death if you think good.



With how much greatness he o're-looks his Fate?










The Consul's lost! dreadful reverse o' Fate!
It overturns my Reason, makes me doubt
If Vertue ought to have regard from Men,
Since it has none from Heaven.




Of his poor Children he has left at Rome,

And your fair Daughter here?




I dare not think.




I have charg'd all to hide the News from her.



Oh! she will quickly find it in our Looks,
And universal Consternation.
Oh! Gods! how will her Sorrows pierce my heart?
But those of Rome will give me deeper wounds.



See, Sir, your Daughter comes; retire with speed,
Or your confusion will discover all.



Too late! but if I can, I'll rule my self.








Oh! Sir! what means this terror in your Camp?
Some unseen mischief, like a Pestilence
Strikes your Men pale and mute; their only Proofs
Of breath are Sighs, but words I can have none.
Oh! something with the Consul is amiss.
Where is he, Sir?



Do not retard me now.



Oh! do you shun me too? he's kill'd! he's kill'd!



He lives, let that suffice.



Then why de'e shake,
And look so sad? Oh! he is near his death.
Wounded to death.



Not so, he is in health.



Oh! let me see him then.




But Rome must be serv'd first, in her Affairs
He's now engag'd; longer I cannot stay,
Follow me not, nor be inquisitive.



Stay, Sir, I humbly beg.



What wou'dst thou say?


Be quick, for I've much business to dispatch.



Sir, I fought near the Consul as I cou'd.
But crowds of Enemies, and clouds of dust
Soon took him from my sight, and since that time

I've heard no news of him. All is not well.
You hide some dreadful Secret in your Breast,
Because y'are fearful it shou'd do me harm.
You wou'd have all the Sorrows to your self.

I thank you for your generous tender Love.
But am I worthy of his Love and yours,
If I'm no more than other Women are?
If ill has hapned to the Man I love,
I'll grieve, but shew my grief some noble way.
I'll not be pitied for my womanish tears,
But do some glorious thing in his revenge,
Shall make us all be envied.




I'll trust thy courage know he is surpriz'd,
And led to Town a Captive.







Is this your promis'd bravery?





I wou'd not grieve? yes, Sir, I ought to grieve;
But every tear I shed, and pang I feel,
I'll put to the account of cursed Carthage.

Now I consider I may spare my tears;
This mercenary Town much prizes Gold,
For this we need but make our treasure weep.



No, I'm afraid they'll prize him above Gold,
But shortly we will free him with our Swords.
Though by strange Fate he's fallen into their hands;
We have not with the Consul lost the day.
No, their great purchase they have dearly bought,
Some hundreds of brave Spartans are cut off.

I do not find our Army much impair'd.
And shortly we expect two Legions more.
The Wind is fair, I'll see if they be come.




So now my sinking heart is rais'd again,
Yet the brave Captive shall enslave the Town;
We're here a Conqueror's, I a Bridal Crown.
And we'll make burning Carthage, when we wed,
Our Nuptial Flame, and light us both to Bed.












DArling of Heaven, tis to you, to you

Carthage owes all the Fortune of this day.
The Gods wou'd ne're ha' ruin'd Regulus,

To preserve Carthage had not you been here.



If Heaven loves me it is for loving you?
Oh! fie! I shew my self too fond, I spoil you.
With how much cruelty you tore your self
Away from me, when I was all in tears
I shed for you? yet you cou'd laugh at me;
I'll manage Love as all wise women do.
The best and finest shall not come abroad,
But on great solemn times to make a shew:
Mean while you shall have course and homespun love
I swear I will not give you a good look.
This 



This how long? come say it if you dare.



I will not say how long because I'l cross you.



You will not say't lest you should cross your self.



Well 'tis in vain to hide my love from you.
It is too great for any covering;
I'l trust thee generously with my heart.



Now thou appear'st in thy own beautious form
All kind and sweet; I knew 'twou'd soon be so,
For Nature always is too hard for Art.
Do not believe my heart barren of Love,
If thou perceiv'st in me a dearth of words,
That I abound not in professions.
We Spartans weed from talk superfluous words,
Let time declare how I will use thy heart.



I doubt this pleasure is too great to last.
A shout within.
Enter a Gentleman.



How now? what new disturbance in the Town.



My Lord your glorious Captive Regulus



Is sent in Fetters to the Dungeon,
And the rude Rabble triumph over him.



How came this Climate, Love, to produce you?
Since 'tis as opposite to Excellence,
As others are to Poyson; I confess
Valour and Wit here is, those noble Fires
Your damps of Luxury have not yet choak'd.
But as they'r us'd 'twere to be wish'd they had.
Wit here is all imploy'd in knavish Craft;
The valiant glory in oppression.
Give speedy orders to the Guard from me,
The Consul to the Senate be return'd.
I'll hasten thither, and if possible
Prevail with 'em better to treat themselves:
If not he's mine, and I will force him from 'em.



Just as I thought you must be gone again,
'Tis a sad thing to be a Soldiers wife,
One has but half a Husband of a Soldier.
Wars and Campaigns have half of him and more
And Wounds have a large share of t'other half:
And yet this noble parcel of a man,
Is better than a wanton soft Gallant
Who is no man, but makes Summer Campaigns
In Gardens, Groves, at Springs, or Bowling-greens,
Or with a Whore, as much a man as he.
But go I'm pleas'd thou shou'dst do gallant things,
Because in all thy glory I have share.



That's like a Spartans wife, for she prefers
Her Husbands honour far above his life;
Weeps if his Bucklers lost, though he be safe.
But she rejoyces though he be brought home
Dead on his Buckler; and the greater Love
She had for him; the greater is her joy.



Now I believe that joy is not sincere,
Widows I find are artful every where:
In Sparta for their poor departed Dears
Joy they Dissemble, and in Carthage tears.
Exit.







I knew the General wou'd be displeas'd




What if he be, my Lord? do our decrees
Depend upon his will? when he subdu'd
This Roman Consul, did he conquer us?


I thought he fought to guard, not seize our freedom.



That we have freedom we may thank his Sword;
But no man can have freedom, to do ought
Which honour and humanity forbids.




He and his Spartan Friend are dangerous men,
And the more dangerous for their deserts;
We must let no man grow too great for us.
(aside to a Senator.




'Tis true; but now let us not shew our selves.
Enter an Officer.



My Lords, the General's here.









My Lords, I'm told y'ave doom'd the bravest man
To what the vilest scarcely can deserve,
To Chains, a Dungeon, stench, and want o' bread.



My Lord, 'tis true the Senate has decreed
The Roman Consul shall be treated roughly
Unless he will comply with their desires.
I hope the Senate only threaten him.




No more I hope, most noble General
We much commend your generous tenderness
Of this fallen gallant man; we'd pity him too
Wou'd he shew pity to our Countrymen,
And grant us peace, which you know how we need,
But he refuses us all our desires.



Bring him to me.


He's chain'd! tormenting sight!
I beg you noble Consul credit me,
Those Chains are no impieties o' mine;
Rather my sufferings and impos'd on me.



Sir, I believe you, for I've found you brave.



What is it you desire of this great man?




That he and all his Troops quit Africa.

Yield every Town and Pris'ner he has got.



I will not give you the least Village back.
And this I speak from reason, not vain pride.
Our power is dwarfish here compar'd with yours,
Yet now we have you down, blow upon blow
May bring you in short time to your last gasp.
But if we give you the least breathing while
To gather strength, you'l rise and drive us hence:
Nay we shall see you at the Gates of Rome.

Rather than I will give you back one Fort,
I will pull all the Towers on my head.




Hast to the Dungeon, nay the wrack with him,
We'll frighten bold invaders from our Coast.



The Dungeon? stead o' that strike off his Chains.


He is my right, the purchase o' my blood,
And I'll dispose my own.




So we are master'd
In our own Senate-house.



And with good reason.
I do not find that you can rule your selves,
And therefore I have brought a force to rule you.
Govern your selves, and we will be your Servants.





Are you our Enemy?



I am your Friend.
And hinder you from Crimes, may bring on you
Curses from men, and vengeance from the Gods.




You hinder us from honourable peace?



Can shameful ways get honourable Peace.




There is no shame in justice, he brought war
Into the bowels of the Common-wealth,
Hunger shall war upon his Bowess now.
Go to the Dungeon with him, and there starve him.




Senator, let the General play the fool.
(aside.
We owe him much, and this will quit all Scores.



I'll mediate, let the Consul be confin'd,
And let it be reported he's ill us'd,
He has weak parts which may that way be bent;
Children, Relations, Friends; and one soft part,
His belov'd Fulvia.




Ha! that startles him.




Fulvia, was made that I might feel some pain,
I wish I could forget, and be forgot
By her I love; I fear this Policy.
aside.



My Lord, y'ave found a way to touch his heart,
Which with the Senates leave I will improve.
Sir, can your Camp make peace?



Yes Sir, they can.



Sir, I'm a Servant to this Commonwealth,
Her Faults and Passions I'm not bound to serve;
I am her Rights and Interests to promote;
I think 'tis fit she shou'd regain her own.
And I've one way to force peace out of you.
Sir, by that right we have in you by war
We will employ you as our Embassador
To your own Camp, there to negotiate
With your Friends Tears. You smile, for you believe
I fool my self, and give you all you want
To fortify your glorious Victories,
By strengthning that weak side; but I believe
You'll not be there the Regulus y'are here.


Your mutual greifs will master all of you.



You shew more art, and understanding Sir,
Of a great mind, than all the Senate does.
I shall but harden more under their usage;
None but vile Slaves are master'd by a Rod,
But I believe the sorrows of my Friends
Will melt my heart, and I shall yield a while.
Y'entice me into a dangerous Ambuscade,
The only place where I can be subdu'd.
But I shall o'recome and win more glory,
Therefore accept the Embassy with thanks.



What say your Lordships?








Consul, you have the leave of all the Senate,
Now go, and if you can perswade your Friends
To give you up to Death.




Hold e're you go,
Give us good hostages for your return.



I'l be a hostage for him.








You are both priviledg'd by your deserts
We cannot touch you, we'll have other persons.




Come we'll oblige the Consul to be friend us.
We'll take his word.




No, we will have his Oath.



You have my solemn Oath.



'Tis more than needs.
Great men, were there no Gods, would keep their words
In reverence to themselves; but Gods there are,
Whom none needs rouse by Oaths to witness Truth.
Now let me tell you, (if I can for grief
For I much honour you) if you return
Without a lasting Peace, which frees these Lands
From all those seeds of War, your Garrisons,
You will return to a tormenting Death,
And all my power cannot save you, Sir.



Of all the torments I shall suffer here,
The Griefs of such a noble Heart as yours
Will most afflict me; if you wou'd spare me,
Be sparing of your self; pity me not
Till I'm become a pitiful poor wretch,
Despoil'd of all my resolution,
And made indeed a Captive by base fear.



The good Gods graciously direct you, Sir.



And you most noble Spartan; of all men
I e're encounter'd, the most generous.









Oh! I'm afraid our head's lost, oh! if they take my head, what shall I do.



The Rabble are fine fellows to trust to.



Well I can say for my honour, I ever hated the vulgar. I have un∣done thousands of 'em, and I never did one of 'em good in my life.







Sir you have had the impudence to cheat Persons o' Quality. If you had only cheated poor fellows, you shou'd have had a friend o' me.



My ruine wou'd be great delight to me,
If by my fall Carthage were overwhelm'd.



That it may be spite o' this great success.
Though Regulus is taken Rome is not.



I'll tell your Highness very excellent news,
The Romans burnt this day in our own Ports,
Above threescore of our best men of war. ha! ha!



Ha! art thou sure of that?





The Romans now may land what men they will;
If they don't take the Town I'gad I'l hang.



But will they take the Town before we hang?



That I can't say.



Nay if we hang, let who will have the Town. Well, I am horrid∣ly afraid to dye. I'd go to Prayers if I thought t' wou'd signify any thing.



Whom wou'dst thou pray to? thou hast no Friends in Heaven, thou never mad'st the least acquaintance there: thou hast traded to all parts but Heaven.



I doubt none of us have any great store of Friends in Heaven; if we had, they'd ne're ha' suffer'd us to come to this.



Right, therefore Heaven has no great Friend o' me.
Ha! I'm a fool to open thus my heart
To fools; who though they should have honesty
May be outwitted into knavery.
But now it is in vain to look my heart,
For all the dangerous secrets are gone out.
(aside.
 Well, Sirs, what do you think? are we in danger?
I do not think we are; what have we done?
Much have we talk'd indeed, in merriment,
About I know not what, of this and that,
Of altering some Forms of Government.
But that was only matter of discourse,
We cou'd not be in earnest, for we know
'Twas wholly impracticable.









That shall not bring him off, he was in earnest.



Were not you so?



No, I abhor the thought.



you mov'd him to't.



A trick to try him.



Pox o' your tricks, you have noos'd me,
To save my neck I have been forc'd to make
Shameful Confessions.



Well, y'are serv'd right, why wou'd you be a knave
And plot to take your Countries liberty.



A knave? how cou'd I chuse but be a knave,
Keeping such knavish company as yours.








What, I believe y'are discompos'd by fear?
Fear nothing, for I say, what have we done?
Shew'd our Affection to the Commonwealth
In a mistaken way? will they put men
To death, for being subject to mistakes?
Then it will be a fault to be a man.
But do not fear, for I have one sure Friend,
Money I mean, which shall buy all our pardons?



Oh! dear, Sir, will your Highness buy my pardon?



Thine? what art thou to me? these are my Friends
And Gentlemen: thou art a barterer
Canst traffique for thy self; buy thy own head.



And so I wou'd at reasonable rates.



De'e hear? de'e hear? we have been silly knaves,
I wou'd I had all my confession back.
(aside.



W'ave been too hasty, I am sorry for it.
(aside.



I must keep up the spirits of these fools.
(aside.
Be merry Sirs; I warrant you your lives.
Who's there?
(Enter Keeper.







Bring in my Wine and Music
Enter Wine and Singers.
Here is sincere Wine.



And here are sophisticated Knaves, pity they shou'd be put together.



Come, sing us a Catch.


Chorus.Down with your sprightly Wine, boys,
Down with your sprightly Wine, boys,
For a Traveller bound,
To the Stygian Lake,



Is the best, is the best Divine, boys.

I.If the Wine be not sound,
No Falsehood is found
In a Bowl well crown'd;
And it drowns all our Sorrow and Sin:
And by the help of a Bowl,
From the World we may rowl,
More merrily than we came in.

II.With his Flames and his Flams,
And his horrible Shams,
How the Church-man damns
The little poor Villains and Whores;
But the great who by Power,
Whole Nations devour,
He merrily crowns and adorns.


  39III.If your Sence you'll resign,
Give it up to good Wine,
But to no Divine,
For his Visions are frightful and sad;
But the Visions in Bowls,
Make jovials Souls,
More merrily, merrily mad.

IV.To what Regious we fly,
None know when they die,
Any more than I,
To be certain of heavenly Bliss;
The few Moments I stay,
I by Night and by Day,
Will merrily revel and kiss.
Down with your sprightly Wine, boys &c.







I wonder Gisgon your fine Persian Wife
Comes not to visit you.




She does not come to kiss your Highness Hands.
For she has brought with her from Persia

Her Country Adoration of all Princes.







Hark! I hear her voice.






Oh! Princely Sir, I humbly kiss the Earth
Y'are pleas'd to honour, with your sacred Feet.



Oh! Madam, you are not in Persia.




No Sir, I wou'd you were, your Royal Blood
Wou'd not there meet this profanation.
Now Sir, shall I implore your Princely leave
To have some Conference with your Slave my Husband?
Oh! are you there Sir.





Ha! I am afraid
She has been told I'm turning an informer.
(aside.



You are a worthy person.








Did not I bring much Honour to your Bed?















Have not I kept the Honour which I brought?







Have not I manag'd too
Your Fortune with the utmost care and wisdom?







Of your person too
Have I not been most tender?







Then why have you been a base man to me?



'Tis so, (aside) in what respect most noble Madam?



In such an odious way I loath to name it.
This Valiant Gentleman, this Noble Spark,
Has sold his Honour, for vile shameful life.
He has submitted cowardly to confess
Your Highness plotted to be Monarch here.



Oh! dog! can I not get him near the wall,
That I may brain him? (aside) have you done this Gisg•n?




Yes, Sir, I have, and Sir you know 'tis true.



Say it be true; have you not told me, Sir, he has a right to reign? that he's descended from King Strato.



Well, let him be descended from fifty Kings, I don't care. I'll not be a slave to him, nor to any Prince upon earth.



Oh! Madam, it was all but railery.
And he was one that started first the jest;
Now by his fooling I lose life and honour.



His fooling, Sir? his cowardly treachery.
What e're you were, he was in earnest Sir.
He has a thousand times boasted to me,
What Honours he shou'd have, when you were King.
Then, though your Highness be most innocent,
And will escape (I hope and beg the Gods)
He shall dye; I'll swear he is a Traytor,
Double, false, both to the Prince and People.








So is that Reverend person too.



And has the Priest been dabbling.




He has been at his Revelations;
His Commentaries, Sir, on your dark Text.



I'll take him by the beard, and wring his head off



Well, Sir, I did as I was bound in conscience.
I'll not betray my Countries Liberty.



No then thou't not a Priest.



Ah! foolish men, they might have liv'd and dy'd
With glory, and have got a thousand Friends.



They'd ha' done us much good when we were hang'd.



More good than infamous base life will do.
Now all will spit upon you. I abhor you,
Who lately ador'd you, and resolv'd to do
The greatest things for you.



What cou'd you do?



Oh! Madam can you do us any kindness?
Oh! if you can I will present your Honour,
I will give any thing for my head in reason.



Hold thy tongue fool, I think not of such fellows.
But for my Husband and his Reverence too,
I wou'd have done what had amaz'd the world;
If they had done as great men ought to do.
I'd have convey'd 'em through the Town in pomp,
In spite of all the Senate.







Yes when your glorious Martrydom was past,
I wou'd ha' crown'd you such Funerals 



Pox o' your Funerals.



Mind your own Funerals;
Vex not your head with ours.



Oh! Madam bury 'em dead or alive,
Or the corrupted Rogues will breed a pest.



I cannot serve his Reverence as I wou'd
And he deserves; but it is in my power
To do my Husband justice, I'll right him.



She'l be the death of me.
I must retard her while I get my Pardon.
(Aside.
I have consider'd on't I would retract
My confession, and rather dye than live
In all the shame I've brought upon my self,
But I'm afraid they'l torture me to death.



Oh! I've so much Power with the great men.
Be you a noble valiant Gentleman
One I may own and love. Dye like a Hero
For this great high-born Prince, I'll undertake
The State shall not torment a man I love.



She is a whore to the whole Commonwealth.



I'll get you any kind of death you fancy.
And for his Reverence too, if he desire it.



I do not fancy any kind of death.
If you do Madam take your fill of it.
Poyson or hang your self, and if you like it
Come tell us so, and Madam we'll be hang'd.



'Tis well great Sir, I humbly take my leave
With infinite concernment for your danger.
I wou'd ha' sacrificed my Husband for you,
With all my heart.



I do believe it Madam.



Or my own life.



You much oblige me, Madam.



I take my leave in great confusion.



She'd have sacrific'd me.



These women tamper here with State affairs,
And hang their Husbands, I'll be hang'd by no body.
I'm Heavenly mettal and belong to Gods,
And I will keep their Plate from batterry.
Troth Batto, I have done your business too.
I've let the Councel know your villany.
Not only trade with Romans, but conspire
To set a King over the Commonwealth,
And take away our Liberties and Laws?



Oh! horrible! did you not move me to't?



Only to try you; I had heard of you.
I'm watchman for the Public; 'tis my Office
To have my Eye and Ear in every place,
And knock at every door. When I mov'd you,
I knock'd, and found a Knave within your bosom.



And so you'd hang me?







Well, and I've endeavour'd to hang you.
I've let the Councel know your Villany.



Ha! have you so? Well see who shall have most credit.



Nay none of us I think will have much credit.



So, so, the Rogues are hanging one another.
If ever a turn comes, I'll hang you all.



Let a turn come; I fear not you or death,
For death will only change my vehicle.
Enter Keeper.



My Lord, here are some Senators from the Senate,
To speak with your Highness



To take my head; I'm lost. Wait on 'em in
Enter Senators.




My Lord, the Senate sends to beg your Highness
To be Protector o' the Commonwealth.









Usurps upon the State, he forc'd the Senate
To release Regulus on his Parole.
The Common People think they are betray'd,
And have requir'd the Senate to free you,
And give you power, that you may punish him.



Sir, I'm unfit for Power, these Gentlemen
Have accus'd me of very horrid Treasons.




They'r not believ'd but look'd on as defamers;
And order'd to be kept in close confinement.



Oh! brave! oh! brave!



Oh! curse on evidencing!



Now Rascals! Keeper, put these men in setters.
Now Noble Senators, I'll wait on you,
To my most honourable Lords the Senate.
(Ex.













Brave Metellus! brave friends all!
De'e weep? nay then it seems you are subdued.



Who ever saw such an amazing change?



Does it amaze you to see fortune change?
The wonder wou'd be greater shou'd she fix.
She takes my freedom to maintain her own.
Remove your Eye from fortune my dark part,
And fix it on my self, who still remain
Not only unconquer'd, but invincible.
Yet o're victorious Carthage I'll triumph.



Oh! Sir! then have you terms for liberty?



My liberty depends not on their will,
'Tis true, the freedom of my body does.
But that is born a slave, by nature bound
To serve the mind, a time prefixt by fate
And then turn'd over to new bonds in death.
Of this poor vassal I take little care.
How free my mind is, you shall soon perceive.



I tremble for him.





This Body, (which can never be releas'd
From vassallage to sufferings, and death)
Asks the refunding all our Victories.



Agreed! one Regulus is worth 'em all.
For he'll regain 'em all.



You shall not give
The smallest link out o' that golden Chain.
It setters Carthage now, but if once broke

Carthage may scape, arise, nay enslave Rome.

I come to rule your dangerous love to me,
Which I fear more than Carthaginian Racks;
For these can give me but some painful hours
Which glory will allay, and death will end.
But you wou'd torture me with lingring shame,
Got by a treacherous and cowardly peace.
Then as your Consul, I command you all,
Give Carthage no more peace, than this short truce.



And what becomes o' you?












Sir, you return to dye.



It may be so.



To a tormenting death.



It may be so, my word and oath are past,
And nothing do I fear, like breach o' faith.








Will you forsake your friends,
To perish by your barb'rous enemies?



I do not perish, if my honour lives;
But if I stay shall not my body dye?
Then shall I lose the honour I can keep,
To preserve life, which is not i' my power?
By keeping faith, o're Carthage I triumph,
A Roman Ghost will triumph over her.
Not by short pomp which blazes but some hours;
My triumph shall go on, from age to age,
While Rome shall stand, which shall the longer stand
For my example of unshaken Faith,
For what Foundation to a State like Faith?



Sir, I'm the less amaz'd at what I hear,
For all your life has been with wonders fill'd.
But I have not so great a heart as yours
I cannot let you go.



He shall not go;
I will bring all the Army to his feet.



Is't possible? I do command you stay.
Perform your duties both to Rome and me,
Let Rome have Carthage, and leave me to Heaven.

Metellus why de'e wrong your self and me?
Your Spirit equals mine, and for the World,
You wou'd not have me leave this glorious path.
Like Romans now receive my last adieus.



He shall not go, his Troops shall stop his way.
(Aside.
Now take your leaves.






Oh! Sir! what you resolve
Has so much glory in't, I envy you.
But I must pity those, whom you forsake,
My self, your Children, my poor Fulvia.





Metellus be assur'd, those you have nam'd,
Are dear to me, as they can be to you,
But Generals must discipline their thoughts.
The honor of the Gods and good of Rome

Must first command; next them I rank my friends,
These have o're me so great authority
I'm jealous o' my weakness, and their power;
And dare not trust my self with seeing 'em.
I'll ne're see Fulvia more.



Not see her, Sir?



Oh! no, an enterview will raise our griefs
To such a tumult, 'twill not become me
To be seen in it. I'll serenely part,
And so retain my greatness to the last;
And this may less harm her.



Oh! Sir, she comes.



Then I must fly, I cannot stay with her.
(Ex.






The Consul! Sir, the Consul! where is he?
A minutes absence more I cannot bear.



Oh! my unruly griefs will betray all.
(Aside.



You sigh, nay more you strive to smother tears.








I do not; Sir, I see't.



Your fears impose on you.



Convince me of it,
And let me see the Consul.












Y' are rash, command your self.




I cannot do it.



You must, he's busied now in a great work,
The greatest that was e're design'd by Man.



Oh! what? and where?







Oh! why Sir, why? shall I not have a share
In all his Fortunes?



Ay, too much poor Girl.
(aside.
Let it suffice to know, his aims are now
Above what mortal Man ever attain'd.
And he will reach his aims now, seek no more.
(Exit)



I must, I must enquire, I cannot rest;
This is all darkness and confusion.





Oh! Madam! Madam! save the Consul's Life.



Now the dire Mystery begins t' unvail.
I'm dying, speak whilst I have Life to hear.



He cannot make an honorable peace,
So he is only come to command war;
Now to keep faith with faithless enemies,
Returns to dye.



Y'ave struck me to the heart.



Fly, Madam, or you'll never see him more.
His Army at the present bar his way,
But all their force will, without you, be vain.



My reason, sence and life, before me fly;
The Consul will enjoy his cruel wish,
Nothing of mine will ever reach him more,
Unless my shreiks cut through the wounded air,
Or Winds hurl to him my torn scatter'd hair.










WHO has betraid me thus, and brought my Troops
To besiege me?



Sir, I confess, 'twas I.




Y' are grateful Lepidus, I advanced you
To honor, you'd sink me to the lowest shame;
Make me appear a Coward, and be forsworn.



Well, Sir, we have not sworn you shall return,
We are not perjur'd if we hinder you.



Yes but you are, y' are sworn to obey me.



We may oppose you without Perjury,
If you destroy your self.




When I am false, I'm Regulus no more,
But a foul Spectre, which in little time
You'll hate and loath, whatever you think now.



Sir, this perhaps might force you from our hands,
If y' only went to die, for then you went
To the good Gods; you go to Furies now,
Who will torment you.



Not beyond my strength.
I've got this profit by calamity,
That I have learnt to bear calamity.

I never did believe it was an evil,
But now I do not think it troublesome.
Misery by use into our nature grows.

I by enduring pains will torture them,
And burn them with their own infernal rage.



But, Sir, you'll also torture your dear Friends,
We dare not let you go.



How shall I scape?


But the Proconsul comes, he'll do me right.
Sir, set me free from my distracted Friends,


Who would take from me more than Carthage can,
My Honor, Innocence, and their own Love;
For will they love me when I'm infamous?



Sir, something so divine appears in you,

I prostrate even my reason to your will.
Sir, if you wou'd resolve to stay with us,
No earthly power shall take you from our hands;
But if you will return, I offer up
My self, my Child, as Victims to your will,
For be assur'd we perish, Sir, with you.




I perish if I stay, then set me free.



I'll do you then this dismal service, Sir,
If I am able; but I doubt it much:

I hardly can believe the Legions,
Which oppose your commands, will obey mine.



I've thought upon a way a word give out,

Carthage has given me my mortal bane;
And in a sence it has.
aside.





I will do't, Sir, Pray Gentlemen draw near.
Follow no longer your mistaken Love,
It leads you to no purpose from your way.
The Carthaginians have the Consul fast,
They've given him his death.







They have his life, 'tis theirs do what you can;
They've torn it to a wretched Remnant now,
Not worth his keeping, therefore give it 'em,
It is the price of their Damnation:
And let him have the glory he desires.







Nay you trouble him.
Take hence your griefs, the Consul has enow,
Go, throw 'em on his bloody Enemies.



The Villains are too few for revenge.
And, oh! too vile to recompence our loss;
The Carthaginian Nation cannot do't.
Oh! Consul! since we must not hope for you,
And your stay here reprieves your Murderers,
We will release you, to release our selves
To our just vengeance.



Now I know you all.

I was afraid I had lost all my Friends;
That Punick air breath'd Punick souls in you,
And that you slighted Faith; which I believe
No Roman does, except a Roman Priest.


Mourn not for me, for that implys I'm fallen,
Rather calamity falls under me.
Applaud my happy fortunes, for I go
In triumph to a higher Capitol,
And more magnificent than that in Rome;

One in the Heavens, where living Jove resides.
True, I must first put off my flesh by death,
But that I with as small concern can do,
As men do Sandals at a Temple gate.
Now Friends farewel, thank you for all your Love,
And when I am in Carthage, storm the Town.



Now, Sir, thank you for an immortal life,
For you have open'd me the way to it;
And at no small expences to your heart.
Oh! Fulvia! there's my last great agony.



Sir, I have eas'd you of some part of it;

I met her flying t'ee, and stopp'd her way;
But might have spar'd the labor, for, alas!
Her sorrow often flung her dead on earth.

I left her senceless in her womens arms,
You may escape her now. Oh! no! she comes,
Comes like a Torrent, there's no stopping her.



Nay then, what sufferings have I to bear?

I fear my strength, and dare not meet her Eyes.





Oh! Consul! Consul! what have you decreed?








I cannot, cannot, Sir.
Pray pardon me, I'm not in my own power.
Oh! Consul! will y' abandon all your friends
For Slavery and Death, tormenting Death?



He's bound by Oath.



Was he not so to me?
And by a Thousand Oaths, he had no right
To give himself away without my leave:
He's true to Murderers, and false to me.



Dear Fulvia, calm your self, and use your reason,
You'll find I've acted as became a Man,
Who durst pretend to such a heart as yours.
Should such a Man betray the Rights of Rome

To save his life?



Your death will ruine Rome,

And me, and all the World.





By dying I preserve the Rights of Rome,

Advance her Glory, and mine, and therefore yours.


Now Rome will be my lofty Monument,
'Twill stand upon my Tomb, where I shall rest,
In a Bed fit for him whom Fulvia loves.



Where shall I rest when Regulus is dead?
You take no care for me.



Will you not rest
In my repose? can our united hearts
Have any joys, or griefs, both do not feel?



I do not know your heart, but I believe
Your griefs afflict me more, than they do you.



Too much, too much.
More than a Slave, as I am, can deserve.



You are my Lord; more dear (if possible)
To me than ever: by your fall my heart
Is greatly bruis'd, and tend'rer than before;
More sensible of Sorrow, and of Love.
Then pity me, for my sake, go with me.



I dare not do't, because I love you more,
Than to permit your sorrow to deceive you.
You seek to take with you, a Slave, a Coward,
A Thief, a Murderer; all this I must be,
If I return not. I shall break my Oath,
To steal my Freedom from the gallant Spartan

Who trusted me; and if I break my trust

I expose him to all my Sufferings,
And perhaps prove his bloody Murderer.
Would you have such a Villain as this with you?



Oh! these are arts to hide your want of Love,
You love me not, ne're lov'd, you have deceived me.



Now Daughter you are too importunate.



Oh! by my Love, I know he does not love,

I for no Joy on Earth could part with him;
He flies from me to Torments, and the Grave.



No, no, to Justice, Piety, Renown.



He is unjust, I have a right in him,

I never did, I never will renounce.
To take himself from me is Robbery
And cruel Murder, it will be my death,
And this he knows; but he regards not me,
He can be tender of his Enemies,
And not of me.



Oh! Madam! say not so.



Go, go to Carthage, let her have her right,
And I'll have mine.
I've title to partake whate're is yours.
It seems Chains, Misery and Death are yours,


And all the forrune you have left your self.
Well I'll to Carthage wi' you, and have my share.








Do you think I dare not do't?
Yes valiant Consul, I in some respects,
In resolution will transcend even you.
You are divine, above all sence of ill;
I'm a weak Woman, I have tender sence,

I can feel torments, yet I'll rush upon 'em.



Sweet Fulvia, hear me.



Oh! I love too much
To hear and see you; would I lov'd it less,
My misery and misfortune would be less.
Would I had never lent an Ear to you.
Yet you would now be heard. What should I hear,
Bloody Decrees against yourself and me?
Oh! I have heard too much, too much o'them.
And why should you expect I should hear you?
You regard not my Love, my Tears, my Blood.



Hold Fulvia, hold! you harm a dying Friend,
Who dyes for you and me, and for all Rome.

Why say you Misery is all the fortune
Of this great Man? is Glory of no price?
Are you a Roman, and want sence of glory?
All Ages will adore this wondrous Man,
Whom you wrong heavily. See, see, I swear,
Sh' as wrung Tears from him; now but that I know,
What thou hast said proceeds from raving Love,
For this great Sacriledge I'd strike thee dead.



Oh! Sir! you now commit the cruelty
You charge her with, you wound a wounded heart.

I know her heart is bleeding now for me,
And what she says comes from her pain, not her;
She is most kind in what she seems unkind.



Inndeed I am, and though your Love were lost.



Oh say it not.




I do not think it is;
But if it were, yet I must love you still,
Nay in calm thoughts adore you, and believe
You are too excellent, that's all your fault,
And my misfortune was, I lov'd too high.



Now Daughter you judge well, and do him right,



Oh! 'twas my madness wrong'd him, and not I.





I know't sweet Fulvia, and can I be false
To so much love! before I knew you lov'd,

I lov'd you so, that you were my chief aim.
In seeking Glory I sought chiefly you.

  52I fought for you, and now I dye for you,
By glorious Death more to deserve your Love;
And therefore be more lov'd; for if I dye
To keep my Faith with mortal Enemies,
Oh! think how firm my heart must be to you.
But shou'd I poorly live by breach of faith,

I should for ever lose you in both worlds;
You'd shun me here with scorn, and after death,

I for my Perjury shou'd shine in shades,
While you wou'd shine in Heaven; there is a Heaven.
This shred of Life cannot be all the Web,
Nature has wrought to cover divine Spirits;
There is a Heaven because there's misery.
The divine Power ever blest and good,
Made not the World for an ill natur'd jest,
To sport himself in pains of those he made.



True, but for Heaven what must you endure?



No more than what you cou'd endure for me.



Oh! that I might, I'd run to it with joy.



Then cannot I for you, sweet Fulvia?




So, y'ave prepared balm for the parting blow;
And that you may the better bear it to.
Take from each other your entangling Eyes.
I'll interpose and hide 'em now, my Lord.





Hold, hold, I cannot, will not let you go.
I'll lose my arms before I'll lose my hold.
I know what you resolve is glorious;
But I'm a Woman, and my Love prevails;
And the more brave you are, the more I love,
And the less able am to part with you.



Oh! I am in a tempting dangerous snare.



Nay do not grieve, you cannot scape from me,

I shall release you soon, my heart will break.






She shreiks and dies! her heart is broke indeed,
Poor Girl!



Oh! now I see what made her shriek,
A frightful Messenger is come for me.








From the dead; 'tis my dead Wife.





I perceive nothing dead, but my poor Child;

I hope she's dead, life would afflict her now.



Take notice Heaven, what we all endure
Only for Vertue. This one sweet last touch


Of this fair hand is the only recompence,

I shall receive for all I lose on Earth.



I'll see you to the Lines then take my leave.






Oh! he is gone! he is for ever gone.
Fond tears be gone, such vain and vulgar sorrow
Does not become the grave of Regulus.

I'll strew his Tomb with Carthaginian Ruines.
And this whole Nation for his bloody death,
Shall weep to death in blood Ho, Lepidus.



Where is your Consul?



He is near the Walls.
Where Thousands of us will be presently;
We are preparing for him a revenge.



Come follow me 
I'm now your Consul, his Soul lives in me.
We'll bury Carthage so, that where it stood,
In future ages shall to few be known;
Some shall believe here never was a Town.
Ex.









Most noble Senators, will you be pleas'd
To tell my honorable Lords, the Senate,
I'll only give some necessary orders
About their Service, then attend their Pleasures.



We shall, my Lord.
(Ex. Senators.



I fee the Senates craft;
I'm only us'd like Physic for a need;
With loathing forc'd upon 'em, and the wish'd
Effect once wrought, I shall be flung away.
For Commonwealths cannot bear glorious men,
By the confessions of the Priest and Gisgon


I am in danger, but I'll try to quash 'em.
I order'd the confessing Gentlemen

Should be brought to me.
1. They are come, my Lord.






How the Rogues look and tremble, for my sport?
(aside.
I'll let their terrors worry 'em a while.



What will he do with us?



I do not know.
I'm under dreadful consternation.



How? are y' afraid of death, now it is come?
I've heard you crow over death on your own Dunghil.



Oh! no profaneness in affliction, pray.



Oh! now the wind sits there, y'ave a sore Throat;
At other times your swallow's large enough.



The Rascals wrangle; and how pale they look?
The Priest there, has a face just like a Goose,
White every where, except about his Bill.
His Nose is faithful to the dye, Wine gave it.
Well, now my grave, my cheating face goes on.
(aside.
Oh! Gentlemen! I love and honor you.
Come to my arms.



What's this? come to his arms?
(aside.



Has he not got an engine there to flash us?
(aside.



You lov'd the Commonwealth above my life,
Or your own credit; you are honest men.
You play'd the part of Spies, oh, you did well.
To tell you truth, it was a part I play'd.

I was a Spy on you.







Indeed. But you had one great quality
Most fit for Spies, of which I had no share.
You scorn those scorns which always are the vales
Of that unlucky Office. I confess,
I was kept under by the fear of shame,
And partly by some tenderness for you:
I love you Gentlemen.







Your Excellencies very humble Servant.











Besides I found no great necessity
To do you harm; when I had power enough
To hinder you from doing the State harm.
But that I never meant to wrong the State,
I swear before the Gods. Do not I know,
It is impossible to be King here?
Speak your minds Gentlemen, you never thought
I was so foolish as to be in earnest;
And stake my life at a sure losing game?



We knew not what to think of your Highness,
We acted as our Consciences directed.



Oh! You did very well, y' are honest men.



I can swear for your Highness, you never said one word to me, of being King.



Th'ast done me right, so must these Gentlemen,
Or they will bring great guilt upon themselves:
For Gentlemen, had you thought me in earnest,
You'd have inform'd, when first you knew my guilt.
Instead o'that, you never let it go,
Till you cou'd purchase your own lives by it:
For, Sirs, can you deny the fear of death
Had not a mighty hand in this great work?



It had a little finger in't indeed.



Well Gentlemen, y'ave serv'd the Senate well.
Now he that is an entire honest Man
Does right to all Men; clear my innocence,
Then both the Senate and myself must love you,
For having serv'd us both most honestly.
And let me tell you, it is in my power
To raise or ruine you; which I shall do,
According as I find you good or bad.



We had best stick to him, he's a great man





Ay, and a very devillish cunning Man.
(aside.



Ay, and an honest man for ought I know,
He never said a word to me of being King.
(aside.



This Fellows evidence too will mischief us.
 We'll serve your Highness.



You are honest men.
Come we will to the Senate, they are sate.
(Ex.









Most Honorable, Venerable Lords;
I have an infinite desire to serve you.
It is my sole ambition, whatsoe're
Some Men may tell you: but, alas! my arm
Is wither'd by a blast, these Gentlemen
Have blown upon me; I must do 'em right.
They have inform'd, I talk'd of being King.
'Tis true, I did; they started first the Talk.
The Apparition, of so great a Treason,
So scar'd me, that I knew not what to answer.
I soon reflected, I should better serve


The State by humoring these Gentlemen,
To find how far they'd dug in such a Mine;
Then I should do, by making 'em in fri••ts
Conceal their works. But that I ever went
One step with 'em, or gave 'em cause to think,

I aim'd at being King, I do deny;
And they have prov'd by hiding long the Treason.
But I commend 'em that they e're discover'd it,
And humbly beg noble Rewards for 'em.



What say you Gentlemen? d'ee think my Lord
Meant to be King?



We know not what he meant.
We did discover it for fear he meant it;
But were not hasty in discovery,
Because it was not plain to us he meant it.



It seems he would, and he would not be King.
Why, Sir, you baffle your own evidence.
What says your Reverence to this affair?




I do desire, as it becomes my Coat,
To have my name and conscience without spot.

I fear'd his Highness was ambitious;
To feel his pulse, I mov'd him to be King.
His Highness did accept the tempting proffer.
To do my Duty to the State I told it.
But I must do his Highness right;
He ne're advanc'd one step in th' affair,
Or gave us cause to think he did approve it.
So I have conscientiously discharg'd
My Duty to the Senate, and his Highness.



That is to say, y'ave play'd the Knave with both;
And with yourself the Fool, as you shall find.
What says, that Citizen?



An't please your Honor,
His Highness never said one word to me
Of being King. All I know of th' affair
Was from his Reverence; he told me indeed,
His Highness had a fancy to be King:
And also said, if I would help his Highness
To keep a correspondence with the Romans,

If by the Romans help he got the Crown,

I shou'd be sure of very rich rewards.




So, so, they've been disposing all our Money.



And all our Lives; the Romans must ha' come.
By all y'ave said, y'ave fairly clear'd my Lord,
And charg'd yourselves. I think 'tis fit they die.
What says your Lordships?



Ay, ay, hang 'em, hang 'em.







Go, away with 'em, and hang 'em.



My Lord, my Lord, will you let us be hang'd?





What wou'd you have me do? oppose the Senate?



We are all fop'd here, fop'd out of our lives.



Oh! dear! I cannot dye! I cannot dye!



Thou canst do nothing else, thou dyest with fear.




I am not prepared to dye!



No, Sir, nor I.





I have my Religion yet to chuse.



I have my hanging Equipage to make.

I desire to hang like a Man o' Quality.



Dye piously, that's the best Equipage.




They'r not content with hanging; torture 'em.



Hold, hold! my Lords! we beg we may be hang'd.



That's a sad thing! must we intreat a hanging?




Away with 'em, and hang 'em presently.
Hiarbas, Gisgon, and Batto are guarded off.




So Traytors now will have a care of me.
aside.
For I out-match 'em all at their own art.
Now venerable Lords my hands are free
To guard you.



To destroy us all, we know you.
aside.





My Lords, the Traytors are all executed;
And at their deaths conjured the Multitude,
If any thing they had was precious to 'em,
With utmost speed to quell Lord Asdrubal,

Or he'd be King, and they'd be all undone▪
So all the Town are at your gates, to beg.
You'll fling him to their mercy.




Guards seize Lord Asdrubal, and carry him out
To be dispos'd as the good People please.



As the base Rabble please, your dirty Lords.
You take my life for what you ought to thank me.

I shou'd have honor'd you by being your King.
Had I been King, y'ad serv'd a high born Prince.
Now you are Vassals to a nasty Rout.
Confound your Commonwealth! Confound it▪ no.
Continue it Heaven! that there may never live
A great Man here. In a base Commonwealth,
Merit is Treason; a great Man oppresses!
His little Masters, by out-shining 'em.
I'm your Oppressor now, your Tyrant now,


Fear of me tortures you; I give you Laws.
Shake and look pale! you do Obedient Cowards!
While I have Life, I've Empire in my frown,
And in my courage a bright awful Crown.
(Ex.



Why? what a thundring Tyrant had this been
Upon a Throne, when he is thus in Fetters?




'Tis well we're rid of him; wou'd with this ease
We cou'd be freed from the bold dangerous Spartan.

The Traytor Asdrubal has told some truth.
A Commonwealth bears no imparity.
A great Man is a Tumor, is a Disease.
Enter an Officer.



My Lords, the Roman Consul is return'd.
The Spartan General attends,
With his great Prisoner, to know your pleasures.



Go bring 'em in.



Ha! What means this? our General is sad.
Which is the Conqueror, and which the Captive?



Have you forgotten me so soon my Lords?



No, but you come with the air of a Triumpher.
Your Conqueror there comes like a mournful Prisoner.
Has he subdued you General since he went?



Yes, and your Lordships too, he has o'recome,
In a more dreadful battle with his Friends,
Than e're he fought with your most valiant Troops;
Their griefs had sharper edges than your Swords:
He has o'recome 'em all, and now returns
To triumph here, and if I might prevail,
He shou'd triumph, and be led round the Town;
With Lawrels crown'd; t' encourage all your Subjects
To do for Carthage what he did for Rome;

For if you honor vertue in a Foe,
What may a great deserving Friend expect?



Is this true, Regulus? have you brought war?




I have done Justice both to Rome and you.
What Roman Valor got, I have preserv'd,
And hither brought myself your right by war.




Be crown'd with Lawrels? torn with red hot Pincers.








Be torn. Go fetch the Torturers.



Touch him that dares, he is my right.




Out-brave us all in our own Senate-house?

Xantippus know we are provided for you.


Our fond confiding in your faith and honor,
Expos'd us lately to your insolence.
Now we have fifty Thousand Men in arms,
Affront us now, no Spartan shall escape.



Behave yourselves like Men, and we'll obey you.
But if you will be Lions, and devour
A valiant Man, only in love to blood;
We'll do our best to scowre your filthy den,
Happen what will to us.





No more, no more o' this, if y' are my Friend;
You torture me more than these Men can do,
For I shall glory in what they inflict.
But I sink down under your griefs and dangers▪

I would not for the world lose this occasion
Of winning Glory to myself and Rome.




Go, carry him away, and torture him.



E're I will bear it, I'll be tortur'd with him.
(Ex.



Was ever such amazing insolence?




'Tis well we are behind hand with his pay.



He puts a bloody cross on his accounts.




'Tis the best piece o' service he e're did us.
After a Fight within, enter an Officer.



My Lords, take speedy course to save yourselves
And the whole City, or it will be lost.
The Spartan General has beat your Guards,
And finding he wants strength to fight the Town,
He has let in part o' the Roman Troops,
Commanded by a warlike Roman Virgin,
Contracted as they say to Regulus.

And she's come hither to revenge her Lover.




Why, what a bold black Traytor is this Spartan?




My Lord, I doubt we are the Traytors now,
The beaten Party always are the Traytors.




The beaten Party? has he got all Carthage!




Oh! no! he's only Master of one Gate,
Which I believe he keeps for his retreat.
But he has strength enough to do great mischief,
Unless prevented.



We will put a stop to't.
Where's Regulus?




He's forc'd out of our hands.



Before he was tormented?







Well, all the better, he cannot harm us.
Go to the Spartan General, and tell him,


We say, he has committed a high fault,
His King and Country would severely punish,
Should we complain of him; but for the sake
Of his past services we greatly love him.
If he will quickly leave the Town in peace,
And return home, all this shall be forgot;
We will provide him every thing he wants,
Money and Shipping.




I will let him know't.
(Ex.




I will take care the Shipping shall be rotten,
And he shall sink, perhaps in sight of Carthage.











Oh! noble Virgin, in whose sacred breast,
The heart of the great Regulus is lodg'd.
Can you forgive the cruel Sacriledge

I have committed against him and you?
But I repent and have made some atonement.



I am not able, Sir, to answer you.
My Soul is torn with tortur'd Regulus,

For I am told, we come too late to save him.



It is too true.



Is he alive or dead?



He lives, and has the joy to know y're here.
I told it him, I did not think it safe
To bring you to him, e're he was prepar'd,
Lest the surprize shou'd scatter all his Spirits.
And still I am afraid the enterview
Will harm you both.



Sir, this short enterview,
Is all the wealth we hope for in this world;
And to be hinder'd of it, all the harm
That can befall us now: if you repent
The ill y'ave done us, heap no more upon us.



The Heavens forbid. Well you shall have your will.
He's nearer than you think, open the door.








Oh! here's my Lord, all over wounds and blood.



And have I liv'd to see my Fulvia?

Thou bringst me joy, can heal a thousand wounds,
Wou'dst thou not weep; but if thou weep'st, my Dear,
Thou wilt set all my wounds bleeding afresh.



Can any eye see this, and not burst out
In tears and blood? your barbarous Murderers
Have found a luxury in torturing you;
You are all over wounds.



Oh! no, my Love!
My Soul's all over pleasure. Had I wounds
In Conscience or in Honor, I indeed
Were a poor creaturre fit to be lamented;
But as I am, I'm to be envied.
I have a Conscience which I would not change,
For all the Crowns on earth; and I have Honor,
Will live unrivall'd to Eternity;
And in my arms I've my dear Fulvia.




And at your feet your weeping enemy,
Asking your pardon, and adoring you.



Can there be then a happier man than I?


I have some wounds, it is no wonder sure,
A Soldier shou'd have wounds, and these I sought.
They give eternal life to my renown;
To me but a few pains, which now methinks,
Are gone, my Fulvia has heal'd 'em all.



No, no, you say this to deceive my sorrow

I see your Agonies, Convulsions,
And feel 'em too; they tear my veins and nerves,
And I shall die without revenging you.

I did not doubt but to have offer'd up
This Town, a burning Victim to your Ghost;
A glory to which I had greatest right,
For by your suff'rings I have highest wrong.
Now all this wealth I must bequeath to others.
But for my suff'rings I have great rewards,
Since I in life have Regulus's love,
And in Elizium shall possess himself.



For ever dear But do not hasten thither
By dangerous ways; harm not thy beauteous self,
Lest I shou'd lose thee too, in the next world.
Dark is the passage to't, the clearest paths,
Are Vertue and Obedience to the Gods,
If 'tis their pleasure, suffer life a while.
A little time in this short life is much,
But it is nothing in eternity.
Some days cut off from thence, will not be miss'd.


I'll wait the coming of thy lovely shade,
At th' entrance of Elizium, which to me,
Will not be an Elizium till thou com'st.
I'm going, weep not, Fulvia, for no man
Can live with greater pleasure than I dye.
(Dyes.



He's gone! he's gone! oh! thou accursed Carthage!

May'st thou abhor and scorn all Honor, Virtue,
Piety, Faith, till thou art scorn'd by all.
May'st thou do Villanies may deserve hanging,
And then be fond of Tyrants that shall hang thee.
Ha! I'm not well, I burn, and my brain's sick;
All nature's sick, the frightned day starts back;
Abortive night is born before its time.
Some horrid thing is done, what is the news?



Alas! she raves! sorrow has hurt her sence!



I'm told the Consuls murder'd, is it true?
I saw him lately, what's become of him?



'Tis so alas, here's a great Spirit broke.



I'm to be married to him, I'll have him,
Though he be dead! Dead? no, he's but asleep.
The Bridegroom sleep before the Brides, abed,
Oh! fie upon't! I'll make him blush to morrow.
Undress, undress me Ladies, quickly, softly,
I'll steal to him, and never waken him,
Then i'th' morning I will rise a Virgin,
And we'll all laugh him out o' countenance, ha, ha.



How does she mix together grief and mirth?
Ah? what confusion's in this noble mind?



How pale and cold he is? like a Moon beam
In a clear frosty night, oh! he will starve me.



Remove from hence the body, it disturbs her.
Regulus is carried off.




Warm, warm him some body. Ha! he is gone!
Then he is taken Pris'ner once again,
When he had paid his Ransom with his blood.
Oh! treacherous insatiable Villains!
Can nothing satisfie your thirst of blood.
I'll after 'em, my Sword, my Bow, my Horse;
Pursue, pursue, e're they are got to Carthage.



She runs after Regulus.



Follow, and hold her, lest she harm herself.





Away, away, my Lord, the Winds blow fair.
Both from the Heavens, and the Senate-house.
The Senate give you leave to return home,
Order you Money, and all things you need.


They sent this Officer, to express their pleasure▪






I thankfully accept the Senates savor,
And will not give 'em trouble many days.
Wilt thou go with me?



Will I stay behind?
If thou shou'dst sink in Seas, I'd follow thee;
Mount to the Heavens, if I stay behind,
It shall not be my fault; I will shake off
The luggage of this body to be with thee.
I've more good news, my Father will go with us.
And is providing shipping.







His care is needful, for he has discover'd
A horrible contrivance of ill men,
To sink thee and thy Troops, in rotten Ships.



Oh! wicked place! well I will sink this Town;
I'll take thy Father and thyself away,
Whose Piety binds up the hands of Heaven;
Then Vengeance will have liberty to strike.
And I, my Love, shall need your Piety,
To guard me from the anger of the Gods.
I've ruin'd a most noble pair of Lovers,
The divine Regulus and Fulvia.

I greatly fear her sorrow and his blood.



You did not shed his blood but fought to save it.



'Tis true, I did; and I will save his body
From any farther barb'rous violence;
I will convey it to his Camp with Honor.
And lovely Fulvia, dear, shall be your care.
Alas, she needs it, for her sence is gone.



I will my Love.



And then we will to Sparta,

And take up all our joy in Love and Vertue.
In these thou wilt find happiness enough.

Regulus found it so in spite of torments.
Vertue! thy joys no fortune can oppress;
Vice! thou art wretched spite of all success.
The aid of fortune is to Vertue vain;
To Vice a curse, and more augments the bane.
Ex.



