


THou sha't try her yet once more.








If thou be'st my friend, thou'lt do't.



Try your fair wife?
You know 'cis an old point, and wonderous frequent
In most of our Italian Comedies.



What do I eare for that? let him seek new ones
Cannot make old ones better; and this new point
(Young Sir) may produce new smooth passages,
Transcending those precedent: pray will ye do't.



Pray fool your self no farther; twice you have swaid me,
Twice I have try'd her; and 'tis not yet, ye know,
Ten days since our reconciliation:
How will it shew in you so near a Kinsman
To the Duke, nay, having woven your self into
The close-wrought Mystery of Opinion,
Where you remain a souldier, a man
Of brain and quality, to put your friend
Again on such a business, and to expose
Your fair wife to the tempest of temptation?
And by the white unspotted Cheek of Truth,
She is 















As far from your Distrust, as bad ones are from Truth:
She is in love with Vertue, would not boast it,
But that her whole Life is a well-writ story,
Where each word stands so well plac'd, that it passes
Inquisitive Detraction, to correct
She's modest, but not fullen; and loves silence,
Not that she wants apt words, (for when she speaks,


She enflames Love with wonder) but because
She calls wise silence the souls harmony.
She's truly chaste, yet such a foe to coyness,
The poorest call her courteous; and which is excellent,
(Though fair and young) she shuns to expose her self
To the opinion of strange eyes: she either seldom
Or never walks abroad but in your company,
And then with such sweet hashfulness, as if
She were venturing on crack'd ice; and takes delight
To step into the print your foot hath made,
And will follow you whole fields: so she will drive
Tediousness out of Time, with her sweet Character:
And therefore, good my friend, forbear to try
The Gold has past the fire.




Beauty, like the Herb Larix, is cool i'th' water,
But hot i'th' stomack: women are smooth flatterers, but cunning injurers.



Thou wonderous yellow friend,
Temper an Antidote with Antimony;
And 'tis infectious: mix Jealousie with Marriage,
It poysons Vertue: let the child feel the sting,
He'll fly the Honey-comb: Has she one action
That can expose you to distrust?



Oh! when the Flesander leaf looks most green,
The fap is then most bitter: an approv'd appearance
Is no authentick instance; she that is lip-holy,
Is many times heart-hollow. Here she comes.
Enter Abstemia.
A Prayer-book in her hand! Oh hypocrisie!
How fell'st thou first in love with woman? wilt try again
But this one time?



Condition'd you will stand
Ear-witness to our conference, that you may take
In at your ear, a Vertue that will teach
Your erring soul to wonder.



He would wittal me,
With a consent to my own Horns: I will;
I'll give thee a new occasion: There lurks in womans blood
A vindicating spirit.



I came, Sir, to give you notice,
Count Lodovico, Stroimo, Spinoso, and Pandulpho, with the rest
Of the Consilliadory, certifie,
They are setting forth to meet the Duke your Kinsman
Returning from Venice.




Oh, there he has seen the Duke your Brother.



Yes, Sir, and they stay but for your company.



And you're cloy'd with't Kicks her and Exit. She weeps.




And will you still be used thus? Oh Madam,
I do confess, twice I have batter'd at
The Fort I fain would vanquish, and I know
Ye hold out more 'cause ye would seem a Souldier,
Then in hate to the Affailant; I am again
Inflam'd with those sweet fountains from whence flow
Such a pair of streams: Oh strong force of desire!
The quality should quench, hath set on fire:
I love you in your sorrows.



And I sorrow in nothing but your love; twice, Philippo,

Have I not beat back the impetuous storm
Of thy incessant rudeness? wilt thou again
Darken fair Honour with Dishonesty?
Thou know'st my Lord hath long and truly lov'd thee
In the wisdom of a Friend, in a fair Cause;
He wears his good sword for thee, lays his heart
A lodger in thy bosome, proclaims thee Partner
In all he hath, but me; Oh be not counterfeit:
We all conclude, a Diamond with Clouds
The Goldsmith casts into his dust; and a Gentleman
So blemish'd in his Honour, blots his Name
Out of the Heralds Book, stands a lost man
In Goodness and Opinion: Oh Philippo,

Make me once more so happy to believe
'Tis but a pointed passion.







Come, learn of your City-Wagtail; with one eye
Violently love your Husband, and with t'other
Wink at your Friend.



I will not trust you, Brother.



He seeks, will ye not have him finde? cries ye out,
In his mad fits, a Strumpet, rails at all women,
Upon no cause, but because you are one:
He gives wound upon wound, and then pours Vinegar
Into your bleeding Reputation,
Poyson'd with bitter Calumny: Pox on him;
Pile a reciprocal reward upon him;
Let Ballet-mongers crown him with their scorns:
VVho buys the Bucks Head, well deserves the Horns:
Demur not on't, but clap them on.



You are, Sir, just like the Indian Hysop, prais'd of stran∣gers,
For the sweet scent; but hated of the inhabitants,
For the injurious quality: Can he love the VVife,
That would betray the Husband? Hast thou not seen me


Bear all his injuries, as the Ocean suffers
The angry Bark to plough thorow her Bosome,
And yet is presently so smooth, the eye
Cannot perceive where the wide wound was made:
And cannot this inform, I love him better
In his sow'r Follies, then you, in your sweet Flatteries?
If Verona hath observed any Errours in me,
I well may call for grace to amend them;
But will never fall from grace to befriend you.



VVith what a Majesty good women thunder!



'Has given her some close nod that I am here.



Rip up the end of thy intent, and see
How shame and fear do lurk where you would walk,
Like a pair of Serpents in a flow'ry Mead:
Lust sees with pleasure, but with fear doth cread.







VVhat is the pleasure thou pursu'st? a sin
Finish'd with infinite sorrows: read and find
How barb'rous Nations punish it with death:
How a minutes sin so stolen, though in the Face
Sit summer calms, all smooth, yet thou wilt hear,
From the Eternal Alarm of thy Conscience,
How it sets within thy soul continual tempests,
Thunder and dismal blackness: mark but the course
Of the holy-seeming hollow-man, and see
How he that glories Heaven with no Honour,
Covets to glorifie himself with Honesty.
And to put you past your hopes, let me leave this with you;
Thou mayst hold an Elephant with a thread, eat fire
And not be burnt, or catch Birds with desire;
Quench Flame with Oyl, cut Diamonds with Glass,
Pierce Steel with Feathers; this thou mayst bring to pass,
Sooner then hope to steal that Husband's Right,
Whose Wife seems honest, and no Hypocrite.
Exit.



What think you now, Sir?



Why now I do think it possible for the world
To have an honest woman in't. Good-buy, Sir;
I must go meet the Duke: adieu. Phil. Farewel:
Oh Jealousie! how near thou dwell'st to Hell!
Exeunt.
Enter Lodovico, Pandulpho, Spinoso, Jaspro, and Iovani, and Clown.



The Duke not seven leagues off! my horse, Rogues.



Our negligence deserves just blame; and how
'T will please his Grace to conster it, we know not.



But where's your fair chaste wife, my Lord?



Marry, with my man Francisco; Oh that fellow!
She were undone without him: for indeed
She takes great pleasure in him; he learns her Musick:
To hear what counsel she will give him! if he but screw
His look sometimes, with the pin, she will tell him straight,
'T was an unchristian look: I love him dearly,



But can your Honour never woo your Lady
To a more sociable affability?
She will not kiss, nor drink, nor talk, but against new fashions.



Oh, Sir, she is my Crown; nor is it requisite
VVomen should be so sociable; I have had such a coil with her, to bring her but to look out at window; when we were first mar∣ried, she would not drink a cup of wine, unless nine parts of it were water.







Nay, and ye knew all, my Lords, ye would say so: t'o∣ther day I brought an English Gentleman home with me, to try a Horse I should sell him; he (as ye know their custom, though it be none of ours) makes at her lips the first dash.



He dash'd her out of countenance, I'm sure of that.



She did so powt and spit, that my hot-brain'd Gallant could not forbear, but ask the cause: quoth she 



No, Sir, she spit again, before quoth she left her lips.



I think she did indeed; but then quoth she, A kiss, Sir, is sins earnest-penny: is't not true, Pambo?



Very true, Sir; by the same token, Quoth he to her again, If you dislike the penny, Lady, pray let me change it in∣to English half-pence; and so gave her two for't.



But how she vex't then! then she rattled him, and told him roundly, Though confidence made Cuckolds in England, she could no Coxcombs in Italy.



But did ye mark how bitterly he clos'd it with a mid∣ling Jest?



What was that, I prethee?



Why quoth he to her again, Confidence makes not so many Cuckolds in England, but Craft picks open more Padlocks in Italy.



That was something sharp But here she comes.
Enter Dorothea and Francisco.



Ye shall see how I'll put ye all upon her presently.



Then I shall take my turn.











Have you chang'd the Ditty you last set?







The Conceit may stand, but I hope you have cloath'd the method in a more Christian-like apparel.







Pray let me hear it now.



She that in these days looks for Truth,
Seldom or never findes, in sooth.











Peace, sirrah; nay, she's built of modesty.



Even as a wicked Kiss defiles the Lips,
So do new fashions her that through them trips.







She that doth pleasure use for what 'twill bring her,
will pluck a Rose, although she prick her finger.



Put in hurt her finger, good Francis; the phrase will be more decent.



Y'are a wondrous happy man in one so vertuous.



Nay, ye shall have no Count Lorenzo of me, I warrant ye.



Nor no Count Lorenzo's Lady of your wife, I warrant ye.



Sweet Chick, I come to take leave of thee: finger in nye already!
VVe are all to meet the Duke this afternoon, Bird,
VVho is now come from Venice: thou mayst walk and see
The Count Lorenzo's Lady.



'Lae, she's too merry for my company.



Too merry! I have seen her sad,
But very seldom merry.



I mean, my Lord,
That she can walk, tell Tales, run in the Garden.



VVhy then your Ladiship may hold your tongue, say nothing, and walk in the Orchard.



She can drink a cup of wine not delay'd with water.



VVhy then you may drink a cup of water without wine.



Nay, if a Noble man come to see her Lord,
She will let him kiss her too, against our custom.



VVhy a modest woman may be kist by accident,
Yet not give the least touch to her Reputation.



VVell said, touch her home.



Nay, but they may not: she that will kiss, they say,
VVill do worse, I warrant her.



VVhy I have seen you, Madam, kist against your will.



Against my will it may be I have been kist indeed.



Pshew, there's nothing against a womans will; and I dare be sworn, if my Lady kiss but any one man, 'tis because she cannot do with all.



Nay, I know that to be true, my Lords, and at this time,
Because ye cannot do with all, pray kiss them in order;


Kiss her all over, gentlemen, and we are gone.



Nay good my Lord, 'tis against our Nations custome.



I care not; let naturals love Nations:
My humour's my humour.



I must have my turn too then.



It must go round.







Look how she spits now.



The deeper the sweeter, Lady



The neerer the bone, the sweeter the flesh, Lady.







Did not my Lord bid the gentlemen kiss you all over?



I have sweet cause to be jealous, have I not, gentlemen? no; Crede quod habes, & habes still; he that believes he has horns, has them. Will you go bring my horse, sir?



I will bring your horse, sir; and your horse shall bring his tail with him.
Exit.



Francis, I prithee stay thou at home with thy Lady: get thy instrument ready; this melancholy will spoil her: before these Lords here, make her but laugh, when we are gone.



Laugh before these Lords when they are gone, sir!



Pish, I mean, make her laugh heartily before we come home; and before these Lords, I promise thee a lease of forty Crowns per annum.



Can ye tell whether she be ticklish, sir?







I'll deserve your lease, then, ere you come home, I warrant.



And thou shalt ha't y faith boy.
Enter Clown.



Your horse is ready, sir.



My Lords, I think we have staid with the longest; fare∣wel Doll: Crede quod habes, & habes, gallants.



Our horses shall fetch it up again: farewel sweet Lady.



Adieu sweet Mistres: and whensoere I marry, fortune turn up to me no worse Card then you are.



And whensoere I marry, Venus send me a Card may save fortune the labour, and turn up her self.
Exeunt.



How now? why loyter you behind? why ride not you a∣long with your Lord?



To lie with your Ladiship.







In the bed, upon the bed, or under the bed.



Why, how now Francis?




This is the plain truth on't, I would lie with ye.








I know too that you will lie with me.








Plague of Francis: I am neither Frank nor Francis,

But a Gentleman of Millain, that even there
Heard of your Beauty, which Report there guarded
With such a Chastity, the glittering'st sin
Held no Artillery of power to shake it.
Upon which, I resolv'd to try conclusions;
Assum'd this name and fortune, sought this service:
And I will tell ye truly what I guess you.



You will not ravish me, Francis.




No; but unravel ye, in two lines Experiences writ lately:
Extreams in Vertue, are but Clouds to Vice:
She'll do i'th' Dark, who is i'th' Day too nice.



Indeed ye do not well to bely me thus.



Come, I'll lie with thee, Wench, and make all well a∣gain; though your confident Lord makes use of Crede quod habes & habes, and holds it impossible for any to be a Cuckold, can believe himself none: I would have his Lady have more wit, and clap them on.



And truly Francis, some women now would do't.



Who can you chuse more convenient to practise with, then me, whom he doats on? where shall a man finde a friend but at home? so you break one Proverbs pate, and give the other a plainer: is't a match, wench?



VVell, for once it is: But and ye do any more, indeed I'll tell my Husband.



But when shall this once be? now?



Now? no indeed, Francis.

It shall be soon at night, when your Lord's come home.



Then! how is't possible?



Possible? women can make any of these things possible,



now many casualties may cross us; but soon at night my Lord, I'm sure, will be so sleepy, what with his journey, and deep healths for the Dukes return, that before he goes to Bed (as he uses still, when he has been hard a drinking) he will sleep up∣on the bed in's cloaths so sound, Bells would not wake him, rung in the chamber.



The Cuckold slumbers: though his VVife hit him o'th'
Forehead with her Heel, he dreams of no such matter.



Now Pambo, that makes him merry in his Chamber, shall, when the candle's our, and he asleep, bring you into the Chamber.



But will he be secret?



VVill he good soul! I am not to try him now.



'Sfoot this is brave,
My kind Lords fool, is my cunning Ladies knave:
But pray how then?



VVhen you are in at door on right before you, you shall feel the bed; give me but softly a touch, I'll rise, and follow you into the next chamber: but truly and you do not use me kindly, I shall cry out and spoil all.



Use you kindly! was Lady ere us'd cruelly i'th' dark? do you but prepare Pambo and your maid, let me alone with her Mistres: about 11 I desire to be expected



And till the clock strick 12, I'll lie awake.



Now ye dare kiss.



Once with my friend, or so: yet you may take two, Fran∣cis.




My cast is Ams-Ace then.



Deuce-Ace had got the game.



VVhy then you're welcome. Adieu my daintie Mistres.










I have given them all the slip, the Duke and all;
And am at home before them: I cannot rest,

Philippo and my wife run in my mind so:
I know no cause why I should trust him more
Then all the world beside: I remember
He told her that I bought the Bucks Head, therefore
Deserv'd the horns: although I bid him try her,
Yet I did not bid him bid her with one eye
Love me, and with the other wink at a friend.
How we long to grow familiar with affliction!
And as many words do aptly hold concordance
To make one sentence, just so many causes
Seem to agree, when conceit makes us Cuckolds.
Enter Philippo, and Abstemia.
And here comes proof apparent, hand in hand too;
Now their palms meet, that graspe begers a Bastard.



By your white hand I swear 'twas only so.



Poyson of Toads betwixt ye.




Philippo, you have fully satisfied me.



Insatiate whore! could not I satisfie ye?
I shall commit a murder, if I stay:
I'll go forge Thunder for ye. Oh let me
Never more marry! what plague can transcend
A whorish wife, and a perfidious friend!
Exit.



By the unblemish'd faith, then, of a gentleman;
And by your potent goodness, a great oath;
(For you are greatly good) by truth it self,
(For still I swear by you) what again hath past,
Was at the first, but tryal of her chastity
Far above time or storie: as I speak truth,
So may I prosper.



And came these tryals from your brest only?



Only from my brest; and by the sweet
Excellent blush of vertue, there is in you
Plenty of truth and goodness.




Appeas'd the storm o'ertook you; and you are
Again a good man.
Enter Lorenzo, Pandulpho, Spinoso, Jaspro, Jovani.



Trayto to truth and friendship!
Did not mine honour hold me, I should rip out
That blushing hypocrite, thy heart, that hath broke
So strong a tie of faith; but behold,
How much of man is in me! there I cast them
From this believing heart, to the iron hand
Of law, the wrong'd mans saint.







My Lord, here's warrant for what's done immediate from
The Duke, by force of which you're early i'th' morning
Before his Grace, to answer to such injuries
The Count Lorenzo shall alledge against you.



Injuries! Why friend, what injuries?



Can ye spell Stag, sir? 'tis four letters with two horns.
Good gentlemen convey him from my furie,
For fear of greater mischief.








I would you would instruct me, noble sir,
But how to understand all this.



Do ye see her? look on her all, and wonder: did ye ever
see so foul guilt stand underneath a look so innocent?



I should have pawn'd my blood upon her honour.



Colours not in grain,
Make as fair shew, but are more apt to stain.








Kicks her, She sowns.



Look to the Lady



Look to her! hang her: let me send her now
To th' devil, with all her sins upon her head.



Bear her in gently, and see her guarded.



You are too violent, my Lord.



That men should ever marry! that we should lay our heads, and take our hornes up out of womans laps.



Be patient, good sir.



Yes, and go make porguns.



'Tis late, and sleep would do you good, my Lord.



Sleep! why do you think I am mad, sir?



Not I, my Lord.



Then you do lye, my Lord,
For I am mad, horn-mad: I shall be acted
In our Theaters of Verona. Oh what poyson's
Like a false friend? and what plague more ruinous
Then a lascivious wife? they steal our joyes,
And fill us with afflictions; they leave our names
Hedg'd in with calumny: in their false hearts
Crocodiles breed, who make grief their disguise,
And in betraying teares, still through their eyes.
Oh! he that can believe he sleeps secure
In a false friends oaths, or in a bad wives arms,
Trusts Circes witchcraft, and Calipsoes charms.



'Tis late, let's to the Court.
Exeunt Omnes.






SOftly sweet Pambo: are we in the Chamber yet?



Within a yard of my Lady, and ye can be quiet.



Art sure my Lord's asleep?



I know not, I'll go and ask him.



No, no, no, do not wake him; we are undone then man.



Ha, ha, ha, now do I see, cuckold-making is as ticklish a profession as Cunny-catching: my Lord was so paid with healths at court, he's fast enough.



But still I pursue wonder, why my Lady should pre∣scribe this strange, nay wonderous desperate way to her de∣sires.



Is that a question to ask now? would you would groap out the bed; for I sleep in my talk, I am sure of that.
Lodovico coughs.



VVe are lost for ever: did he not cough?



'Tis nothing but the last cup comes up in stew'd∣broath: if ever you make true whore master, I'll be bound to resign my place up to my Lords page: Sea-sick before you come to th' salt-water? let me go in your stead.



No, I'll venter, stood a gulph between belching up
A Tempest. Oh valiant lust!
How resolute thou go'st to acts unjust!


Desire drowns fear, in presuppos'd delight:



Turn of your left hand, 'twill lead you to the devil, to my Lady, I should say, presently.
Exit.



Let me four steps on the left hand: I have the bed, and on this side she lies: 'Sfoot there's a beard? but all's well yet, she lies on this side sure:
I have her, 'tis her hand, I know the touch:
It melts me into passion; I have much ado
To contain my wild desires: as the wind strains
In Caverns lock'd; so through my big-swolne veynes,
My blood cuts capers.















Fortunate Francis, that was wrap'd in's mothers smock.



Give me your hand Francis.




There 'tis: I melt already.



My Lord, Count Lodovico, awake.



I am lost for ever, Madam,



My Lord, my Lord!



If I pull too hard, I shall pull her out o'th' bed too.



My Lord, will ye not wake?



What's the matter? what's the matter?



How I do dwindle!



Pray hear me sir, I cannot sleep till you


Have resolv'd me one thing.







Of all your men, which do you love best?



That's a strange question to ask at mid-night; Francisco.




And that same false Francisco in your absence


Most leudly temped me to wrong your bed.



VVas ever woodcock catch'd thus?



Oh rogue, I'll go cut's throat sleeping.



Nay I have fitted him most daintily.



Now, now, now, now, I am spitted.



I seem'd sweet-heart to confent to him.



A plague of seemings; I were best confess, and beg par∣don.



And to make him sure for, your revenge, I appointed


About this hour, the door left ope on purpose.







To meet me in the garden.










If thou would'st but steal down thither, thou mightst catch him,
and snap the fool very finely.



Oh my sweet birds-nie! what a wench have I of thee? Crede quod habes, & habes still; and I had thought it possible to have been cuckloded, I had been cuckolded: I'll take my rapier as I go, sirrah: and the night being dark, I'll speak like thee, as if thou hadst kept thy word. Oh Villian! nothing vexes me, but that he should think I can he a cuckold, and have such a Lady: do thou lie still, and I'll bring thee his heart for thy Munkies break-fast.



And would you part unkindly, and not kiss me?



I have no more manners then a goose; farewell
My chaste delitious Doll: what may his life
Be compar'd to, that meets with such a wife?
Exit.
Enter Clown.












Go meet him in the graden, and hark.



Excellent! I'll play my Lady, I warrant ye.







VVell I may hope for a Squires place, my father was a Costermonger.
Exit.



VVell now I see, as he who fain would know
The real strain of goodness, may in her read it;
VVho can seem chaste, and can be what she seems:
So, who would see hells craft, in her may read it,
Who can seem too, but not be what she seems:
In brief, put him to school (would cheat the de'il of's right)
To a dainty smooth-fac'd female hypocrite.
Exit.
  14Enter Lodovico and Clown.



Here's a wife, Pambo!




Now, Crede quod habes, & habes, sir.



Why right man: let him believe he has horns, and he has 'em.



To discover upon the pinch to ye!



Oh! you kind loving husband's like my self,
What fortunes meet ye full but with such wives!



Fortune's i'th' fashion of hay-forks.



Sirra Pambo, thou shalt seldom see a harsh fellow have such a wife, such a fortunate wedding.



He will go to hanging as soon.



No, no, we loving souls have all the fortunes;
There's Count Lorenzo for example now,
There's a sweet coyle to morrow 'bout his wife:
He has two servants, that will take their oaths
They saw her dishonest with his friend Count Philippo,

Nay in the very act: now what was't brought her to't, but his dogged usage of her?



Nay she never liv'd a good day with him.



How she goes flaunting too! she must have a feather in her head, and a corke in her heel.



I that shews her light from head to heel, sir; and who have heavier heads, then they whose wives have light heels? that feather confounds her.



I shall so laugh to hear the Comical History of the great Count Lorenzo's horns; but as I have such a wife now, what a villain did I entertain to teach her musick? 'has done her no good since he came, that I saw.



Hang him, 'has made herr a little perfect in prick-song, that's all; and it may be she had skill in that, before you married her too.



She could sing at the first sight, by this hand, Pambo.

But hark, I hear some-body.
Enter Francisco.



'Tis he sure, 'has a dreaming whore-masters pace; pray let me practise my Ladies part, and counterfeit for her.



Canst thou imitate to th' life?



Can I? Oh wicked Francis!




Admirable! thou shalt do't.



Pray be you ready with your rapier to spit him then and I'll watch him a good turn, I warrant ye



Here they are. If Pambo now comes off with his part neatly, the Comedy passes bravely: Who's there Madam?











I think this place lies too open to the air, Francis?









And truely there's a great dew fallen to night,
The grass is wondrous wet.









And let us sport our selves in yonder rushes;
And being set, I'll smother thee with busses.








It is enough my Lord hath now a friend,
In these dishonest days, that dares be honest.







Nay for thy Lord, he's a meer coxcomb, Francis.








'Tis but your bad desires that tell you so:
Can I contain a heart, or can that heart
Harbour a thought of injury gainst him,
Under whose wing I safely stretch my penions?
Has he not nobly entertain'd me? stand I not
Next neighbour save your self, unto his heart?



I by this hand dost thou.



And should I quit him thus? no, Lady, no.








I am too wise to fall in love with wo,
Much less with woman: I but took advantage
Of my Lords absence, for your tryal Lady,
For fear some fellow (far hotter rein'd then I)
Might have sought, and sped; and I would be loath
A Lord so loving. 



Shalt have five leases, by these fingers.



Should have a Lady false.
Back Lady, to your yet unblemish'd bed;
Preserve your honour, and your Lords Calves head.



Well Francis, you had been better: if I do not tell my Lord of this!



He has put him to't now.



Then I am lost for ever,
You'll turn it all on me, I know; but ere
I'll live to wrong so good a Lord, or stand
The mark unto your malice, I will first
Fall on my sword and perish.



Hold, hold, hold man.



Ha, who are you?



One that has more humanity in him, then to see a proper fellow cast himself away, I warrant thee: 'tis I, 'tis I man, I have heard all.



And 'twas I play'd my Lady, to have snap'd ye.



Has she been then so good to tell your honour?
Now am I worse afflicted then before,
That she should thus outrun me, in this race of honesty.



Nay sh'as bob'd thee bravely; sh'as a thousand of these tricks, yfaith man; but howsoever, what I have found thee, I have found thee: hark in thine ear, shalt have five leases, and mine own Nag, when th'ast a mind to ride



Let me deserve, sir, first.



Shalt have them: I know what I do, I warrant thee.



I joy in such a Lady.



Nay there's a couple of you, for a wife and a friend; shalt be no more my servant: I had thought to have made thee my Steward, but thou'rt too honest for the place, that's the truth on't.



His superfluity is my necessity; pray let me ha't, sir.



I will talk with thee to morrow, Pambo; thou shalt have something too; but I'll to bed: honest Francis, the dearest must part, I see; I will so hug the sweet rascal that thinks every hour ten, till I come yonder! good night Frank, to bed Pambo. What delight in life.
Can equal such a friend and such a wife?
So my dainty Doll, I come to thee.
Exit.



So a City-Night-Cap go with thee. But shall
I not be thought on, for my nights service?



Oh look ye, pray forget nor ye had something.



Well, and pray do you remember I had nothing.







Nothing before I had something, I mean: so you are well return'd from Utopia.



You're very nimble sir, good morrow.
Exeunt.
A Bar set out. Enter the Duke of Verona, Pandulpho, Spinoso, Jaspro, Jovani, Lorenzo, Philippo, Abstemia, a Guard, and two Slaves.



Call the accus'd to th' Bar.




With acknowledg'd reverence to the presence.




To build on circumstances, but to come plainly
To the business that here plac'd us: Cozen Lorenzo,

You have free leave to speak your griefs; but this


Desire the Senate to observe, and neerly:
I come here not your kinsman neither, Madam,
Looking unto the greatness of your blood,
As you are fister to the Duke of Venice;

But as an equal Judge, I come to doom,
As circumstances and proof informs.




(Great Sir, grave Lords, and honourable Auditors
Of my dishonour) I affirm 'tis known
To th' signorie of Verona, the whole City,
Nay the great multitude without, that come
This day to hear unwilling truth, can witness,
How since my marriage with that woman (weepst thou!
Oh truth, who would not look thee in a womans tears!
But showers that fall too late, produce deer years)
All know that since our marriage, I have perform'd
So fairly all judicial wedlock-offices,
That malice knew not how at my whole actions
To make one blow: and to strike home, I did rather
Honour her as a saint, sir, then respect her
As she was my wife: on pilgrimage I sent
All my endeavours to the fair seeming shrine
Of her desires, where they did offer daily
A plenal satisfaction, which she seem'd
Reciprocally to return, pay'd back
As much obedience as I sent of love:
But then the serpent stings, when like a dove.
Opinion feathers him: womens sweet words
As far are from their hearts (though from their brests
They flie) as Lapwings cries are from their nests.







I would appear no satyre.
And for this man (how fain I would call him friend!)
I appeal to the whole state, if at the fight
Betwixt Bizerta Gallies and your Grace,
Wherein you pleas'd to send me General there,
That he deserv'd (let me not take from him
His merits meet confession) but I was there
The man (the erring man) that crown'd his merit
With approbation and reward; brought him home,
Prefer'd him to those graces you heap'd on him:
Wore him a neighbour to my heart, as lovers
Wear Jewls, left by their dead friends; I lock'd him
Into my heart, and double-bar'd him there
With reason and opinion: his extremities
Fastn'd me more unto him, whilst like an arch


Well built, by how much the more weight I bore,
I stand the stronger under him; so lov'd him,
That in his absence still mine ear became
A sanctuary to his injar'd name.



And what from hence infer you?




Base in the depth of baseness, for this wife
So honour'd, and this smooth friend so belov'd,
To conspire betwixt them my dishonour.







To stain my sheets with lust, a minutes theft:
To brand perpetually three faces; a husbands,
A wives, and friends.



Oh good my Lord,
Cast out this devil from you.



Oh good my Lady,
Keep not the devil within you, but confess.



Hear me, great sir; I will confess, Lorenzo,

And print thee down the fool of passion.







'Tis true, this boasting man did thus erect me
In his opinion, plac'd me in his love,
Grac'd me with courtesies: Oh the craft of jealousie!
As boys to take the bird about the pit,
Cast wheat and chaff, contriving a neat train
To intice her to her ruine: so this friend
Falser then City-oaths, it is not doubted,
Having so far indear'd me, when he came
To enjoy a fair wife, guest it impossible
For me to share with him in all things else,
And not in her; for fair wives oft we see
Strike discord in sweet friendships harmony:
And having no way to insnare me so,
To separate our loves, he seriously
Woo'd me to try his wife.








By all that honest men may be believed by,
Three several witnesses, I try'd her, by him urg'd to't,
Yet still my truth not started, kept so constant,
That till this hour this Lady thus much knew not
I bore her brave reproofs: Oh when she spake,
The saints sure listen'd, and at every point
She got the plause of Angels! now upon this,
This jealous Lord infers (and it may be but
To shun futurity) that I


(His betray'd friend) could not hold the cup,
But I must drink the poyson: no, Lorenzo,

An honest man is still an unmov'd rock,
Wash'd whiter, but not shaken with the shock;
Whose heart conceives no sinister device:
Fearless he playes with flames, and treads on ice.



Cosen, did you, as your friend here affirms,
Counsel him to these tryals?












Philippo, thou art fallen from a good man,
And hast ta'en leave of modestie: let these my servants
(That incredulity should be induction
To my more certain shame) let these speak
And relate what they saw: they grew so publick,
My servants could discover them.



Speak, friends, be fearless;
And what you know, even to a sillable,
Boldly confess.




Then know, great, sir, as soon
As ere my Lord was gone to meet your Grace,
Signor Philippo and my Lady privately
Went up to her bed-chamber: we two suspecting
What afterwards we found, stole softly up,
And through the key-hole (for the door was lock'd)
We saw my Lady and Count Philippo there
Upon the bed, and in the very act,
As my Lord before affirm'd.



Canst thou hear, heaven,
And withhold thy thunder?



My Lords one devil, ye know,
May possess three bodies.



Will you swear this, sir?




I will, my Lord.








I will, and dare, sir.







Reach them the book.



Ye poor deluded men, Oh do not swear!



Think of the chain of pearl.




Give us the book:
That we affirm the truth, the whole truth,
And nothing but the truth, we swear.



Believe me, I am sorry for the Lady.




Two souls more pretious then a pair of worlds


Are levell'd below deach!



Oh hark! did you not hear it?







This hour a pair of glorious Towers are fallen;
Two goodly buildings beaten with a breath
Beneath the grave: you all have seen this day,
A pair of souls both cast and kist away.



VVhat censure gives your Grace?



In that I am kinsman
To the accuser, that I might not appear
Partial in judgement, let it seem no wonder
If unto your gravicies I leave
The following sentence: but as Lorenzo stands
A kinsman to Verona, so forget not,

Abstemia still is sister unto Venice.











Abstemia's lover once, when he did vow
And when I did believe; then when Abstemia

Deny'd so many Princes for Lorenzo,

Then when you swore. Oh maids! how men can weep!
Print protestations on their brests, and figh,
And look so truly, and then weep again,
And then protest again, and again dissemble!
VVhen once enjoy'd, like strange fights we grow stale,
And find our comforts like their wonder, fail.





Look upon tears, each one of which well valued,
Is worth the pity of a King; but thou
Art harder far then Rocks, and canst not prize
The pretious waters of truths injurd eyes.



Please your Grace proceed to censure.



Thus 'tis decreed, as these Lords have set down
Against all contradiction: Signor Philippo,

In that you have thus grosly, sir, dishonour'd
Even our blood it self, in this rude injury
Lights on our kinsman, his prerogative
Implies death on your trespass; but your merit
Of more antiquity then is your trespass,
That death is blotted out, and in the place
Banishment writ, perpetual banishment
(On pain of death (if you return) for ever)
From Verona, and her signories.











This censure is alotted? Your high blood
Takes off the danger of the law, nay from
Even banishment it self: this Lord your husband
Sues only for a legal fair divorce,
Which we think good to grant, the Church allowing:
And in that the injury
Chiefly reflects on him, he hath free lience
To marry when and whom he pleases.




That you are favourable unto my Love,
Whom yet I love and weep for.





This brest did never yet harbor a thought
Of thee, but man was in it, honest man:
There's all the words that thou art worth; of your Grace
I humbly thus take leave; farewel my Lords,
And lastly farewel, thou fairest of many,
Yet by far more unfortunate: look up
And see a crown held for thee; win it, and die
Lovers martyr, the sad map of injury:
And so remember, sir, your injur'd Lady
Has a brother yet in Venice.







VVhom my soul doth love. if you ere marry,
May you meet a good wife, so good, that you
May not suspect her, nor may she be worthy
Of your suspition: and if you hear hereafter
That I am dead, enquire but my lasts words,
And you shall know that to the last I lov'd you;
And when you walk forth with your second choyce,
Into the pleasant fields, and by chance talk of me,
Imagine that you see me lean and pale,
Strewing your paths with flowers: and when in bed
You cast your arms about her happy side,
Think you see me stand with a patient look,
Crying, All hail, you lovers, live and prosper;
But may she never live to pay my debts:
Weeps.


If but in thought she wrong you, may she die
In the conception of the injury.
Pray make me wealthy with one kiss: farewel, sir:
Let it not grieve you when you shall remember
That I was innocent: not this forget,
Though innocence here suffer, sigh and groan,
She walks but thorow thorns to finde a throne.
Exit.



Break up the Court, and Cosen learn this reed;
VVho stabs Truths bosom, makes an Angel bleed.



The storm upon my brest, sir.
Exeunt.






DId Chronicle ever match this couple, genetlemen?



You maks us wonder,
That both should seem to yeild to the temptation,
And both so meet in one resolved goodness,
Unknown to one another!



There lies the jest on't. Sirrah Pambo, I do but think and she had met him in the gardon, how she would have •atled him.



And ruffled him too, sir; the Camomile would have been better for it many a day after.



Such an honest minded servant, where shall one finde?



Servant? my sworn brother, man, he's too honest for an office he'll never thrive in't: ye have few servants will deal so mercifully with their Lords.



A wife why she's a saint, one that ever bears
A good sound soul about her.



Yes, when she wears her new shooes.



Shall we see her, my Lord?



VVhere is she, Pambo?




VValking a turn or two i'th' garden with Francisco, sir:
I go call her.



No, no, no; let her alone, 'tis pity indeed to part them, they are so well match'd: was he not reading to her?



No, sir, she was weeping to him: she heard this morn∣ing that her confessor father Jacomo was dead.







Why now shall not we have her eat one bit this five days.



She'll munch the more in a corner, that's the Puri∣tans fast.



Nay do but judge of her my Lords by one thing; where∣as most of our dames go to confession but once a month; some twice a quarter, and some but once a year, and that upon con∣straint too; she never misses twice a Week.







'Tis a sign she keeps all well at home: thy are even
With the whole world, that so keep touch with heaven.



Nay, I told ye, ye should finde no Philippo of Fran∣cisco.



And I remember I told your honour, you should finde no Abstemia of my Lady.



Nor no Lorenzo of my self; he was ever a melancholy stubborn fellow, he kept her in too much, and see what comes on't; I give my wife her will; and see what comes on't too.



Nay sir, there is two come on't, and a man could dis∣cover 'em.



Two what, I prethee?



It may be two babies, sir, for they come commonly with giving a woman her will.



I'd laugh at that, yfaith boy: but who has she now for her confessor?



She looks for one they call him father Antony, sir, and he's wish'd to her by Madona Lussuriosa.
Enter Dorothea, Francisco.



There's another modest soul too, never without a holy man at her elbow: but here comes one out-weighs them all: Why how now chick! weeping so fast? this is the fault of most of our Ladies, painting, weeping for their sins I should say, spoils their faces.







Look, look, look, loving soul, he weeps for company.



And I shall laugh our-right by and by.



Oh that good man!











Would he go to heaven without his zealous pupil?



It may be he knew not your mind, forsooth.



He knew my mind well enough.



Why then it may be he knew you could not hold out for the journey; pray do not set us all a crying 
Weeps.



Prethee sweet birds-nye be content.



Yes, yes, content, when you too leave my company?


No one comes neer me; so that were it not
For modest simple Francis here. 



As modest as a gib cat at midnight.




Vertuous books to me; were it not for him,
I might go look content: but 'tis no matter,
No body cares for me.



Nay prethee Doll; pray gentlemen comfort her.




Now is the devil writing an encomium upon cunning cuckold-makers.



You have been harsh to her of late, I fear, sir.



By this hand, I turn'd not from her all last night: what should a man do?



Come, this is but a sweet obedient shower,
To bedew the lamented grave of her old father.



He thinks the devil's dead too.



But 'tis no matter, were I such a one
As the Count Lorenzo's Lady, were I so graceless
To make you wear a pair of wicked horns,
You would make more reckoning of me 
Weeps.



Weep again? she'll cry out her eyes, gentlemen.



No I warrant yee; remember the two lines your
Honour read last night.
A Womans Eye, 'S Aprils Dust, no sooner wet but dry.



Good pigs-nye! Frank, prethee walk her t'other turn i'th' garden, and get her a stomach to her supper; we'll be with ye presently, wench.



Nay when ye please But why should I go from ye?



Loving soul! prethee Frank take her away.



Pray let me kiss ye first Come Francis,

No body cares for us At the door Francis kisses her.





Well, there goes a couple; where shall a man match ye indeed? Hark Pambo!















And intreat Madona Lussuriosa to sup with us, as you go, tell her my Lady's never well, but in her company.



What if your honour invited the Count Lorenzo? he'll be so melancholy now his Lady and he are parted!



Pray do as you are bid, kind sir, and let him alone; I'll have no cuckold sup in my house to night.



Tis a very hot evening, your honour will sup in the garden then.



Yes, marry will I, sir; what's that to you?



Why, your honour was ever as good as your word: keep the cuckolds out of door, and lay a cloath for my Lord in the Arbour, gentlemen.
Exit.



I have been this three months about a project.



What is't, my Lord?



Why I intend to compose a pamphlet of all my wives vertues, put them in print, and dedicate them to the Duke, as or∣thodoxal directions against he marries.



'Twill give him apt instructions, when he does marry, to pick out such a woman.



Pick her, where will he pick her? as the English pro∣verb says, He may as soon finde a needle in a bottle of hay: would I know what sins she has committed, I would set them down all one with another; they would serve as soyles to her ver∣tues: but I do think she has none; d'ye think she has any, gen∣tlemen?



Oh none sir but has some!



I, pidling ones it may be, a when a pin pricks her fin∣gers to cry at sight on't, and throw't away; but for other mat∣ters. 



Now I think on't, sir, I have a device newly begotten, that if you be so desirous to be resolv'd of her perfections, 'twill be an apt means for your intelligence.



That will be excellent, and then my book grounded upon mine own experience, the report of my judgement in the choyce of a woman, will sell them off faster than the Compositor can set the Letters together.



We will discourse it as we go; mean time, Sir,
Let this prepare the path to your construction.
Conceipt and confidence are juglers born:
One grafts in air, t'other hides the real born.



Well, he that believes he has horns, has horns;
And Crede quod habes & habes, shall be my Motto.
Exeunt.
Enter Pandulpho and Spinoso.



The powers of Venice upon our Confines!



Yes, Seignor Philippo, it seems, having possest him
With the passages that past upon his Sister;
Embassadors were dispatch'd to Bergamo,

Where then his Forces lay; who thus return'd,


That he came not a publick foe unto Verona,

But to require justice against Count Lorenzo,

To approve his sister innocent.




Proof or apparent circumstance builds he
His bold attempt upon?




The honour of Philippo, he has proof
So unresistable to affirm the plot
Of Count Lorenzo, that he only crav'd
(Hostages being rendered for their safe returns)
Here in the Senate-chamber, the fair tryal
Might publickly be censur'd: and by this
They are at hand.






Fair sir, the presence is levell'd for your grevances.



First summon to the bar the Count Lorenzo.





Lorenzo Medico, stand to the bar.



I do stand to the bar.



I come not here, witness the good mans comfort, to adde one step
Unto my territories: and though I burthen
The neighbour-bosom of my confines with
The weight of armour, or do wound your brest
(My Dukedoms neer next neighbour) with the hoofs
Of war-apparell'd horses; 'tis not to seek
For martial honours, but for civil justice.
Conceave mine honour wounded, a sisters shame
Is an unpleasant spot upon our Arms:
Yet that we come not here to sanctifie
A sisters sin; for if she so be prov'd,
Shame sleep within her epitaph, and brand her;
Let Bears and Wol•es that Angels Face confound,
Gives goodness such a foul unfriendly wound:
But if she chaste be prov'd, what balin can cure
A wounded name? As he that not inflicts
The bitter straok of law upon the strumper,
Fattens the sad afflictions of a thousand:
So who but stains an honest womans name,
Plagues are yet kept for him, steel is no defence
For the unclean tongue injures innocence.
I affirm my sister wrong'd, wrong'd by this man,
This that has wrong'd pure judgement, and thrown poyson
Upon the face of truth, and upon him


I secek a satisfaction.




The law must give you satisfaction,
That justly did divorce us: I appeal
To the whole Consiliadory, it equal law
In her progression went a step astray,
Either by proof or information:
Let the Duke speak (not as he is my kinsman)
If I produc'd not legally in Court,
Besides mine own assertion (which even reason
Grounded on probability) two of my servants
That upon oath affirm'd they saw your sister
Even in the very act of sin and shame
VVith that Philippo there: blame me not then, sir,
If I return an error to your cause,
Reason (the Base where on we build the laws)
You injure in this action; give her the lye:
VVho dares not build his faith upon his eye?
They swore what they did see; and men still fear,
(Reason concludes) what they not see, to swear,



You hear my kinsmans answer.




That you produce your authour: it is held
Meer madness on a hill of sand to build.



The foundation-work is mine, and that I answer:
He builds on truth, the good mans mistris,
And not in the sanctuary.
Of this injui'd brothers power, but the integrity
And glory of the cause: I throw the pawn
Of my afflicted honour, and on that
I openly affirm your absent Lady
Chastitie's well-knit abstract, snow in the fall,
Purely refin'd by the bleak Northern blast,
Not freer from a soyl, the thoughts of Infants;
But little neerer heaven: And if these Princes
Please to permit, before their guilty thoughts
Injure another hour upon the Lady,
My right drawn sword shall prove it.



Upon my knee, sir,
(How my soul dances!) humbly I intreat
Your grant to his request; fight with Philippo

I'th' midst of flame, or pestilence in a Cave,
VVhere Basiliskes do breed.



VVe must take counsell,
The price of blood is pretious.






The price of Truth is precious: for all the fights
I have fought for you on land; the fears at lea,
Where I have tug'd with tempests, stood storms at midnight,
Out-star'd the flaring lightning; and the next morning
Chas'd the unruly stubborn Turk with thunder:
For all the bullers I have bravely shot,
And sent death singing to the slaughter, Sir







What should a souldier do with peace? remember
Mine Honour lies a bleeding, and in mine yours;
Her wide wound inward bleeds; and while you cry peace,
Shame wars upon my Name: Oh rather kill me,
Then cast me to this scandal.




With such dare approv'd, you may permit it.



Your request is granted, Coze



You have now, Sir, breath'd
Fresh air in the face of fainting Honour
Rapiers of fair equality.



Look with what cunning
The spider, when she would share the fly, doth weave;
VVith neater Art appearances deceive.
Stay, as you said, sir, blood is a pretious price.
Let me but see the men produc'd, who swore
They saw them in the shameful act: and then
Farewel a sister and her honour.



Produce your servants, sir.
Venice sends off a Lord.



Plague of this change, here's one of them; the t' other
In that I threaten'd him for some neglect,
The next day ran away.



Did you sir, swear
You saw our sister and this gentleman
In this base act of sin?








To deny truth, is more dangerous then to displease a Duke:
I saw it and did swear it.
Enter Lord and 2 Slave.



But here comes one,
VVill swear you saw it not, and are forsworn.









This is the other fellow took his oath.



VVhat come you here to say, sir?




That we swore falsely, may it please your Grace,


Hyr'd by my Lord with gifts and promises:
And as I now have spoke the muth, so heaven
Forgive my former perjury.








VVould you would say something; I have nettles in my breeches.



Now, now, I hope your eyes are open, Lords,
The bed of snakes is broak, the tricks's comes about,
And here's the knot i'th' rush: good heaven, good heaven,
That craft in seeking to put on disguise,
Should so discover her self!







Now see sir, where this scorpion lutks to sting
Mine honour unto death: this noble Dule
By nature is ingag'd to defend a sister:
And to this Duke so ingag'd, this malitious Lord
(For sin still ha her scourger) makes repair,
And prepossesses him with that suppos'd innocence
Of an injur'd sister; which he had hir'd this Slave
To follow him, and affirm, and layes the cause
To scruple, and to conscience: they did consent
To steal belief by seeming accident.
Sin Jugler-like, casts sin before our eyes;
Craft sometimes steals the wonder of the wise.
VVith an equal hand now weigh me, and if I want
A grain of honour, tear me from your blood,
And cast me to contempt.




My Lord would have made an excellent state-so∣phister.



In what a strange dilemma judgement sits,
Charm'd to her chair with wonder.



Shall I have justice?



Yes, in that this fellow swears for the Duke:
Reach him the book, you shall see him again
Take the former oath.



This doubt must be so ended;
If it give not satisfaction, send back our hostage,
You have fair regress to your forces: but
The blood remains on you; and still remember
The price of blood is pretious.



Let us end it.



Oh what a Combat Honour holds with Conscience!
Reach him the book; and if thou false dost say,
May thine own tongue, thine own foul heart betray





Give me the book, my oath must end all then.







Now you shall hear him swear,
He saw them both in the base act.





They are now both seen in the base act.







'Tis a strange oath.








True, villain! are both now seen in the base act?













You and I, sir.








Both you and I are seen in the base act,
Slandering spotless honour; an act so base,
The barbarous Moor would blush at.



D'ye hear him now?



Out Slave, wilt thou give ground too? fear works upon 'em.
Did you not both here swear i'th' Senate-chamber
You saw them both dishonest?




Then we swore true, sir.



I told you 'twas but fear.



Swore ye true then, sir, when ye swore
Ye both saw them dishonest?




Yes marry did we, sir:
For we were both two villains when we saw them,
So we saw them dishonest.



Heaven, thou art equal!




This is a jealous Lord, his Lady chaste,
A rock of christal not more clear: this gentleman
Basely abus'd: this great Prince dishonour'd;
And so we kneel for mercy.



You have redeem'd it:
Depart, prove honest men: that I should bear
Dishonour in my blood!







VVhat justice, sir, belongs unto the injur'd?



First, witness heaven, I tear thee from my blood,
And cast thee off a stranger: Assume you, sir,
(Since the great cause is yours) my seat of justice,
And sentence this foul homicide; it must be,
And suddenly; he will infect the air else:
Proceed, great sir, with rigor, whilst I stand by
And do adore the sentence.





Art thou not guilty?



Give me my merit, death;
Princes can build and ruine with one breath.



The cause may seem to merit death, in that
Two souls were hazarded, a Princess iame,
A Duke dishonour'd, and a noble Lord
Wounded in reputation: but since she lives,
And that no blood was spilt (though something dearer)
Mercy thus far stretches her silver wings
Over your trespass, we do banish you,
Both from our Dukedomes Limits and your own:
If you but set a daring foot upon them
Whilest life lends you ability to stand,
You fall into the pit of death, unless
You shall finde out our most unfortunate sister,
And bring her to our Court.



You sir are merciful!



This let me adde, in that you have made impartial ju∣stice, sir,
Princes should punish vice in their own blood:
Until you finde that excellent injur'd Lady,
Upon this gentleman, who hath suffer'd for you,
We confer your lands, revenues, and your place;
That during three days stay within our confines
It shall be death, to any that relieves you,
But as they do a begger at their door.
So cast him from our presence.



Your dooms are just!
Oh love, thy first destruction is distrust!
Exeunt Lord, Jaspro and Jovani.



For you, fair sir, until we shall hear tydings
Of your most injur'd sister, please you to call
My Court your own, conceive it so: where live,
Two partnersin one passion we will be,
And sweeten sorrow with a sympathy.
Exeunt.
Enter Lodovico like a Fryer, Jaspro and Jovani.



What, am I fitted, gallants? am I fitted?



To th' life, able to cheat suspition, and so like
Father Antony the confessor, that I protest
There's not more semblance in a pair of egges.



An apple cut in half, is not so like.



VVell, of Lords you're mad Lords to counsel me to this; but now in this habit shall I know the very core of her heart, all her little pedling sins, which will shew in my book as foils to her giant-bodied vertues.



That will be admirable!

  30〈1 page duplicate〉  31〈1 page duplicate〉
  32Jov.
We'll step aside: by this she's upon coming.



We shall know all.



Reveal confession: but go your ways; as much as may lawfully be reveal'd, we'll laugh as, at next meeting



Come, let's be gone: but once upon a time, sir,
A begger found a larks nest, and o'er-joy'd
At his suddain glut, for he thought 'twas full of young ones,
Looking, they were all gone; he was forc'd again to beg,
For he found in the Larks nest a Serpents egge;
So much good d'ye sir. 
Exeunt.
Enter Dorothea.



Well, thou surpassest all the courtiers in these pretty ones; if a man had the wit to understand them Yon∣der she comes; I can hardly forbear blushing, but that for dis∣covering my self.
Right reverend habit, I honour thee
With a Sons obedience, and do but borrow thee,
As men would play with flyes, who i'th' midst of modest mirth
With care preserve themselves.







Welcome my chaste daughter.



Death having taken good father Jacomo,

Upon the plenal and approv'd report
Of your integrity and upright dealing 








I have made a modest choyce of you, grave sir,
To be my ghostly father: and to you I fall▪
For absolution.



Empty then, my daughter,
That vessel of your flesh, of all the dregs,
VVhich (since your last confession clear'd you) have
Taken a setled habitation in you;
And with a powerful sweet acknowledgment,
Hunt out those spirits which haunt that house of flesh
Tears makes dry branches flourish green and fresh.



Since last I confest, then I do confess,
My first sin was, that my Taylor bringing home
My last new gown, having made the sleeves too slanting;
In an unchristian passion I did bid
The devil take him.



That was something 〈◊〉, dear daughter
Yet the more pardonable, for it may be your taylor
Lyes in hell, night by night: pray to your second.



Next, in a more savage rage, my chamber-maid


Putting a little saffom in her starch,
I most unmercifully broak her head.



'Twas rashly done too: but are ye sure, dear daughter,
The maids head was not broak before?



No, no, sir, she came to me with neer a crack about her.



These will be brave sins to mix with her vertues; why they will make no more shew then three or four bayliffs amongst a company of honest men. These sins, my Dove-like daughter, are out of contradiction venial, trivial and light: have you none of greater growth?



Oh Yes, sir, one!



One? what should that be; I wonder?



One yet remains behind,
Of weight and consequence: the same order
Heralds prescribe in shews, I now observe
In placing of my sins; as there inferiours
(Because the last lives freshest in our memories) 
Far more the persons of great note, so last
My great sin comes to obliterate those past.



Sh'as trod some chicken to death, I warrant her.



Hear me, and let a blush make you look red,
Unseemly I have abus'd my husbands bed.



You did ill to drink too hard ere you went to bed.



Alas, sir, you mistake me; I have lain
With another man, besides my husband







Nay the same way I use to lye with him,
But not altogether so often.



VVhy then Crede quod habes, & habes; I will believe I have hornes, for I have 'em: 'Sfoot, a woman, I perceive, is a neat Herald, she can quarter her husbands coat with Butchers Arms at pleasure: but I have a penance for your pure whore∣ship: you are somewhat broad, are you not with childe, daugh∣ter?



Yes, yes, sure 'twas that nights work.



How know you that?



Alas, by experience, sir: the kind fool my husband
VVishes all well; but like a light piece of gold,
He's taken for more then he weighs.



VVith child! there's charges too: at other side, there should follow
A zealous exhortation: but great affairs
That brook no stay, make me be brief, remembring
Lawful necessity may dispence with ceremony:
You are ingenuously sorry?







And resolve to fall no more so?



No in truth sir.



I then pronounce you here absolv'd: now for your pe∣nance.







As the fact in you seems strange, so blame me not
If your penance be as strange: you may wonder it;
But it is wondrous easie in performance,
But as your penance I enjoyn it: nay now I remember,
In an old French Authentick Author, his book
Titled, De Satisfactione, I read the same
Enjoyn'd a Lady of Dauphin. 'Tis no holy fast,
No devout prayer, nor no zealous pilgrimage;
'Tis out of the prescrib'd road.




So strange, story ne'er matcht the injunction, I do vow
The plenal strict performanc•.




Soon at night (so rumour spreads it through the City)
The two great Dukes of Venice and Verona

Are feasted by your Lord, where a mask's intended.







Now when ye all are set round about the Table
In depth of silence, you shall confess these words
Aloud to your husband: YOU ARE NOT THIS CHILD'S FATHER;
And 'cause my orders bar me such inquisition,
You shall say, Such a man lay with me, naming the party
Was partner in your sin.







This is your penance, I enjoyn you; keep it,
You are absolv'd; break it, you know the danger of it: god-buy.



Oh good sir stay, never was penance of more shame then this.



You know the danger of the breach as to us,
'Tis the shameful loss of our religious orders if we reveal.




Enjoyn me first upon my knees to creep
From Verona to Loretto.








Nothing indeed to this: is this your penance so wondrous easie in performance?







I am silent: your new penance nay meet a new per∣formance: farewel, sir.
You are the cruelst ere confest me before.



And this the trick to catch a near pure whore.
Exeunt.






HEre miserable despis'd Abstemia,

In Millain let thy misery take breath,
Wearied with many sufferings. Oh Lorenzo!

How far in love I am with my affliction,
Because it calls thee father! unto this house,
Where gentlewomen lodge, I was directed;
But I here discover
Strange actions closely carried in this house.
Great persons (but not good) here nightly revel
In surfets, and in riots, yet so carried,
That the next day the place appears a sanctuary,
Rather then sins foul receptable; these ways
Have to me still been strangers; but Lorenzo,

Thou couldst not though believe it: Oh jealousie!
Loves eclipse, thou art in thy disease,
A wild mad patient, wondrous hard to please.
Enter Timpanina and Morbo.



Yonder she walks mumbling to her self; the Prince Antonio has blest her with's observation; and ye win her but to him, your house bears the bell away; accost her quaintly.



I warrant thee, Morbo Madona, Timpania has effected wonders of more weight then a maiden-head: have I ruin'd so many City-Citadels, to let in. Court-martialists; and shall this Country-Cottage hold our? I were more fit for a Cart then a Coach, then yfaith: how now Millicent, how d'ye this morning?



VVell, I do thank so good a Landlady.



But hark you, Mill, is the door close, Morbo?




As a Usurers conscience. Grace was coming in, till she saw the door shut upon her▪



I'll set Grace about her business, and I come to her: is here any work for Grace, with a wannion to her? we shall have Eaves-droppers, shall we?



Chastity guard me, how I tremble▪



Come hither mistress Millicent; fie, how you let your hair hang about your ears too? how do you like my house, Mill?







Nay I know a woman may rise here in one month, and she will her self: but truths truth, I know yoo see something, as they say, and so forth. Did you see the gallant was here last till 12?



VVhich of them mean you? here was many.



VVhich? he in the white feather that supp'd in the gal∣lery, was't not white Morbo?



As a Ladies hand, by these five fingers.



White? no, no, 'twas a tawny, now I remember.



As a Gipsie, by this hand; it look'd white by candle▪ light though.



That lusty springal Millicent, is no worse man
Then the Duke of Millains Son.



His excellent carriage spoke him of noble birth.



And this same Dukes son, loves you, Millicent.




Now heaven defend me!



What from a Dukes son? many come up with a mur∣ren, from whence came you: tto, ha?



Thus nice Grace was at first, and you remember.



I would have ye know, houswife, I could have taken my Coach and fetch'd him one of the best pieces in Millain, and her husband should have look'd after me, that's neighbours might have noted, and cry'd farewel Naunt, commend me to mine Uncle.



And yet from these perfum'd fortunes, heaven defend you.







Perfum'd! I am a Pander, a Rogue, that hangs toge∣ther
  37
like a beggers rags, by geometry: if there were not three La∣dies swore yesterday that my mistres perfum'd the coach! so they were fain to unbrace all she side-parts, to take in fresh air.



He tells you true, I keep no 〈…〉 a company, I warrant ye; we vent no breath'd ware here.



But have ye so many several women to answer so many men that come?



I'll answer that by demonstration: have ye not observ'd the variation of a Cloud? sometimes 'twill be like a Lyon, sometimes like a horse, sometimes a Castle, and yet still a Cloud.







Why so can we make one wench one day look like a Country-wench, another day like a Citizens wife, another day like a Lady; and yet still be a punk.



What shall become of me? Oh the curse
Of goodness, to leave one wo for a worse!
Enter Philippo.



Morrow sweet Madam; Oh look how like the Sun be∣hind a Cloud, the beams do give intelligence it is there.



You're reciprocal welcome, sir,



What have ye not brought this young wild haggard to the lure yet?



Faith sir, she's a little irregular yet; but time, that turns Citizens Caps into Court-periwigs, will bring the won∣der about.



Bless you, sweet mistres.
Enter Antonio and Slave.



'Sfoot here's the Prince, I smell thunder.



Your Grace is most methodically welcome: you must pardon my vareity of phrase, the Courtiers e'en cloy us with good words.







A gentleman of Ferrara, sir, one Pedro Sebastiano.




And do ye set her out to sale, I charg'd ye reserve for me alone?







Pox of your deeds. 
Kicks her.












Nay good my Lord.



Good sir, 'tis one of the Dukes chamber.



Let him be of the devils chamber.



Sirrah, leave the house, or I will send thee out with thunder.



Good sir, 'tis madness here to stand him.



'Sfootkickt? pray that we meet no more again, sir;
Still keep heaven about you.



What ere thou art, a good man still go with thee.



Will you bestow a cast of your professions?



We are vanish'd, sir.



This 'tis to dream of rotten glasses, Morbo.




O what shall become of me? in his eye
Murder and lust contends.



Nay flie not, you sweet,
I am not angry with you, indeed I am not:
Do you know me?



Yes, sir, report hath given intelligence
You are the Prince, the Dukes son.








Spoke but her native language; you are none of either.







Were you the Prince, you would not sure be slav'd
To your bloodspassion: I do crave your pardon
For my rough language; truth hath a forehead free,
And in the tower of her integrity,
Sits an unvanquish'd virgin: can you imagine
'Twill appear possible you are the Prince?
VVhy when you set your foot first in this house,
You crush'd obedient duty unto death,
And even then fell from you your respect:
Honour is like a goodly old house, which
If we repair not still with vertues hand,
Like a Citadel being madly rais'd on sand,
It falls, is swallow'd and not found.



If you rail upon the place, prethee how cam'st thou hi∣ther?



By treacherous intelligence: honest men so
In the way ignorant, through theeves purlewes go.
Are you son to such a noble Father?
Send him to's grave then
Like a white Almond-tree, full of glad days,
VVith joy that he begot so good a son.
Oh sir, methinks I see sweet Majesty
Sit with a mourning sad face full of sorrows
To see you in this place: this is a cave
Of Scorpions and of Dragons; Oh turn back!


Toads here ingender, 'tis the stream of death;
The very air poysons a good mans breath.
Enter Timpanina and Morbo.











Is my Caroach at door?



And your horses too, sir; ye found her pliant.



Y'are rotten hospitals hung with greasie sattin.







Came this nice piece from Naples, with a pox to her?



And she has not Neapolitanis'd him, I'll be flead for't.
Exeunt Baud and Pander.



Let me borrow goodness from thy lip: farewel:
Here's a new wonder, I have met heaven in hell.
Exeunt.
Enter Venice, Vorona, Lodovico, Pandulpho, Iaspro.



Is this your chast religious Lady?



Nay good my Lord, let it be carried with a silent repu∣tation, for the credit of the conclusion; as all here are privy to the passage, I do desire not to be laugh'd at, till after the Mask and we are all ready: I have made bold with some of your Graces gentlemen, that are good dancers.



'Tis one of my greatest wonders, credit me,
To think what way she will devise here openly,
To perform her so strict penance.



It busies me, believe me too.



Ye may see now, sir, how possible 'tis for a cunning
Lady, to make an Ass of a Lord too confident.



An Ass! I will prove a contented Cuckold the wisest man in's company.



How prove you that, sir?



Because he knows himself.



Very well brought in.
Is all our furniture fit, against the morning,
To go for Millain?




Ready, and like your Grace.



We are given to understand, the injur'd Princess,
Whom Count Lorenzo and noble Philippo

Are (unknow to one another) gone in search of,
Hath been seen there disguis'd: strict inquisition


From the Duke himself shall ere many daies
Give our hopes a satisfaction.
Enter Dorothea, Ladies, Francisco and Clown.



The Ladies, sir; Francisco keeps before, sir;
And Pambo keeps all well behind.



Yes, there's devout lechery between hawk and buzzard: but please ye set the Ladies: the Mask attends your Grace.
Exit.



Come Ladies sit: Madona Dorothea,

Your ingenious Lord hath suddenly prepar'd us
For a conceited Mask, and himself it seems
Playes the presenter.



Now fie upon this vanity:
A profane Mask! chastity keep us, Ladies.



What, from a Mask? whereon grounds your wish?



Marry my Lord upon experience.
I heard of one, once brought his wife to a Mask,
As chaste as a cold night; but poor unfortunate fellow
He lost her in the throng, and she poor soul
Came home so crush'd next morning!



'Las that was ill:
But women will be lost against their will.



Silence, the Masquers enter.
Enter Lodovico, Clown and Masquers; a Stag, a Rom, a Bull and a Goat.



Look to me, Master.



Do not shake, they'll think th'art out. A Mark.



A Mask, or no Mask; no Mask but a By-clap;
And yet a Mask yclep'd a City-Night-Cap.







And conveniently for to keep off scorns,
Considerately the cap is hedg'd with hornes.







Speak a little louder.







We insinuate by this Stag and Ram so pritty,
With Goat and Bull, Court, Country, Camp and City.











'Tis the first word of your next line.



Oh Cuckold begins with C. And is't not sport?
Then C. Begins with Country, Camp and Court:
But here's the fine figary of our Poet,
That one may wear this Night-Cap, and not know it.



Why chicken, shall they make such an Ass of thee? good your Grace, can a woman indure to see her loving husband wear horns in's own house?



Pray Lady, 'tis but in jest.



In jest? nay for the jest sake, keep then on sweet bird.



Now to our Masks name: but first, be it known-a,
When I name a City, I only mean Verona.

Those two lines are extempore, I protest, sir; I brought them in because here are some of other Cities in the room that might snuff pepper else.



You have fairly ta'en that fear off; pray proceed.







Your kindest men most cuckolds are, Oh pity!
And where have women most their will, Oh City!
Sick for a Night-Cap, go to cuckolds luck;
Who thrives like him, who hath the daintiest duck
To deck his stall? nay at the time of rapping,
When you may take the watch at corners napping;
Take it forsooth, it is a wondrous hap
If you finde Master Constable without his cap:
So a City Night-Cap; for whilst he doth rome
And frights abroad, his wife commits at home.







A Constable of Verona; we will not meddle with your
City of Venice, sir.
Therefore 'tis sit the City, wise men say,
Should have a Cap call'd Cornucopia.








To conclude our Cap, and stretch it on the tenter,
'Tis known a City is the whole lands center:
So that a City-Night-Cap, ours we call
By a conclusion philosophical.
Heavie bodies tend to th' center so (the more the pity)
The heaviest heads do but upon the City:
And to our dance this title doth redound,
A City-Night-Cap, alias Cuckolds round.



Cuckolds round! and my sweet bird leads the dance!



Be patient, Madam, 'Tis but honest mirth:
From good construction pleasure findes full birth.
Dance.




Jaspro, fill some wine.
















I'll instantly give you a fair occasion to produce
The performance of her penance.



I'll catch occasion by the lock, sir.



Here, a health to all, it shall go round.



'Tis a general health, and leads the rest into the field.



Your honour breaks jests as serving-men do glasses, by chance.



As I was drinking, I was thinking, trust me,
How fortunate our kind host was to meet
With so chast a wife; troth tell me, good Count Lodowick,

Admit heaven had her.



Oh good your Grace, do not wound me.
Admit heaven had her! alas what should heaven do with her?



Your love makes you thus passionate; but admit so:
Faith, what wife would you chuse?



Were I to chuse then, as I would I were, so this were at Japan,

I would wish, my Lord, a wife so like my Lady,
That once a week she should go to confession;
And to perform the penance she should run,
Nay should do nought, but dream on't till 'twere done.



A delicate memento, to put her in mind of her pe∣nance.



Now you talk of dreams; sweet heart, I'll tell ye a very unhappie one; I was a dream'd last night of Francis there.








Nay, I have done with him.



Now your Grace shall see the devil out-done.



Pray let us hear your dream?



Bless me! I am e'en asham'd to tell it: but 'tis no mat∣ter, chick,
A dream is a dream, and this it was:
Me thought, sweet husband, Francis lay with me.



The best friend still at home, Francisco.

Could the devil, sir, perform a penance neater,
And save his credit better? on, chick, a dream is but a dream.



Me thought I prov'd with child, sweet heart.







Pox of these dreams.



Me thought I was brought to bed, and one day sitting
I'th' gallery, where your Masking suits and vizards hang,
Having the child me thought upon my knee,


Who should come thither as to play at soils,
But thou, sweet heart, and Francis?





Frank and I! does your Grace mark that?



I do, and wonder at her neat conveyance on't.



Ye had not play'd three venies, but me thought
He hot thee such a blow upon the forehead,
It swel'd so that thou couldst not see:







At which the child cri'd, so that I could not still it;
Whereat, me thought, I pray'd thee to put on
The hat thou wor'st but now before the Duke, thinking thereby
To still the child: but being frighted with't,
He cri'd the more.



He? Frank thou get'st boys.



In dreams it seems, sir.



VVhereat I cri'd, me thought, pointing to thee,
Away you naughty man, you are not this childs father.



Meaning the child Francisco got.



The same: and then I wak'd and kist thee.



A pretty merry dream!
Enter Jaspro.



Your servant tells me,
Count Lodowick, that one father Antony,

A holy man, stays without to speak with you.



VVith me, or my Lady?



Nay, with you, and about earnest business.



I'll go send him up, and he shall interpret my Ladies dream. Pist Jaspro.





VVhy husband, my Lord.



Didst mark? I must interpret.



I smell worm-wood and vineger.







He will not sure reveal confession.



VVe'll rise and to our lodging: I think your Highness
Keeps better hours in Venice?




As all do, sir,
VVe many times make modest mirth, a necessity
To produce Ladies dreams.



How they shoot at us! would I were in Millain:

These passages frye me.
  44Enter Jaspro and Lodevico.



Here's strange jugling come to light.







This Fryer hath confest unto Count Lodowick.

That his Lady here being absolv'd,
Confess'd this morning to him here, in her own house,
Her man Francisco here had lain with her.
At which her Lord runs up and down the garden
Like one distracted, crying, Ware hornes ho.



Art mad? deny it yet, I am undone else.








I confess it, I deny it, I any thing, I do every thing, I do nothing.



The Fryer's fallen Frantick; and being mad,
Depraves a Lady of so chast a brest
A bad thought never bred there.



'Tis my misfortune still to suffer, sir.



Did you not see one slip out of a cloak-bag i'th' fashion of a flitch of bacon, and run under the table amongst the hogs?



He's mad, he's mad.



I, I, a tythe-pig twas overlaid last night, and he speaks nonsence all the day after. 



Shall I, sir, suffer this in mine own house too?



I'd scratch out's his eyes first.



Since Lady you and your man Francisco

Are the two injur'd persons, here disrobe
This Irregular son of his religious mother,
Expose him to the apparent blush of shame,
And tear those holy weeds off.



Now you my frantick brother,
Had you not been better spar'd your breath?



And ye keep counsel sir no better?
We'll ease you of your orders.



Nay, let me have a hand in't: I'll tear his coat with more zeal then a Puritan would tear a surplis.



See what 'tis to accuse when you're mad.



I confess again to you now sir, this man did lie with me.



And I brought him to her chamber too: but come, turn out here.












How dreams, sweet wife, do fall out true!



I was a dream'd, now I remember, I was whipt through Verona.




I was your confessor:
Did not I enjoyn your chaste nice Ladiship
A dainty penance?



And she perform'd it as daintily, sir, we'll be sworn for that.



Oh good sir, I crave your pardon!



And what say you, Francis?




You have run best sir, vain 'tis to defend,
Craft sets forth swift, but still fails in the end.



You brought him to her chamber, Pambo.




Good my Lord, I was merely inveagled to't.



I have nothing to do with ye, I take no notice of ye, I have plaid my part off to th' life, and your Grace promis'd to per∣form yours.



And publickly we will still raise their fame:
VVho ere knew private sin scape publick shame?
You sir that do appear a gentleman,
Yet are within slave to dishonest passions;
You shall through Verona ride upon an Ass
VVith your face towards his back-parts, and in your hand his tail 'stead of a bridle.



'Snailes, upon and Asse: an 'th nd been upon an horse it had been worthy gramercy.




After that, you shall be branded in the forehead,
And after banish'd: away with him!




Like a midnight-meal, after our violent drinkings,
'Tis swallowed greedily: but the course being kept,
We are sicker when we wake then ere we slept.
Exit.



He must be branded, if the whore-master be burnt: what shall become of the procurer?



You Madam, in that you have coferr'd sanctity,
To promise her the vows you never paid,
You shall unto the Monasterie of Matrons,
And spend your daies reclusive: for we conceive it
Her greatest plague, who her daies in lust hath past
And soil'd, against her will to be kept chaste.



Your doom is just, no sentence can be given
Too hard for her plays fast and loose with heaven.



I will buss thee, and bid fair weather after thee: but for you, sirrah. 



Nay sir, 'tis but Crede quod habes & habes, at most; believe I have a halter, and I have one.



You sirrah, we are possest were their pander.



I brought but flesh to flesh sir, and your Grace does as much when you bring your meat to your mouth.



You sirrah at a Carts tail shall be whipt Through the City.



there's my dream out already; but since there is no remedy but that whipping-chear must close up my stomach, I would request a noat from your Grace, to the Carman, to intreat him to drive apace; I shall never indure it else.



I hope, Count Lodowick, we have satisfied ye.



To th' full; and I think the Cuckold catch'd the Cuckold-makers.



'Twas a neat penance; but oh! the art of woman in the performance.



Pshew sir, 'tis nothing, had she been in her great Gra∣nams place.
Had not the Devil first began the sin,
And cheated her, she would have cheated him.



Let all to rest; and noble sir, i'th' morning,
With a small private train, we are for Millain.

Vice for a time may shine, and vertue sigh;
But truth like heavens Sun plainly doth reveal,
And scourge or crown, what darkness did conceal.






BUt faith, sir, what's your device in this? this change
Infinuates some project.



Shall I tell thee?
Thou art my Slave, I took thee (then a Turk,
In the fight thou knowest we made before Palermo)

Thou art not in stricter bondage unto me
Then I am unto Cupid.




Oh then you are going, sir,
To your old rendevow, there are brave rogues there:
But the Duke observes you narrowly, and sets spies
To watch if you step that way.




Thus many times, I have chang'd habits with thee,
To cheat suspition, and prejudicate nature
(Mistres of inclinations) sure intended,
To knit thee up so like me, for this purpose,
For th'ast been taken in my habit for me.



Yes, and have had many a French cringe
As I have walk'd i'th' Park; and for fear of discovery,
I have crown'd it only with a nod.
Enter a Lord.



Th'art a mad villain:
But sirrah, I am wondrously taken
With a sweet face I saw yonder; thou knowst where.



At Venus Colledge, the Court-baudy-house.



But this, man, howsoever she came there,
Is acquainted so with heaven, that when I thought
To have quench'd my frantick blood, and to have pluck'd
The fruit a king would leap at; even then she beat me
With such brave thunder off, as if heaven had lent her
The Artillery of Angels.



She was coy then.



Coy, man! she was honest; left coyness to court-Ladies:
She spake the language of the saints, me thought.


Holy spectators sate on silver Clouds,
And clapt their white wings at her well-plac'd words.
She peicemeal pull'd the frame of my intentions,
And so joyn'd it again, that all the tempest
Of blood can never move it.



Some rare Phaenix, what's her name?



'Tis Millecenta, and wondrous aptly,
For she is Mistress of a hundred thousand holy heavenly thoughts.
Chastly I love her now, and she must know it:
Such wondrous wealth is vertue, it makes the woman
Wears it about her worthy of a king;
Since kings can be but vertuous, farewel.
A crown is but the care of deceiv'd life,
He's king of men, is crown'd with such a wife.
Exit Antonio, and the Lord after him.



Are your thoughts levell'd at that white then?
This shall to th' Duke your dad, sir; he can never talk with me,
But he twits me still with, I took thee at that fight
VVe made before Parlermo; I did command
Men as he did there, Turks and valaint men:
And though to wind my self up for his ruine,
That I may fall and crush him, I appear
'To renounce Mahomet, and seem a Christian;
Tis but conveniently to stab this Christian,
Or any way confound him, and scape cleanly,
And one expects the deed: to hasten it,
This letter came even now, which likewise certifies
He waits me three leagues off, with a horse for flight
Of a Turkish Captain commander of a Gally:
He keeps me as his slave, because indeed
I plaid the devil at sea, with him; but having
Thus wrought my self into him, I intend
To give him but this day to take his leave
Of the whole world; he will come back by twilight:
I'll wait him with a pistol: Oh sweet revenge!
Laugh our great prophet, he shall understand,
When we think death farthest off, he's neerest hand.
Enter Philippo.



You and I must meet no more sir; there's your kick a∣gain.
Kicks him.



Hold, hold, what mean you sir?



I have brought your kick back sir 
Shoots him.



Hold man, I am not 
Falls.



Thou hast spoken true, thou art not What art thou?
But I am for Verona.





Mine own words catch me, 'tis I now understand,
When we think death farthest off, he's neerest hand.
Dies.
Enter Lorenzo.
She lives not sure in Millain: report but wore
Her usual habit, when she told in Verona,

She met Abstemia here: Oh Abstemia!

How lovely thou look'st now? now thou appearest
Chaster then is the mornings modestie
That rises with a blush, over whose bosom
The Western wind creeps softly: Now I remember
How when she sat at Table, her obedient eye
Would dwell on mine, as if it were not well,
Unless it look'd where I look'd: Oh how proud
She was, when she could cross her self to please me!
But where now is this fair soul? like a silver cloud
She hath wept her self, I fear, into th' dead sea,
And will be found no more: this makes me mad,
To rave and call on death; but the slave shrinks,
And is as far to finde, as she. Abstemia,

If thou not answer or appear to knowledg,
That here with shame I sought thee in this wood,
I'll leave the blushing witness of my blood.
Exit.
Enter the Duke of Millain, Sebestian, Sanchio, and the Lord.



Followed you him thus far?



Just to this place, fir:
The slave he loves left him, here they parted.



Certain he has some private haunt this way.



Ha private indeed, sir: Oh behold and see
Where he lies full of wounds!







My son Antonio! who hath done this deed?








He's gone, he's gone; warm yet, bleeds fresh, and whilst
We here hold passion play, we but advantage
The flying murderer. Bear his body gently
Unto the lodge: Oh what hand hath so hid
That sunlike face, behind a crimson cloud!
Use all means possible for life: but I fear
Charity will arrive too late. To horse,


Disperse through the wood, run, ride, make way,
The Sun in Millain is eclips'd this day.



To horse, and raise more pursuit.
Exeunt.
Enter Lorenzo, with his sword drawn.




Abstemia! Oh take her name you winds upon your wings,
And through the wanton Region of the Air,
Softly convey it to her: there's no sweet sufferance,
Which bravely she past through, but is a thorn
Now to my sides: my will the center stood
To all her chaste endeavours: all her actions,
With a perfection perpendicular,
Pointed upon, she is lost; Oh she
The well-built fort of vertues victory!
For still she conquer'd: since she is lost, then,
My friendly sword find thou my heart.


Enter Millain, Sanchio, Sebastiano.



This way, what's he? lay hands on him.



The murderer on my life, my Lord, here in the wood
Was close beset, he would have slain himself.



Speak villain, art thou the bloody murderer?







His dissembled ignorance speaks him the man.



Of the Dukes son, the Prince Antonio, sir; 'twas your hand that kill'd him.



Your Lordship lyes, it was my sword.




Ravens shall fedst upon thee: Speak, what cause
Hadst thou with one unhappy wound, to cloud
That Star of Millain?




Because he was an erring star,
Not fix'd nor regular; I will resolve nothing:
I did it, do not repent it; and were it
To do again, I'd do't.







Leave him to swift destruction, tortures and death.
Oh my Antonio! how did thy youth stray,
To meet wild winter, in the midst of May?




Oh my Abstemia! Who cast thy fate so bad,
To clip affliction, like a husband clad?
Exeunt.
  51Enter Antonio and Abstemia.



Good sir, the Prince makes known his wisdom,
To make you speaker in his cause.




I have felt loves passions equal with himself,
And can discourse of loves cause: had you seen him
When he sent me to ye, how truly he did look;
And when your name slip'd through his trembling lips,
A lovers lovely paleness straight possest him.







Go says he to that something more then woman,
(And he look'd as if by something he meant saint)
Tell her I saw heavens army in her eyes,
And that from her chaste heart, such excellent goodness
Came like full rivers flowing; that there wants nothing
But her soft yeilding will, to make her wife
Unto the Prince Antonio: Oh will you flie
A fortune which great Ladies would pursue
Upon their knees with prayers?





Had law to this new love made no denial,
A chaste wifes truth shines through the greatest tryal.
Enter Morbo.



How now, what makes you i'th' wood here? where's my old Lady?







All the countrie's in an uprore yonder, the Prince Antonio's flain.







Nay no man can tell how; but the murderer with's sword in's hand is taken.



Is he of Millain?




No, of Verona: I heard his name, and I have forgot it.



I am all wonder, 'tis the slave sure.







Ha, Lorenzo! VVhat I pray?



Lorenzo Me Medico has run him in the eye, some thirty three inches, two barly corns: they could scarce know him for the blood, but by his apparel. I must find out my Lady: he us'd our house, intelligence has been given of his pilgrimage thither: I am affraid I shall be fing'd to death with torches, and my Lady stew'd between two disnes.



VVhy hath this thus amaz'd you, Mistress?



Oh leave me, leave me, I am all distraction, Struck to the soul with sorrow.
Enter Millain, Lords and Lorenzo guarded.



See where they come:
My father full of tears too? I'll stand by:
Strange changes must have strange discovery.



'Tis he: heart, how thou leap'st! Oh ye deluded,
And full of false rash judgement! why do ye lead
Innocence like a sacrifice to slaughter?
Get garlands rather, let palm and lawrel round
Those temples, where such wedlock-truth is found.











Oh Lorenzo! thou hast suffer'd bravely,
And wondrous far: look on me, here I come
Hurried by conscience to confess the deed:
Thy innocent blood will be too great a burthen
Upon the judges soul.







Look, look how he will blind ye; by and by he'll tell ye
We saw not one another many a day,
In loves cause we dare make our lives away.
He would redeem mine, 'tis my husband, sir,
Dearly we love together: but I being often
By the dead Prince your son solicited
To wrong my husband bed, and still resisting,
Where you found him dead, he met me, and the place
Presenting oportunity, he would there
Have forc'd me to his will; but prizing honesty
Far above proffer'd honour, with my knife
In my resistance most unfortunately
I struck him in the eye: he fell, was found,
The pursuit rais'd, and ere I could get home
My husband met me, I confest all to him:
He excellent in love as the sea-inhabitant,
Of whom 'tis writ, that when the flattering hook
Has struck his female, he will help her off
Although he desperately put on himself;
But if he fail, and see her leave his eye,
He swims to land, will languish and there die:
Such is his love to me; for pursu'd closely,
He bid me save my self, and he would stay
With his drawn sword, there about the place, on purpose
To require my loyalty, though with his death.


Fear forc'd my acceptance then, but conscience
Hath brought me back to preserve innocence.



The circumstances produce probability.



By truth her self, she slanders truth: she and I
Have not met these many months: Oh my Abstemia!

Thou wouldst be now too excellent.



These are strange turns.



Let not love strangle justice; speak on thy soul,
Was it her hand, that slew the Prince?



Not, on my life,
'Tis I have deserv'd death.



Love makes him desperate,
Conscience is my accuser: Oh Lorenzo!

The Duke and Lords whisper.
Live thou and feed on my remembrance,
When thou shalt think how ardently I lov'd thee;
Drop but a pair of tears, from those fair eyes,
Thou offer'st truth a wealthy sacrifice.



Did ye hear her, sir?



No, what said she?



She ask'd me why I would cast my self away thus,
VVhen she in love devis'd this trick to save me?



There may be jugling sir in this, it may be
They have both hands i'th' deed, and one in love
VVould suffer for't.
Enter a Lord.







The Dukes of Venice and Verona

VVith some small train of gentlemen are privately
This hour come to th' Court.



Bear them to prison,
Until we have given such entertainment, sorrow
VVill give us leave to shew: until that time
The satisfaction of my lost sons life
Must hover 'twixt a husband and a wife.
Exeunt: manet Antonio.



How strangely chance to day runs! the slave kill'd
In my apparel, and this fellow taken for't,
VVhom to my knowledg I ne'er saw: she loves him
Past all expression dearly: I have a trick
In that so infinitely dear she loves him,
Has seal'd her mine already; and I'll put
This wondrous love of woman to such a nonplus,


Time hath produc'd none stranger: I will set
Honour and love to fight so life and death:
Beautie (as Castles built of cards) with a breath
Is levell'd and laid flat.
Enter Philippo, putting on a disguise, lays down a pistol.




It was the Prince Antonio I have slain.



Ha! the clew of all this errour is unravelled;
This is the valiant gentleman so threaten'd me;
He met the flave doubtless in my habit,
And seal'd upon him his mistaken spleen:
If it be so, there hangs some strange intent
In those accuse themselves for't.



It seems some other had laid the plot to kill him;
This paper I found with him, speaks as much,
And sent to the intended murderer,
Happen'd it seems to his hands: it concurs;
For, they say, there is one taken for the fact,
And will do me the courtesie to be hang'd for me:
Antonio takes up the Pistol.
There's comfort yet in that: so, so, I am fitted,
And will set forward.



Goose, there's a fox in your way.







Come, I have other business afoot; I have no time to discover 'em now, sir; see, I can inforce ye: but by this hand, go but with me, and keep your own counsel; garden-houses are not truer bawds to cuckold-making, then I will be to thee, and thy stratagem.



Th'art a mad knave, art serious?



As a usurer when he's telling interest-mony.



VVhatere thou art, thy bluntness begets belief: go on,
I trust thee.



But I have more wit then to trust you behind me sir: pray get you before, I have a private friend shall keep you in custody, till I have past a project; and if you can keep your own counsel, I will not injure you: and this for your comfort, the Prince lives.



Living! thou mak'st my blood dance: but prithee let's be honest one to another.



Oh sir, as the Justices clarke, and the Constable, when
  55
they share the crowns that drunkards pay to the poor; pray keep fair distance, and take no great strides.
Exeunt.
Enter Lorenzo and Abstemia, as in prison.



Can then Abstemia forgive Lotenzo?




Yes, if Lorenzo can but love Abstemia,

She can thus hang upon his neck, and call
This prison true loves palace.




Forget their crowns, that know what 'tis to enjoy
The wondrous wealth of one so good; now
Thou art lovely as a young spring, and cornly
As is the well-spread Cedar; the fair fruit,
Kist by the sun so daily, that it wears
The lovely blush of maids, seems but to mock
Thy souls integrity; here let me fall,
And with pleading sighs beg pardon.
Enter Antonio.



Sir, it meets you,
Like a glad pilgrim, whose desiring eye,
Longs for the long-wish'd altar of his vow;
But you are far too prodigall in praise,
And crown me with the garlands of your merit,
As we meet barks on rivers, the strong gale,
(Being best friends to us) our own swift motion
Makes us believe that t'other mimbler rows,
Swift vertue thinks small goodness fastest goes.



Sorrow hath bravely sweetned thee: what are you?



A displeasant black cloud: though I appear dismal,
I am wondrous fruitful: what cause soever
Mov'd you to take this murder on yourself,
Or you to strike your self into the hazard
I or his redemption, 'tis to me a stranger,
But I conceive you are both innocent.



As new-born vertue, I did accuse
My innocence to rid me of a life
Lookt uglier then death, upon an injury
I had done this vertuous wife.






My innocence to save the belov'd life
Of my most noble husband.



Why then? now 'twould grieve you,
Death should unkindly part ye.



Oh but that, sir,
We have no sorrow: now to part from her,
(Since heaven hath new married, and new made us)
I had rather leap into a den of Lyons,
Snatch from a hungry Bear her bleeding prey,
I would attempt desperate impossibilities
With hope, rather then now to leave her.



This makes for me.



And rather then leave you, sir, I would eat
Hot coles with Portia, or attempt a terrour,
Nature would snail-like shrink her head in at,
And tremble but to think on.




If you so love him, what can you confess?
The greatest kindness can express that love.



To save his life, since there is no hope,
Seeing he so strongly has confest the murder,
We shall meet the happyness to dye together.



Fire casts the bravest heat in coldest weather,
I'll try how ardently you burn; for know
Upon my faith, and as I am a gentleman,
I have (in the next room, and in the custody
Of a true friend) the man that did the deed
You stand accus'd for.








Will you not let him go, sir?



That's in suspence; but mistress, you did say
You durst eat coals with Protia, to redeem
The infinitely loved life of your husband.



And still strongly protest it.








You shall redeem him at an easier rate:
I have the murderer you see in hold.



And we are blest in your discovery of him.



If you will give consent that I shall taste
That sence-bereaving pleasure so familiar
Unto your happy husband.








Then I will give this fellow up to th' law:
If you deny, horses stand ready for us,
A bark for transportation, where we will live


Till law by death hath sever'd ye.



But we will call for present witness.





Experienc'd navigators still are fitted,
For every weather: 'tis almost past call
To reach the nimblest ear: yet but offer it,
I part ye presently for ever.
Consider it;
The enjoying him thou so intirely lov'st
All thy life after; that when mirth-spent time
Hath crown'd your heads with honour, you may sit
And tell delightful stories of your loves:
And when ye come to that poor minutes scape
Crowns my desire, ye may let that slip by,
Like water that ne'er the meets Millers eye:
Compare but this, to th' soon-forgotten pleasure
Of a pair of wealthy minutes: the thirstiest Lapidarie
Knows the most curious Jewel takes no harm,
For one days wearing: could you sir (did your eye
Not see it worne) your wife having lent your cloak,
(If secretly return'd and folded up)
Could you conceive, when you next look'd upon't,
It had neatly furnish'd our a poor friends want?
Be charitable, and think on't.





Oh shall we part for ever, when a price
So poor might be our freedome?



Now goodness guard ye!
Where learnt you, sir, this language?




You did but now profess, that you would dye
To save my life, and now like a forward chapman,
Catch'd at thy word, thou giv'st back asham'd
To stand this easie proffer.




And know your selfe a cuckold?



What a question's that?
Many men cannot live without the knowledge:
How can ye tell,
Whether she seems thus to respect your honour,
But to stay till the law has choak'd ye? it may be then
She will do't, with less intreaty.



I, there, there 'tis.



'Tis your old fit of jealousie, so judges:
A foul devil talks within him.




The wondrous art of woman! ye would do it daintily,


You would juggle me to death, you would perswade me
I should dye nobly to preserve your honour;
That dead ignobly you might prove dishonourable,
Forget me in a day, and wed another.



Why then would I have dyed for you?



That was but a proffer, that dying you might Idolize her love;
'Twould have put her off the better.



Oh you have builded
A golden Palace, strew'd with Palm and Roses,
To let me bleed to death in! How sweetly
You would have lost me! Abstemia, you have learn'd,
The cunning Fowlers art, who pleasantly
Whistles the bird into the snare: good heaven!
How you had strew'd the inticing top o'th' cup
With Arabian Spices! but you had laid i'th' bottom

Ephesian Aconite: you are loves hypocrite:
A rotten stick in the nights darkness born,
And a fair Poppie in a field of corn.



Oh sir I hear me 
Kneels.



Away, I will no more
Look pearl in mud: Oh slie hypocrisie!
Durst ye but now die for me? good heaven! die for me!
The greatest act of pain, and dare not buy me
With a poor minutes pleasure?



No sir, I dare not; there is little pain in death,
But a great death in very little pleasure:
I had rather, trust me, bear your death with honour,
Then buy your life with baseness: as I am expos'd
To th' greatest battery beauty ever fought,
Oh blame me not, if I be covetous
To come off with greatest honour; if I do this
To let you live, I kill your name, and give
My soul a wound; I crush her from sweet grace,
And change her Angels to a furies face:
Try me no more then, but if you must bleed, boast,
To preserve honour, life is nobly lost.



Thou wealth worth more then kingdoms, I am now con∣firm'd,
Past all suspition, thou that art far sweeter
In thy sincere truth, then a sacrifice
Deck'd up for death with garlands: the Indian winds
That blow off from the coast, and cheer the Saylor
With the sweet savour of their spices, want
The delight flowes in thee: look here, look here,
Oh man of wilde desires; we will die the Martyrs


Of Marriage, and stead of the loose ditties
With which; they stab sweet modestie, and ingender
Desires in the hot room; thy noble storie
Shall lawrel-like crown honest ears with glory.




Enter the three Dukes, with Lords.



Ha, who cries murder?



As y'are a gentleman, now be true to me.











My shame, art thou there?



Oh sister, can it be
A Princes blood should stain that white hand?







No, no, no, hear me, 'twas I cry'd murder:
Because I have found them both stain'd with the deed,
They would have throtled me.



Hear us, by all.



Upon your lives be silent; speak on, sir:
Had they both hands in our sons blood?



Two hands apiece, sir:
I have fifted it, they both have kill'd the Prince;
But this is the chief murderer: please you give me audience,
Ye shall wonder at the manner how they kill'd him.







He came first to this woman, and truth's truth,
He would have lain with her.







Nay good your Grace.







Coming to seise upon her, with the first blow
She struck his base intent so brave a buffer,
That there it bled to death: she said his horse
Would teach him better manners: there he dy'd once.



VVhat does this fellow talk?







He met her next i'th' wood, where he was found dead:
Then he came noblier up to her, and told her
Marriage was his intent; but she as nobly,
(Belike to let him know she was married)
Told him in an intelligible denial,
A chaste wives truth shin'd through the greatest tryal:
There the Prince dy'd again.



There's twice, beware the third time.



The third time, he came here to them both in prison,
Brought a pistol with him, would have forc'd her again,
But had ye seen how fairly then she flew him,
You would have shot applauses from your eyes:
Oh she came up so bravely to that Prince,
Hot potent Lust, (for she slew no Prince else)
With such a valiant discipline she destroy'd
That debosh'd Prince, Bad Desire; and then by him
So bravely too fetch'd off, that (to conclude)
Betwixt them they this wonder did contrive,
They kill'd the Prince, but kept your son alive
Discovers himself.











Come home my sister to my heart.



And now Lorenzo is again my belov'd kinfman,



Oh sir, here dwells vertue epitomiz'd,
Even to an abstract, and yet that so large,
'Twill swell a book in folio.



She swells beyond my wife then:
A pocket-book bound in Decimo Sexto

Will hold her vertues, and as much spare paper left
As will furnish five Tobacco-shops



But here's the wonder, who is it was slain
In your apparel?



I will give them all the slip.
Offers to go.



Here's a gentleman of Ferrara.




As you are noble.



That saw them fight: it was the Slave was slain, sir,
I took before Palermo; he that kill'd him,
Took him but for a gentleman his equal:
And as this eye-witnss says, he in my apparel
Did kick the t'other first.



Nay, upon my life, sir.
He in your apparel gave the first kick; I saw them fight,
And I dare swear the t'other honest gentleman
Little thought he had slain any thing like the Prince;
For I heard him swear but half an hour before,
He never saw your Grace.



Then he kill'd him fairly.



Upon my life, my Lord.



T'other had but his merit then: who dies,
And seeks his death, seldom wets others eyes.



Let this perswade you, I believe you noble,
I have kept my word with you.



You have out-done me, sir,


In this brave exercise of honour: but let me
In mine own person thank you.







Unwittingly I did an ill (as 't happen'd)
To a good end: that slave I for you kill'd,
Wanted but time to kill you: Read that paper
Which I found with him, I thinking by accident
You had intercepted it: we all have happily
Been well deceiv'd; you are noble, just and true;
My hate was at your cloathes, my heart at you.



An accident more strange hath seldome happen'd.




Philippo, my best friend, 'twixt shame and love
Here let me lay thee now for ever.




Hath now plain'd all our rough woes smooth and even.



At Court, large relation in apt form
Shall tender past proceedings; but to distingush
(Excellent Lady) your unparallel'd praises
From those but seem, let this serve: bad women,
Are natures clouds eclipsing her fair shine;
The good, all gracious, saint-like and divine.

