Sir Bellamour Blunt and Vainthroat, in Riding habits, as just come to Town.


WEll, Sir Bellamour, how shall we dispose of our selves,
now we are arriv'd at this glorious Town of Lon∣don?




Why faith, Vainthroat, I'm not well acquainted with the
Town; but by what I do know, thou mayst e'n choose what corner of
it thou thinkst fit, and yet never want objects for either Ridicule or De∣traction;
and those are thy two darling faculties.



Lord, Sir, why shou'd you say that of me, who am the nicest
man living of all peoples Reputations?




Reputation! I'd undertake there wou'd not be a single grain
of such a thing in the Universe, were it in the power of thy Tongue to
blast it.



Come, Sir Bellamour, I must tell you, that you have got a
damn'd unbecoming quality, to speak always what you think, 'tis the
absurdest thing that a Gentleman of this age can be guilty of.




Would it not be more absurd, either to speak without think∣ing,
or impudently to belye a man's own opinion?



Not at all I vow; I find you are, as you say your self, not well
acquainted with the Town: why all Gentlemen of good assurance and
right Town breeding, first never think of what they say, and then don't
care one •a•thing whether a syllable of it be truth or not.




For that reason I'll avoid all Town Company, to prevent be∣ing
shockt with the insolence of Lies, or stunn'd with the eternal sput∣ter
of Nonsence.



At the present we'll wave disputes Let's settle our selves in∣to
convenient Lodgings, get splendid Equipages; and then Beau it about
the Town.




VVhat the Devil dost mean by that foolish word, Beau?



VVhy faith the title and qualifications of a Beau, have long
been the standing mark for the random shot of all the Poets of the Age.
And to very little purpose. The Beaus bravely stand their ground
still e'gad The truth on't is, they are a sort of case-harden'd animals,
as uncapable of Scandal, as they are insensible of any impression either
from Satyr or good Sense.




And prithee how must these case-harden'd animals be distin∣guisht?



Barring Reflection, I believe the best way to be adquainted with
the whole Tribe of 'em, wou'd be to get a general Register drawn from
all the Persumers Shop-books in town Or which is more scandalous,
to examine the Chaulks in all the Chair-mens Cellars about the Pall∣mall;
where each morning the poor fellows sit, looking pensively upon
their long scores, shaking their heads and saying Ah! how many
times have we trotted with such a powder'd Son of a nine Fathers, from
the Chocolate-house to the Play, and never yet saw a groat of his
Money.





Mr Vainthroat you are welcome to Town, you are the only
person living that I most wanted a sight on; I vow and protest you are,
upon my honesty.




I never yet heard a man call his honesty to witness, but he
prov'd a damn'd Rogue at bottom. This fellow has Rascal stampt
upon his very countenance.




Honest Nickycrack, thou art come very opportunely You may
at present be assisting to us.



O Lord, in whatever lies in my power, you know, Sir, that
you may assure your self of me Is this your friend, pray Sir?



'Tis Sir Bellamour Blunt, Sir: a person highly worth your acquain∣tance.



Sir Bellamour Blunt, I am yours, with all the integrity, sincerity,
  3
and uprightness an honest heart is capable of containing Pray, Sir,
how can I be most serviceable to ye.




By going about your business, Sir.



You must pardon this Gentleman's abrupt speaking, 'tis his way
Mr Nickycrack.



Then the Gentleman's way of speaking suits punctually with
my way of acting, which is always honest and downright.




Were I to guess at your actions by your looks, I'd sooner
cut out my Tongue, than speak a syllable that should correspond even
with your bare conceptions.



Fie, Sir Bellamour, prithee leave this strange moroseness. Come
honest Nickycrack, can'st thee advise us to any good Lodgings?



O dear, Sir, my Sister Sweetny here just by, has the best con∣veniency
of Lodging and Boarding of any woman in Town And
she, you know, Sir, is a good woman; a woman, tho I say it, of much
true Piety and Devotion.




I'll hold my life on't, she's a Bawd by her Character.



Why suppose she were, does not a person of that necessary
function deserve a more tender expression As that such a Lady is a
most obliging officious Virginity-Broaker, Dem me if she ben't the
charitablest creature in the Kingdom Whenever ye design to villi•y,
you must be sure to let it be tout en Ridicule, ah, ha, ha. And thus you
may modishly be allow'd to to bespatter any body.




I'd as soon disguise my person to be a base and barbarous
Assassin, as I would my thoughts by telling a Lye.



Prithee what Company is there at your Sister's at present?



O Lord, Sir, we are never without good Company; there's
the fine Widow Thoroshift, a vast fortune; and her pretty Country bred
innocent Maiden Sister, Mrs. Minx.



Very well, I know 'em.



And just now Sir Wealthy Plainder and his beautiful Daughter
Ophelia, have made an addition to the Family.



Sir Wealthy Plainder, and his Daughter Ophelia! Do you hear,
Sir Bellamour; the very persons we came up to Town withal. I am
confident you need no farther inducement. Go Nickycrack, get our
Rooms ready, and we'll order our things thither, and follow imme∣diately.



Sir I shall be proud of obeying your Command.







Ha! My Dear, have I found thee? I have been upon the hunt
for ye, with greater vigour than ever I yet pursu'd an Enemy; and that
  4
you may imagin was never with any small heat. Come faith you
must assist me.



In what, good Captain Bownceby? What is the mighty bu∣siness?



VVhy the mighty business is love And who the Devil would
think a man of my rough temper, a Soul of that fierceness as mine is,
should e're be flexible to the beck of a little, puny, blind brat?



Good Captain, the Object?



The Object of my uncontroulable passion, is the VVidow Thoro∣shift:
I know you have an interest in her And let me perish if it
shan't be worth thy while.



Ha! Pimp for a Soldier in time of Peace, ah that's damn'd
cool work e'faith.



Pox! I understand ye. You shan't want your encouragement,
tho I sink my Arrears three parts in four for you.



Captain, I have business at present: but assure your self you
may command me in any thing, so your intentions be just and honoura∣ble;
for all the world knows that Mr. Nickycrack will not act otherwise
than what is becoming an honest man.; and as such, I am noble Cap∣tain
Bownceby's very humble Servant. Oh! Yonder's Nibs, the
trusty Servant-maid, walking this way, she can better inform you in
your present concerns. I am yours, Sir.






Sweet Mrs. Nibs, I'll be short and Soldier-like with you. Know
then that the suze of my Vitals is fired by the lighted Match of your
Mistresses Beauty; and if it be not quickly extinguisht by her cooling
P•mp of Pity, dry up my blood, if I shan't be blown into the air; and
there burst into millions of fiery atoms.



Sir, I'll endeavour to answer you as a Captain ought to be an∣swered:
I'll say but little, but what I do say shall be to the purpose. I
say, that a Servant that is entrusted with the concerns of a Family,
ought always to have Discretion stand Centinel upon her lips, there
strictly to guard the port of her utterance. For my part, I scorn to let
my tongue, Weather-cock like, wag with the breath of every imperti∣nent
enquirer: If I see with one eye; I wink with the other: and what∣ever
I hear, is that very moment barricado'd within the precincts of
this Breast: and mum's the word; and tho I say it, that shou'd not say
it, and all that 



Nay prithee Nibs, halt, halt, halt I say. Come, let's to
the purpose, I•expect very soon to be a Collonel, and I'll give you my
parole of honour to make that man a Captain that you shall think fit to
make your Husband, deal but sincerely with me, and let me know how
things stand?



Well Sir, what is't you wou'd know?



Why I wou'd know who pays Court to the Widow?



O Lord! all the world: Who pays Court to a rich Widow?
Why Courtiers without Estates, Country-Gentlemen damnably in
debt, unbenefic'd Divines. Officers without Posts, Doctors without
Patients, Lawyers without Clients, Tradesmen without Stocks, younger
Brothers without either Fortunes or Employs, Beaux upon their last
legs, cast Stallions, and begga•ly Poets; and there's the greatest part of
the world, I'm confident on't.



Blood and Brimstone, Nibs, prithee leave this eternal chatter∣ing,
and tell me who is my most dangerous Rival.



Why then, Sir, as I hope to be a Captains Lady, for once I
will divulge There's one Mr. Broakage, a wealthy Merchant, who
attacks her vigorously.



Hell and furies! Bombs and Bilboa Blades! May rank Coward
be imprinted on this dreadful Countenance, if I don't go raise the Siege
instantly How! A City-drone stand in competition with a daring
war-like Hornet? Ha!



He's wonderful rich; and you know that's a prevailing accom∣plishment
in the business of Love He has Colonies in all our P•anta∣tions,
Cargoes in all our Trading bottoms, and Shares in all our Banks.



Ha! I'll go this moment and depopulate all his Plantations,
sink all his Ships, and blow up all his Banks.







I'll Carbonade the Dog full of ghastly Wounds, then with my
charming Widow in my arms, I'll mount my triumphal Chariot, and
drag his mangled Carkass around the utmost limits of the Universe.







I'll first go to the Widow, and if I find there be occasion, I'll
put this tremendous sentence of mine in execution the very moment af∣terwards.
Parch my puddings if I don't.










Nibs, what has the Captain deserted?



VVhy faith, I have been whetting his Courage, and spurring
him in his amour with the VVidow And you know there's no
time to be lost in that business.



Gad 'tis true, for if we don't dispose of her in less than four
and twenty hours, I'm confident the Tallymen will be for disman•ing
of her And shou'd every Bird setch her own Feathers, I doubt
the poor Widow Thoroshift would be left as bare as AEsop's Daw But
first I'll to the Commissaries Office, and make some enquiry after
this thundering Captain Bownceby.



Pray do Mr Nickycrack, for as times go now there are near as
many that take the names of Captain upon 'em, as there are Soldiers in
the Kings Army.



'Tis true; for a stiff cockt-up Hat, close twisted Peruke, and a
tuckt-in Cravat 



A brandy pimpled face, impudent look, and a hoarse voice. 



A score of new coyn'd Oaths, and half as many drunken
Catches 



A great brass hilt Sword, and an Oaken Plant with a dirty
Ribbon in it 



A blue pair of Breeches and red Stockings 



Are sufficient to gain any man the title of a Captain, tho perhaps
he be but a Bayliffs Follower 



Or the scoundrel Bully to a Widows Coffee-House in a blind
Alley.



And indeed there's as much occasion that you should go to the
Change and make some enquiry after Mr Broakage, that so we may be
ready to snap at that which proves the best bargain.



That's right again; for 'tis as difficult to guess at the substance
of a Merchant by his figure in the world, as 'tis to know the true
grief of a young Widow, by the dismal appearance of her mourning
Veil.



Or at the real intentions of a blushing Virgin, when she sets her
mouth in print, and says No to a good proffer 



Or as it is to know the age of a Beau, without having first
consulted the person that shaves his empty Noddle, or his Operator, to be
informed, whether this European Monster is not obliged to the great
African one, for the whiteness of his Teeth 



Or to know his natural imperfections, unless his Valet de Cham∣bre
be workt to a Confession, what suppliments his Beauship makes
use of, to correct the deficiencies of his Shape and Complexion.



Right e'gad, as whether his nice jutting backside be real flesh
and blood, or only an artificial Cusheon of quilted Cotton 



Or whether the calves of those pretty Legs he struts upon, do
not owe their original to some ingenious Artists amongst the Stocking-Weavers
in Spittle Fields.



Ha! Yonder's the Widow, and my Sister Sweetny coming
this way from their evenings devotion.



A fine trade indeed, Prayer-Books in their hands, and the
World, Flesh, and the Devil in their hearts.




(approaching them) Madam Thoroshift I am your Servant 
  7
Sister Sweetny I have just recommended to you a couple of new Lodgers;
I believe they are by this time got to your house.



Pray who are they?



Why there's Mr Vainthroat, a person that we all know, and his
friend Sir Bellamour Blunt, such a morose piece of Knighthood that I
never yet saw; should he chance to go into your Cellar, he'd endanger
sowring your Beer, more than all the Thunder of a hot Summer But
no matter for that, he's a man of substance, and that is enough for
our purpose.



I have heard of him; but is Mr Vainthroat come to Town? I
vow I am glad on't, for he's a pure man.



Mr Vainthroat indeed is most excellent company amongst the
women; he knows all the scandalous news about Town, especially that
part of it, that is most necessary for us to know, as when the close-fisted
Steward fills his Masters Fob for him, and thinks fit to entrust him with
the management of three or four hundred of his own Guineas.



Or when the City Merchant, after a lumping bargain by inch
of Candle, comes to lavish away a hundred pieces amongst our Bon•
Roba's of Covent Garden.



Or when an Inns-of-Court Spark confesses a Statute to raise
five hundred pounds, upon the reversion of his Fathers Mannor house,
to make his last flourish withal And when that is fairly snackt by
Bawds, Pimps, and Strumpets, the vain Coxcomb sneaks over the
Water into the bounds of the Kings Bench, and there dozes away the
remainder of his Life, with fulsome Flip, and nasty Mundungus.



Nay, he has always pretty stories of the women too.



Ay so he has, Madam; and you know 'tis the delight of our
Souls to hear others of our own Sex reflected on.



So it is, Mrs Sweetny, A•, ha, ha, I laugh'd heartily when he
told me how my Lady Rampabout uses to infuse Opium into her Hus∣bands
Tea, and when the good old Knight is fast asleep in his chair of
ease by the fire side, she very fairly receives her friendly visits without
any danger of a discovery.



Ha, ha, ha: And I laugh'd as heartily when he told me of a
certain Fleetstreet Dame, that had got a Receipt to give her Husband
the nasty Northern distemper, by dressing his Shirts with a white Pow∣der,
that so she might have a pretence to lye alone, and there entertain
the caresses of her lusty long limb'd f•re-man of the Shop.







But good lack, alack! how came we to enter into this dis∣course
before we had laid our Prayer-books out of our hands?



Come, come, as long as there is no body but our selves, 'tis well
well enough.



But pray let's leave this chit chat, and mind the main chance:
Madam Thoroshift you shan't fail to have an account of the true estimate of
your new Lovers.



Mr Nickycrack, I am wonderfully obliged to you.



In the first place I will go to my Lord Courtipolls, about your
Sister, Madam Minx's concern, by this time I suppose he may be come
from Court: I'll secure you, I'll bring him along with me.



Pray do, Sir, and besure you urge the business home to his
Lordship, make him sensible of all the incident charges of a lying-in
bout.



Nay faith he's not unsensible of such matters; for I believe his
Lordship has paid for fifty lying-in bouts, where he has had no farther
concern but for the bare credit on't.



The truth on't is, his politick vanity makes him the most ac∣complisht
Cully in the Kingdom.



I'll undertake there's never a Crack in Town, if she reports that
she was first debaucht by my Lord Courtipoll, but is sure to receive a
gratuity from his Lordship, for telling that most obliging lye.



'Tis pity indeed, that his mighty business at Court about State
affairs would not allow us more of his company.



He business at Court! 'tis all pretences, all pretences •aith,
Sister. 'Tis true, he goes every day thither, but has nothing to do
there, but to walk out of one Room into another, which
indeed he does with a wouderful deal of politick gravity.
And as for his being consulted in State affairs, I dare swear his
opinion was never askt, tho it were only to know the qualifications of
his neighbour in the Country, who sollicited hard at Court to be made
a Worshipful Justice.



Well, 'tis time for me to go, and give a welcome to my new
guests. Madam, will you please to walk?






Mr. Nickycrack, my Lord has urgent business with you, and
would speak with you immediately.



Mr Prim, I was this moment coming to pay my humble De∣veirs
to the most noble Lord Courtipoll, and now at his Lordships
command, I'll fly▪ I'll fly to his honourable presence.




Mrs Nibs, I congratulate the chearful ruddiness of your Com∣plexion,
and must own, that I find a fresh spring of joy begin to flourish
in my Bosom, by the warm influence of your bright shining Eyes Gad
that was finely spoke, and very much like a Gentleman.




Pray, M•Prim, don't exercise your Court flattery upon me.



Not a syllable of flattery, Gad Dem me May I forfeit
the honour of my Family, if I han't a great veneration for you.



Your Family! Pray what Family are you of, Sir?



What Family? I am of the ancient Family of the Prims of
Prim Castle, upon Chivet Hills, on the Borders of Scotland; and would
have you to know, tho I serve a Peer of the Realm, yet I'd scorn to
serve the best Commoner in the three Kingdoms. Upon the word of a
Gentleman you may believe me.



Ha, ha, ha, I could tell this pitiful scoundrel another story if I
pleas'd But that I'll reserve to another opportunity 

Well, Mr Prim, I am sorry I cannot stay at present, and pay you the
honour that is due to you, and to the ancient Family of the Prims of
Prim Castle〈◊〉 B•t I shall leave you in good hands; so• I see Madam
Minx's Maid, honest Country Doll, coming this way, and so I am wor∣thy
Mr Prims most obedient.










Mistress Dorothy! pray Mistress me no Mistresses; I am plain
Country Doll.



Then sweet Country Doll, may base ignominy taint the blood
of me, if you han't something in your face that looks very charming.



Charming! what's charming, I never heard such a word in all
my breath, not I.



Pretty Innocence! why prithee Doll, how do they make
love in the Country?



Why in't Country, if John oasts a Motion to Joan, and Joan she
likes it, then Joan gis John't Sillabub, Then John teakes Joan to the
Alehouse, and gis her Plumb Ceake and Ale, where m'aps ater't first
Flagon, John slaps Joan or't face, then Joan she's dugged. But after
t'other por or two all is well again; and Joan she promises to meet
John at night upon Measters Hay Mow, where a hun•er't to one but
Joan she proves with Chilt. Then Joan she fetches John for't the Justice,
and Justice ater't hearing whole story, makes John marry Joan, and there's
an end of tat business.



Ha, ha, ha, very pretty I vow.



Now pray Measte•Prim, will yo tell one how yo maken Love
in London.



That I will Doll to the best of my power. In the first place,
Great men make haughty love with their titles and honours Elder
Brothers just come to their Estates, make taring love, with gaudy Live∣ries
and gilt Coaches Statesmen and men of business, make solid
love with formal shrug and politick grimace. And your Citizens make
sordid love, with paultry Presents from their well-stockt Purses.



Good, pray go on.



Officers of the Army make thundering love, with Vollies of
Oaths and Curses. And the Beaus make as apish and impertinent love
with their Combs and Snuff boxes, as the Wits do tiresome and whi∣ning
love, with their Songs and Elegies.







Your cropt-ear'd Prentices make sneaking love, with stealing
into Abigal's pocket either an Orange stuft with Cloves, or a good
slice of Ginger-bread Pert dapper Pages, and spruce Valet de Cham∣bres,
make teazing love with ruffling of Heads and hawling of Petticoats.
In fine, your Bullies, and Troopers, make barbarous love, by knocking
down their Dowdies, and enjoying them in a swoond.



O Gemini gemini, did one ever hear the like on't? But
pray when will yore Lord come and make love again with my Mistress?
Poor Soul! he has brought her to a fine pass a my word; she's either
longing or puking all the day long, so she is.



My pretty Dolly, my Lord won't fail of being with her this
evening; and as soon as they are Chamber'd, thee and I will go and
solace our selves over a glass of Wine at the Tavern.



Marry but don yo think that I will trust my self? that would
be fine work indeed.



In token that I'll do nothing but what is becoming a Gentle∣man,
I'll make my dear Rustick Cherub a Present of this Diamond
Ring.



O Lord, O Lord, a Diamond Ring on Doll's Finger, how that
will look when I goo a into th' Country, to rake ater't Cart or milk Kye
again.



It was presented me by a great Courtier, and I hope Doll you
will accept of it from my hands, as an inviolable pledge of my just and
honourable pretensions.



In troth Measter Prim, it shall go hard, but that I'll make you
amends some way or other Ods so, here comes my Mistress.





How now Doll, why are you not at home doing what I bad
you?



I was just a gooing forsooth.



Nay, now stay and go along with me Mr Prim what does
my Lord Cou•••p•'l mean, never to see a body again.



M•dam Minx, I was coming to acquaint your Ladyship that
his Lordship will be with you immediately. I'll assure you Madam,
that my Lord languishes with impatience, till he h•s once more sacri∣ficed
his bleeding heart at the shrine of your most illustrious beauty 
  11
Gad I shall rival my Lord with pure dint of Eloquence.




Sackerfize and Lusters, I don't know what you mean by such
words not I, we are not used to such gibberish in the Country Pray
go tell him that my heart is ready to burst for him, that I have almost
cry'd my eyes out, that I'll neither eat, drink, nor sleep till I have seen
him.



Madam, upon the unblemisht fidelity of a Gentleman, I'll
punctually deliver your Ladyships commands.



Well Doll, hast thee been playing thy Country part with Prim,
ha?



To a hair e'faith, Madam; the Puppy has just given me a Dia∣mond
Ring to go with him anon to the Tavern.



Let me see it. Upon my Soul'tis right, and 'tis high time for
me to look to my hits too, and fix his Lord This evening in
spight of fate I'll hook him into settlement. What signifies his Lord∣ships
paying for Lodging and Diet, and some little nasty Pr•esents of a
Gown and Petticoat once a month or so. A musty Quietus Judge
would give me as much as that comes to, besides the assurance of a
Legacy of broad Gold, that the old Toast had palm'd when he sat upon
the Bench for perverting of Justice.



Indeed, Madam, 'tis true, I know a Lady that has three times
as much only for scratching the Poll of a Gouty Citizen.



A woman of pleasure is worse than an Indian Slave, that has not
a Settlement at her own Command. A Quality Mistress should keep
her Coach, a brace of Footmen, and a leash of young Gallants at
least.



Pray, Madam, be rul'd by me, get the writings drawn, according
as my Lord has already given you the particulars. And when you have
workt up his passion to a glowing pitch, then of a sudden take upon
you to be peevishly coy, and don't so much as let him squeeze your
hand, till he has first squeez'd the Wax.



Don't question Doll, but I'll manage him as a Cull of the first
head ought to be managed.





Tears mixt with Smiles, won't fail to do the feat;
And Country Minx may prove a London cheat.
End of the First Act.







Plainder, Mrs. Sweetny and Ophelia walking off at some distance.




PRay Landlady Sweetny, let me recommend to your care my
Daughter Ophelia there My Daughter, who I may justly
say is 



Is! Sir Wealthy Plainder? she is the mirrour of Beauty, the pride
of Mankind, the glory of her Sex, and the wonder of the Age; she
is 



Struck with amazing confusion to be thus flatter'd. Oh how
odious a creature is a fawning Hypocrite.





I'll say this for Ophelia, that she's an excellent Huswife You
must know, do you mind, that I have bred her to be 



A slave to a miserable parent





To be, I say, exquisitively officious in the affairs of the Fa∣mily.
She shall clarify Whey, make Nettle Porridge, and Barley-broth,
with ever a Girl in the Kingdom.



This indeed is a true bill of fare of our late Country Diet.





Now look ye Mrs Sweetny, if you can find me out some sub∣stantial
Tradesman, that will take my Daughter purely for her intrinsick
value, and expect nothing with her, I may perhaps be perswaded to
part with her.



Here's a Parents affection; and yet he's every moment thun∣d••ing
in my ears fi•ial duty, forsooth.





Well, at present I have some business of consequence to
dispatch, I'll therefore leave her with you: but be sure that amongst
your many pious instructions, ply her home with the fifth Command∣ment,
descant well upon that I say; so that reverend old age may keep
its lawful Soveraignty.



O good, Sir, what small Talent I have either in argument or
eloquence, shall certainly be employ'd for the service of Sir Wealthy
Plainder, and for the real good and essential benefit of pretty Madam
Ophelia here I'll take care she shall accompany me to my daily Devo∣tions.




Devorions! As for Devovions, do you mind me, I do
not think 'tis a pin matter. If she asks me blessing, do you see, 'tis
enough, 'tis enough in all conscience.



And that I should go without, were the purchase of it any more
than a bare God a mercy.




Well, mind what I have said, and so, do ye see, fare you
well. Da, da, Daughter.




Come, pretty Madam Ophelia, now you and I are together
in private, we may take the liberty to open our Souls freely. Dis∣simulation
is a loose upper garment, that may be laid aside at pleasure.

Sir Bellamour appears at a distance.


Now the old Cockatrice begins to appear in her proper co∣lours.




You are young, Madam, and consequently must have
wishes; soft, young, tender wishes, which wishes may be satisfied,
so it be within the rules of descretion.



If discretion direct our wishes, I am confident they can never
tend to any thing that is vicious Well, since 'tis not in the power
of Mankind to shock my principles, or tarnish my vertue, I'll for
once counterfeit a levity, and see what she would be at (Aside.) I must
confess, Mrs Sweetny, that I do believe the shackles of ignorance to be
the greatest burden that can be impos'd upon us Mortals. I am
therefore very willing to surrender my self to ye, that I may be better
instructed.



That's my good Girl, dost thee know what love is, Child?



Not very well: But I have heard 'tis something that of a
sudden plays and dances about the heart, and from thence gradually
trickles along the Veins, till having diffus'd itself into subtle rays, i•
steals out at the corners of the Eyes to reach the object of desire.



Ah, ha, ha, a pretty notion truly of Loves first Onset. But
I must tell you, that were Love to do nothing else, than what is
perform'd by ineffectual glances Well, I'll say no more, these
are many gay, young, Sparks about the Town. Let opportunity
shew ye further What think you of Mr Vainthroat that came up
to Town with you? Ah! He's a pure man▪ Od, so, see where
he comes. How do you do, good Mr Vainthroat, after your Jour∣ney?



Pretty well, Madam, but methinks I want to divert my self
with some of my old hearty Bottle friends.



And pray can't you no way divert your self with us that are
Women?



Faith, Madam, not easily; for generally you that are Wo∣men,
either affectation makes you troublesome, pride makes you im∣perious,
or an over easiness makes you nauseous.



Such tempers are often assum'd, Sir, when at so cheap a rate
a woman can free herself from some of your impertinent and cox∣combly
addresses.



I thought Mr Vainthroat had been better bred, than to ex∣press
himself in general terms, before particular Company, especially
before a Lady every way so deserving, as is Madam Ophelia here.



O Lord, Madam, I am sufficiently acquainted with the
bright Ophelia•s perfections, to except her from the whole Sex.



I am sure not a Member of the Sex, ought ever to value what
is said by a publick Detractor.



Detraction! why 'tis by that alone that I have insinuated my
self into the intimate acquaintance of all the Women of Quality about
the Town.



Come, Mr Vainthroat, you shall attone for your Fault by
giving us a Song.



With all my heart, Madam; but I wish by that means I do
not commit a greater.



THE Riddle of Nature,
Is a Female Creature;
She's graciously proud,
Maliciously good,
And her business is to be idle.
The mysterious Toy,
If she weep 'tis for joy,
And when she beguiles,
'Tis done with her smiles,
He's mad then that bites of the Bridle.



O fie upon you, for you're a sad man Have you seen
Madam Thoroshift yet, Mr Vainthroat.



Yes, faith, ha, ha, ha, poor Widow, I pity her e'gad, if she
lets that Tenement of hers stand a little longer uninhabited, it will
be difficult for the next possessor to make good repairs.



I'll promise you, Sir, she does not want applications, but
her prudence makes her cautious Come, shall us walk in∣to
  15
the Dining Room, by this time I believe my Lord Courtipoll may
be come.







'Tis done! 'tis done. That heart that till now ne're felt
a single throb, is become all over pangs I must own, that at first
sight I thought her beautiful; and what I have now overheard, as∣sures
me that her virtue is inestimable. Oh Ophelia.

Re-enter Ophelia at a distance.


By hard shift I have slipt the Company of that wicked Seducer.
And now I ll retire to my chamber, to enjoy the true pleasure of
thinking.




Bless me! She's here (starting.) Madam.








Do ye discover nothing by my looks?



Indeed, Sir Bellamour, I always thought you lookt something
cynical: And I believe you are now running mad.




My passion, I must confess, is something furious. Love
is a sort of madness.



The knowledge of your Distemper is half your cure, Sir?




Will you suffer your pitty to assist in the cure?



I am not credulous enough to think that you have any occasi∣on
for it. However, I can't stay to discuss the point with you at
present.




Why so? where are you going then?



I'll soon try his reality. (aside.) May you be trusted, Sir?




Indeed I may, Madam.



Then know I'm going to my Chamber, to fetch my Mask,
Hood and Scarf, and so jaunt it a little.




Jaunt it! What's the meaning of that?



Why that's to take a Hackney Coach, scowr from Playhouse
to Playhouse, till I meet with some young Fellow that has power
enough to attack me, stock enough to treat and present me, and folly
enough to be laugh'd at for his pains.




Sure that Devils impliment, my Landlady, has not already
induc'd her unexperienc'd youth.




Have you any thing else to say to me, Sir?




A great deal, Madam.



Then when I have nothing else to do, I'll hear you; and so
〈…〉 loving Sir Bellamour.





Well, tho I am not cut out for a soft Lover, I have a reso∣lution
that's capable of persevering. And if I mistake not, I do already
make plain discoveries through the thin veil of my Mistresses pre∣tences;
  16
so that till a farther opportunity, I shall rest satisfied that I
have ad•serving object for my pas•ion, and entrust to her and fate
for a suitable success.





Pray Captain, what do you think the world would say on
me, should I bestow my self and fortune on a person 



Halt, halt good Madam: before you say a word on my per∣son,
pray be so kind as to view me well Do but mind this capaci∣ous
Breast; these robust Shoulders, the sturd••…ss of my Chi•e, the
bre••…h of my Ga•kins, the true turn and symetry of my Limbs, and
the length of my Foot.



Your person I must confess is not despicable, but then, Sir,
your •••…ion, where you may come to expose your l•fe 



Halt. halt again. I say, if 〈◊〉 once cope with my Widow, adieu
Scarlet E'saith. If ever I spill drop of blood in the Field more, may
my 〈◊〉 be food for Ravens, and my Bones lie blanching upon a
Country Common.



But then Captain, without an Estate where's an equivolent
for my Fortune?



An equivolent, Madam! Why this person of mine that you
have al•eady view'd, is more than equivolent for an Earldom, if in∣herited
by a puny Lanthorn-back•t Chitty-fac't Stripling.



Look ye, Captain, I question not but you know that I am
address'd to by Mr Broakage, a wealty Merchant; and I have no
sooner mentioned him, but see where he comes, for the present Ill
leave you together.













Did you never hear of Captain Bownceby?



I have heard of several Captain Bowncebys, Captain Hackums,
and Captain Kick and Cuffs. And what then, Sir?



I find this Mungrel has got Beef and Pudding in his paunch,
and I believe dare sight (aside.) I say, Sir, do you know what Cap∣tain
Bownceby can do if he pleases?




I know what the Law will suffer him to do; and if he does
more than that 







Then, Sir, his big looks may chance to dwindle into a Tyburn grin.



Ay, Sir, ay Sir, 'tis well you have got Tyburn on your side, or
let me tell you, Mr Broakage should not have out-liv'd his last words,
scar•y my Carcass if he should.





Gentlemen the Widow has over-heard your high words, and
sent me to tell you, that if you don't this moment accommodate your
differences, and embrace as friends, she'll never see the face of either
of you while she breaths again; therefore if you have any value for
her, I hope you'll not dispute the executing her Commands.



Mrs Nibs, the Widow shall be obey'd by Captain Bownceby,
and all the Bowncebys in Christendom.



And by me Benjamin Broakage, and all the Broakages in the
Universe.












A couple of Coxcombs!




You shall for the future command me and all my Weapons,
even from my Bagonet to my Back-sword.



And you my Purse, from the Decus's to the Jacobus's.



Is it so? Gad then it shan't be long before I borrow Money
of him, I'll promise him.




Come Gentlemen, what think ye of strengthening your
friendship with a Health to the Widow, and so binding your bargain
with a Bottle?



With all my heart, Mrs Nibs.










What the dickings is the matter with ye, to be always thus
teazing a body when you come to Town?




Matter my Minky! Why I love my Minky. Piddy my
Minky let me go a little into dy Chamber widdee; wou't a my Minky?



My Chamber! don't you think I•ll let any thing in the shape
of Man enter my Chamber doors?




Odsboblikins let me go in any other shape then: Tye a
Collar about my neck and lead me thither in the shape of Towzer, if
dow tinkst fit, my Minky. Nay, I'll be dy Pussy-cat, dy Puppy-dog,
dy any ting, my little pitty Minky.



None of these shapes will do indeed, Sir Wealthy.




Shall I come then, like another Jove, in the shape of  (Chinks
a Purse of Gold) Dost thou hear the blessed chink, hea Gi•l?



Alack Sir, you have such winning ways with you.




I call, and I call, catch Minky; edad there be Purse and
all, my Child a grace, there's Gold for thee. Edad I'm old Sir
Wealthy still, tho I've sold my Estate, plead poverty to the world, and
have swore my self not worth a groat, on purpose to avoid paying the
Kings Taxes.



A very conscientious Commonwealth•-man truly.
(aside)  18
Well, Sir, I have bethought of a way take to you into my Chamber un∣suspected Doll,
go and fetch hither one of your quondam Coun∣try
Habits, she and I will dress you up, and if my Lord Courtipoll comes,
I'll pretend you are my old Nurse just come out of the Country But
be sure, whatever you do, don't ye discover your self, if you do,
you'll ruin me for ever.




E'dad this is a pure contrivance: And never Nurse hugg'd
a Bantling, as I'll hug thee for this invention. (hugs her) Ah my Minky.



Come, come strip off your Jerkin, and let's dizen you.

(They dress him up in womens Cloaths.


Hold up your head Gammer, and mump and simper a little.




Nay I believe I shall not wholly unbecome a womans
Dress, for I have features, Chicken; features, tho I say it, that are not
altogether despicable See, see how I can roll my Eyes about; and
then pout out a plump under-lip, that would make the mouth of a
Hermit to water again.







Now if any body ask you any questions, take your Apron
thus, drop two or three Curtzies, and say, I forsooth, and No
forsooth.




I'll warrant ye, let me alone for I forsooths and No forsooths.



O Lord Mistress! does not Measter look just like Joan the
Ale-wife, at our Church-yard stile?





Madam Minx, here's my Lord Courtipoll.




Oh! my dear Country puggy.




O my Lord! why would you stay so long from a body?




We men of business, my dear Pug, lie under that heavy
curse to have our pleasures give way to our toyls. And now I talk of
business, let me consider a little. (pauses.) If so Ay, ay, then
it must be so Here Prim, disperse my Footmen. Let one wait
at the Secretaries Office, another at the Admiralty, and the rest at the
Foreign Ministers, that I may have speedy notice where my assist∣ance
is requir'd




So, under this pretence the Servants are now set at liberty,
and each man may go visit his own Pug if he pleases, and so follow
the present blessed vocation of their politick Lord and Master.





Who's this you have got with you, Pug?



'Tis my Nurse, my Lord, that is just come out of the Country.




Bless me! did ever such a sweet Creature as thee art, suck
at the breast of such a Horse-fac't Dame as this is? But hold, I•ll
go ask her after some affai•• in the Country, that may in some mea∣sure
relate to the State. Let me consider Good woman, is there
store of Acrons this year, ha?



A notable politick State question truly.




Nurse, why don't ye answer my Lord? I find the poor old
woman is in a quandery, I believe she never saw a Lord before.




On my Soul that may very well be. Nay, I my self
have known a whole monthly meeting of Country Justices struck so
dumb at the grandeur of my presence, that it was scarce within the
power of Stale Beer to set their Tongues a moving again. But come
what say ye, old Mrs Chue cud, are Acrons plenty or not, ha?



Nurse, why don't ye answer, my Lord.









Then we may expect our Venison to be fat, if my Dog of
a Keeper have the grace to keep the Parish Hogs out of the Park. But
hold, let me consider Now for some Domestick Intelligence:
Is the Widow your Sister marry'd yet? ha, Pug?



She's not sped yet, but o'restockt with Suitors, as we sen in
the Country.




Pretty Pug, thy Country language does become thee. But
hold, let me consider once again I profess there ought to be a Sta∣tute
of Restriction relating to the Widows of this Kingdom; they are
generally so damn'd cunning in their Amours, that half a score of Wi∣dows
are sufficient to enslave all the young fellows about the Twon.



Ah, my Lord, the young fellows about the Town are not so
easily enslav'd in this age of Liberty.





O my Lord Courtipoll, I can't but with Reverence acknow∣ledge
the high honour your Lordship does my house, in letting its mean
roof shadow a person of so much worth, goodness and wisdom, as is the
Lord Courtipoll.




Oh Mrs. Sweetny, you are always so lavish in your expressi∣ons! Ha!
Bless me! I'm Planet-struck Never was an Astrologer
more amaz'd at the discovery of a new Star, than I am at the sight of that
beautiful creature Pray, Mrs. Sweetny, by what name and title must
I salute this fair Angel?



'Tis the beautiful Madam Ophelia. my Lord, Daughter to Sir
Wealthy Plainder.

(Lord Co•••ipoll stand• musing.


So, my Lord I find is embarking himself for another piece of
Gallantry. His politick Lordship f•lls as naturally into new amours,
as a Town Bully runs himself into fresh Rencounters. Minx, Minx,
ply thy stumps, or all is lost, faith girl.



My Lord, my Lord, you forget to bring your Pug the Lap∣dog
you promis'd her, so you do.  (Runs to Sir Wealthy) Either take
your Daughter away this moment, or never expect to see the face of me
again  (Runs back to Lord Court.) Come, my Lord, will you go
along with your Pug, and see how far I have workt upon the Petticoat
I shew'd you, when you were here last. Why don't ye speak to your
Pug?




I profess I was within my self deciding an intricate State
question, and find it must be so.




(aside to Ophelia.) Hussy I command you to retire. I say
be gone instantly.



What wou'd this dry chopp'd Hag have? Pray good wo∣man
don't you nose me at this rate.




Ye young Baggage don't ye know me?



I'm resolv'd I won't know him at present (aside.) What means
this sawcy quean to blow her filthy breath in my face, ha?




Ye young Jade you, I'm your Father: But if ye discover
me look to't.



Alas the poor woman is beside her sences I find.




Hussy I'll thump your Jacket for this. I cou'd find in my
heart to tear ye in pieces.

Grins and clenches his fists at her.


Here, pray let somebody lay hold on this Mad woman, she
talks of tearing me in pieces.


Nick. lays hold on Sir Weal.




What's the matter, what's the matter with the Nurse, ha?



Alas, alas! the poor Nurse is sometimes troubled with fits,
and I fear she's now fallen into one.



Hold her down, hold her down Brother Nickycrack; and Doll
do you run and fetch the Bottle of Spirit of Harts-horn, run quickly.


Doll runs and brings a Bottle.


O pox! I find the Nurse proves to be the old Fornicator Sir
Wealthy Plainder, (aside.) So so, I find she begins to recover. Come,
now let me alone with her, I'll take her, and give her a turn or two in
the Air, and a dram of Aqua Mirabilis, which is the life of an old wo∣man,
and I'll warrant ye all will be well again.





I must go see however, that they don't carry the business too
far, as bad as he is.





What has this new-born Star left our Hemisphere already, ha?



Go, go my Lord, I find you don't love your Pug, that ye
don't; if you did, you would never have stood and stared upon a strange
face at that rate, indeed you wou'dn't.




Not love my Pug? By the Soul of Matchiavel but I do, and
that's the greatest oath a Statesm•n can swear by VVere I, my
Dear, to gaze upon crowds of Angels, and should my Pug be amongst
them, she alone should have th• last and fixing look.



There's a kind Lord for ye. Come, my Lord, by this time I
suppose Supper waits for your Lordship.




Come along then. And after that I and my charming
Pug here,

In am'rous sports will so Di•••ely toy,
The God of Love shal• clap his wings for joy.
End of the Second Act.





Sir VVealthy Plainder and Nickycrack.



AH Mr Nickycrack, is it not a hard case for me that am but
a poor Commoner, thus to be rivall'd by a Lord.



Lord, Sir Wealthy Plainder, why would ye not discover your
self and concerns to me? All the world knows the sincerity of
honest Nickycrack.




Alas, alas! in this case there can be no remedy but patience.
Now must I forsooth e'en draw in my Horns, sneak off and dance
Attendance, tho I am sure to enter into a Steel course to cure my self of
the Spleen for't.



Come, Sir Wealthy, do but open your self-freely, and I'll engage
to assist ye.




Open my self, I that I will with all my heart, and my
Purse too, I'll promise ye I am not that indigent person I pretend my
self, but am as rich in reality as a Chymist is in fancy There,
Nickycrack, take this as an earnest of my future intentions.




O Lord, Sir, I am now linkt to your service by the very tye of
gratitude: and so to the point, Sir; I very well know your affections
for Mrs Minx, and have already thought of an Expedient, that if you
be but consenting, shall soon put ye in quiet possession of the charming
Fair.




Ah my dear Boy, propose it, propose it I say, and never
doubt my consent.



The business is this, I perceiv'd my Lord Courtipoll fix'd his eye
upon your Daughter Ophelia, and then he lickt his Lips, bit his Thumbs,
sigh'd, and press'd his sides with his Arms thus.








Now, Sir, if you be but consenting, that we shall endeavour
to work up her inclinations.




Inclinations! 'Sbud, I say she shall have inclinations if that
be all. I'll undertake to enjoyn it by force of power paternal.



A speci•l Father e'saith





VVork• up quoth a! E'gad in this case she shall be workt
up, and workt down too, I'll promise her that.



Not so fierce, pray Sir, women are of a perverse and refracto∣ry
temper, and their wills must by gentle and insinuating means be sup∣pled
into? compliance, and not rashly forc't by violence. This I'll do,
I'll first go and engage my Sister Sweetny on our side, and don't ye doubt
the effects.




Prithee do, my dear Boy, about it this moment I beg thee
(smuggles him) So, now begone, Sirrah. (Exit. Nick.) I can 〈◊〉 think
what a happy thing it was, that I had a pretty Daughter to 〈◊〉 me out
at this dead lif• VVell, I find Children may one time of other be
worth their rearing.





Ha, ha, ha, Sir Bellamour in love, pleasant enough e'faith: why
an amour, man, will sit as awkardly upon thee, as a good suit of Cloaths
does upon an uncouth Country Squire But see yonder's your Father-in-law
that is to be.




Rot him, he's a Brute.



However, you must be civil to him on the account of Ophelia Your
Servant, Sir Wealthy, how goes it with our fellow Traveller?




How can it go well with any Gentleman that is decay'd in
his Fortunes, and as it were turned loose into the world, especially such
a base degenerated world as this is?



Faith I believe the world is as it used to be.




I am of your opinion, the rich dread disasters, and the poor
contemn 'em. Fools wonder at what wise men foresaw. And po∣tent
Knavery depresses and preys upon meritorious honesty; and so it
was always, I believe.



As for the female part of the world, I'm sure it is as it should
be.




How is that, pray Sir?



Why the dear charming Creatures are so coming, that there's
not one in fifty but Cuckolds her Husband before she has him As
thus Sir, when once a young couple have entertain'd a corre∣spondence,
and that correspondence ripens into warm desires, and those
desires require fruition, then she immediately, for the security of Re∣putation,
marries another, on purpose to give her Spark an opportuni∣ty
to reap the Blessings freely And that's Cuckoldom before Marri∣age
for ye, at least it's so intentionally▪




And pray Sir why could not the Lovers themselves have mar∣ry•d?



O Pox! that were the way to have had the joys pall'd upon
their hands immediately. Marriage joys, foh!




Vainthroat thou'rt a horrible censorious fellow; and abundant∣ly
too general in thy reflections •elating to the fair Sex. Sir Wealthy
Plainder, if you please, a word with you.









You have a Daughter, Sir.




I have so: And 'tis well I have, as the case stands, I can
tell you that Sir.




I must tell you, I think her extremely Beautiful.




So much the better for my purpose still, Sir.




In short, I love her.




And to be as short as you, you are not like to have her, nor
have I any thing to give her, Sir.




My affections are above a bargain.




And below the mark, I'll tell ye that.




How so, Sir, I hope our qualities are equal.




In short, I have engag'd her to a person above your quality.




Who's that, pray Sir?




Why then to be plain with you, 'tis to my Lord Courtipoll.




Lord Courtipoll! why he's married.




Married! What then, ha, ha, ha, mayn't he have occasion
for my Daughter for all that? Ha, ha, ha, married, that's a good one
e'faith.




What does the old Rogue mean, would he prostitute his
own Daughter?





Sir, I must beg your pardon, for I am this moment going
to see them fairly put together: and so your servant.





Oh horrid Monster! however, I don't question but the
young Ladies Virtue will stand the shock, and baffle the intentions of
this villain, and so render herself the most adorable Creature upon the
face of the Earth.






Mrs Nibs, you seem to have discretion, and I believe you
may be confided in.



Sir, I'll endeavour to merit your good opinion, by any service
you shall please to command me In the first place you may be
assur'd of my secrecy.




Pray Sweet-heart accept of this small token,  I
doubt not but that you are acquainted with the affairs of the Family.



That I am, Sir; there is nothing that is done, said, or scarce
thought of under this Roof, that is unknown to your very humble Ser∣vant
Nibs Trusty.




Then, Mrs Nibs Trusty, I need not tell ye that there are at
present base things in agitation.



I know what you mean, tho I will say but little. Madam O∣phelia
is to be sacrificed to the pleasures of my Lord Courtipoll, to gratify
her old doting Fathers passion for Mrs Minx, his Lordships present
kept Mistress.




I find your intelligence is authentick.



I am not unac••ainted neither with your pretensions to the beau∣tiful
Ophelia What is it now you'd have me do?




Only to give me a punctual notice of proceedings.



I'll do it on the forfeiture of my life. And more than that, I'll
assist ye to countermine any Plots that shall be laid against the young
Lady's Honour You seem to be a man of worth, and I have sound
ye a person of Generosity, therefore assure your self that in your affairs
I'll be as diligent as a Court-Procurer, aud as secret as a Mother Mid-night.
This moment I'll see how things go on: and so I am Sir Bella∣mour's
most humble Servant. Exit.




But come, prithee Vainthroat give me some account of this
Lord Courtipoll, and look you deal sincerely.



Ha, ha, ha, What, Knight, art stung already with that pesti∣ferous
Viper Jealousie?




I'm not distrustful, but cautious.



Why then, Sir, upon my word my Lord Courtipoll is a dange∣rous
Rival, Folly and Profuseness are taking qualities among the La∣dies.
And faith they are i'th' right on't; for how can a Woman bet∣ter
secure her pleasures, than when she commands the Purse of a liberal
Fool?




For my part, I shan't think him dangerous; for I'm confi∣dent
Ophelia has Discretion enough to laugh at his Folly, and a sufficient
stock of Virtue to despise the baseness of his Bribes.



Come, Sir Knight, that you may shake off this moody amo∣rous
temper, I'll entertain you with a Song and Dance.

1.LEt never dull sorrow our joys invade,
But for ever let's follow the toping trade:
Let a merry merry Song
Drive the Current of Time along;
He's a Prince of a Man
That doubles his Span,
And makes it a Cubit long.

2.Call Harry to fetch us more Bottles in,
Don't tarry, since to Revel we thus begin:
Let's tipple tipple on,
Till the Moon and Stars are gone;
'Tis a meeting divine,
When our faces so shine,
That they Rival the Rising Sun




So, very well To morrow you shall range the Town along
with me▪ A Wench and a Bottle is a certain Antidote against the poy∣son
of Love: But for the present let's go and divert our selves with the
follies that this Family of ours can afford us.





Toll, doll, di, da, doll. (Roars out of Tune.) Huzzah, Victo∣ria,
Victoria! Ha, ha, ha; He drink with me, a peddling Prig, 'sbud
I've laid him as dead as a Door-nail. And now for the Widow, By
the Soul of a Culverin, I cou'd in this humour make Love like a Dra∣gon. Come,
faith I'll go practice a little. Here shall stand the Wi∣dow,
(Sets a Chair out) and here shall stand the Whelp Broakage, sneak∣ing
up in this corner; (Sets his Perriwig upon his Cane in the corner) stand
there, you Hell-hound: and if you dare but to look towards me, du∣ring
the Adoration I shall pay my Charming Goddess here, I'll that
moment tear out of your head those Sacrilegious Eye Balls Now I'll
begin; Madam, tho I've long been a Man of Terror, and have made
Conflagrations, Plundering, Rapes, and Throat-cutting my sport and
diversion, yet for the sake of your dear self, I'll now, like a second
Hercules, fling by my Club and take up the Distaff The roaring Lion
shall clap his Tail betwixt his Legs, and become a fawning Spaniel to
lick the dust off your Ladyships Shooe-soles But first, Madam, let
me beg leave to sacrifice yonders sniveling Whore• bird, up in the corner
there, to my own vengeance, and for your Ladyships honour. (Draws
his Sword, and goes to the Cane and Perriwig) Come along then; by the
fiery breath of a Demi-Cannon, I'll murther this Whelp and Bacon this
very minute, that I will, you Villain, ye Mongril, you Lick-spit Cur
ye. (Lays about him with his Sword) I'll mince your flesh for ye, and so
feed young Jackdaws with the morsels So, so, now I think 'twill be
convenient to repose my self a little after this plaguy fatigue.

(Sheaths his Sword, sits down in the Chair, and falls asleep.
Enter Nickycrack and Nibs.



what's the matter with the Captain here, he is
fallen fast asleep.



Why I left him and Mr Broakage in the Buttery, drinking the
Widows health upon a reconciliation, and I find they have made one
another drunk.



E•gad let's play him some trick or other, and try to startle this
undaunted Hero.



With all my heart. VVe will take out the Candles, and
get the Trumpets my Lord Courtipoll has brought to rattle him awake of
a sudden, and see how he'll bear it.


Nick and Nibs take out the Candle, Trumpets sounds a Charge.


(starting up) Good Lord where am I, or what is become of me.
(Re-enter Nickycrack with a Candle) Ah! good dear Sir, tell me where I
am, or what is become of me.



'Tis I, Captain Bownceby, 'tis I, your friend Nickycrack.



Then I find I have been dreaming all this while.



But why this cold sweat? why all this fear, good Captain?



VVhy would ye have a man have courage in his sleep, that is
a jest indeed. Now I am awake, Mr Nickycrack, I must tell you, that
there is nothing upon the face of the earth, that can terrify Captain
Bownceby; nay, I defy the King of Terrors himself, and all his Hell∣born
Guard de Corps. But hark ye, dear Nickycrack, prethee tell me
how dost think my affairs stand with the VVidow?



On my Soul, as you can wish your self. Ah Captain! I have
heard her speak very feelingly of that graceful person of yours.



Very like so I vow, for I took care to make her view me di∣stinctly.
And what if I take an opportunity to palm the true dimensions
uodn her? ha, Boy.



Now's your time to bear up briskly: Your Rival Mr Broakage
is dead drunk in the Buttery; and I'll contrive to secure him for one
hour at the least, don't question it.



Egad then I'll go strike her home. I'll first go wash and tal∣low,
and then Have at thy Coat, old VVidow.




But Captain, methinks you're somethiug forgetful of your
faithful servant, Mr. Nickycrack.



Not at all, I protest Sir. Ods life man, the Arrears are not
yet paid, when they come in thou shalt swim in Money: by the bar•el
of a Blunderbuss thou sha't, my Boy.



But Sir, if you please, in the mean time to sign this small Note,
it will encourage the work strangely.



That I will my Lad, I'll sign it as freely as ever I sign'd a false
Muster-Roll. Let me see it.




So, Sir, now away to the Widow, and Heavens prosper ye;
in the mean time I'll take care of Mr Broakage.



Then faith I'll lose no time Adieu.






Well Nibs, I have got the Captain in black and white here;
and now I'll go try to get the Merchant under the same circumstances.



I have been examining the Merchants Cargo for him.



Well! and how, was he richly laden?



Hang him, I'll be far enough if he is not a Bankrupt, he had not
one souse of Ready in's pocket.



What Bills had he Child?



Bills he had indeed, of Taylour, Surgeon, Landlady, Cook,
and Landress, but not one single Bill of Credit.



The less favour he is like to find at my hands, I'll promise him.
Come, let's go order matters to the best advantage. Exeunt.



Enter 〈◊〉Courtipoll following Ophelia. A Table and Chairs.



Hold! let me consider! what shall I say first? Oh now
I have it. Do you know who I am, Madam, ha?



'Tis in vain to be in earnest with this politick Blockhead. I'll
e'n play upon the fool to make my self diversion. (aside) You, Sir,
are a person of noble quality.




Right, Madam, I am so. And pray, Madam, how
came you to know that I was a man of noble quality, ha?



Your mein and person bespoke you so, my Lord.




Very like so, I vow Gad I'll try her parts a little
farther, (aside.) And do you know what I am famous for?



No doubt, for your wisdom, my Lord.




Ay, say ye so? Why should you think so, pray, ha?



By the solemn air of your countenance, my Lord.




By the soul of Matchiavel, she's a meer Sybil, (aside.) What
then do you think me most fit for; ha, Madam?



To sit at the Helm of Government, and steer the State, my Lord.




O bless me! I vow Madam you're a person of the clearest
apprehension that ever I yet conversed withal. Should I have a Son by
you, I'd forfeit my honour if he did not bid fair for the Crown of Po∣land,
should there chance to be an Election by the time he came of age.
But now to the business in hand: Come, pray let's sit down, and I will
make love to you as becomes a Statesman, by asking of some politick
questions. (They sit down, my Lord pauses a while) Ay that will do.
Pray, Madam, which side do you lie on when you settle your self to
sleep? ha, Madam.



What can the Coxcomb mean by this? however, at the present,
I'm resolved to humour him. (aside.) I always sleep on my left side,
my Lord.




Then I am the happiest man in the world, I find the Hea∣vens
are propitious to our Amours; for you must know I always sleep
on my right, so that I, each night •laspt within thy circling arms, shall
coo, pur, and murmur out my love with the greatest transports ima∣ginable.



This I must confess, was a rapture worthy a Politician.





But hold, let me consider once again! Ay, if so, then that
may very well be.



Ha, ha, ha, if this be politick Love, it is a very cool way of pro∣ceeding.






Hold out of the way, you old doting fool ye.




Odslifelikius she has made my ears sing again; what a pla∣guy
strength did the young vixon strike withal.



So so, is this going to see a Packet opened? You a person of
quality, and tell a lie.




You mistake, Pug, a Statesman can't tell a lie, he only
gives out false intelligence to amuse and gain advantage.



A fig for a Statesman, don't tell me of a Statesman, ne're a
Statesman in Christendom shall abuse me. Don you think to leave me
in this condition, without providing either for me or my burthen here.
By jenkins before I will be serv'd so, I'll take up the Fire-sork and crack
the very skull of you, so I will.




Patience, patience, Pug E'gad I'll comply, for it may
be a fatal thing for a Politician to receive a very small blow, if it chance
to hit in the right place.



Come, come away, will you? The Lawyer waits for you,
will you go in and seal the Writings, or no?




That I will, my Pug, I never designed otherwise.



Come along then. Come, Sir Wealthy, you shall go and be
witness.




With all my heart, Madam; ods life, if his Lordship deli∣vers
I'll take possession e'faith.





I guest, Madam, at your uneasiness, and therefore soon con∣trived
your relief.



And I guess who imploy'd ye, and therefore shall take care to
keep you in the dark.




Did not you find his Lordship very troublesome and imperti∣nent?



Not at all. How can a person of his quality be thought trou∣blesome,
or a man of his parts be reckoned impertinent.



I scarce believe you to be serious. I know you, Madam Ophelia,
to have a better judgment; but there is a person in the world, tho I'll
say nothing of him, who has no small esteem for you, and is really a
man of parts, an honest Gentleman, whose pretensions are honourable:
what think you of Sir Bellamour Blunt, Madam?



I think he is a Hog, ameer Hog; who do you think would be
troubled with his moroseness?



It is his true notion of things, and the sincerity of his principles
that makes him so downright, both in his discourse and actions: but
here he comes, let him speak for himself.






Are you now at leisure to hear me, Madam?



No, nor never will be at leisure to hear any body but my Lord



Well Sir, if you have any business at Court, I may perhaps
prevail with my Lord Courtipoll to intercede for you.




Thank my Stars, my business there is equal to his interest,
which .



Hold, no reflections upon a noble Courtier, pray Sir? They
ought to be above censure.




Nay his Lordship may be a great Courtier as far as I know.
Gay fools often serve for the ornamental furniture of a Court Tho
this is not my business at present. Now I have an opportunity
I must tell you, that I have a strong and sincere passion for you.



Passion! Ha, ha, ha. And I must tell you that I have a strong
and sincere aversion to all manner of passion, especially a foolish love∣passion.
'Tis a turbulent storm of the mind, that raises a short
blustring disorder, but soon, alas, flags into a cool regardless calm.




Mine, Madam, is of a temperament that promises duration.



Many things that are very promising, meet with strange al∣terations
before th•ir events.




Have you had any account of this Lord Courtipoll?




Yes, yes, he has kept a Mistress, and what by that?
we're not to expect Saints about the Town in this Age The very
bulchin Country Calf, that till the age of one and twenty sucks the
Teat, and bleats at the heels of his Lady Dam, soon finds an oppor∣tunity
to lick the face of some homely Heifer or other.




Do ye know that he's Marry'd, and what function you
are design'd for?



The thoughts of this, I must confess, in spight of my pre∣tensions,
shocks the very soul of me, and fires me all over with In∣dignation.
(Aside.)
Enter Sir Wealthy Plainder.




O fie, O fie, come along with me, Hussy, quickly.



Sir, Sir, your Perriwig is a fire, your Perriwig's afire, I say.






(As he flings off his Hat and Perriwig,
rubs his Head, and jumps about, Ophelia steals off another way.


'Tis out now, Sir: And all's well again.




(looking about.) Where's Ophelia?



She's stept in before you, Sir.




Edad then I'll after her.





Was there ever such a barbarous horrid fellow, as this
Sir Wealthy?



Come, Sir Bellameur, all will go well, I'll warrant you. I
can see as far into a Millstone as another body: and can foretell the
success of an Amour better than e're a Fortune-teller in the Kingdom:
Tho I love to say but little, I don't question but I shall bring all
things about, and give you the possession of both the Lady and a
considerable Fortune into the bargain, out of her Fathers conceal'd
Treasure. For tho I never do discover Secrets, yet I must tell you,
that, for all Sir Wealthy pleads poverty at this rate, yet the old Rogue
is as rich as a Jew. You shan't want my assistance I promise ye, Sir
Bellamour. But mum's the word, not one syllable more. And for
your comfort,

At Games of Love, where Lovers tug most hard,
'Tis trusty Nibs that proves the surest Ca•d▪
End of the Third Act.





Widow Thoroshift and Sweetny.


WEll, and pray Madam what proceedings is there in
your grand affair of Love?



Indeed Mrs. Sweetny I'm at last drove to take my choice of
two Extreams, either to be stript, and flung into durance, by the
force of Law Temporal▪ or to be divested of all freedom, and deli∣ver
my self into Matrimonial bonds, by the power of Law Spiritual.



If you'll be advis'd by me accept of the latter, for in that
the tye is mutual: And your knowledge of the world will direct you
to loose your own hands at pleasure.



Then as to my choice of persons, whether I shall take that
palpable Fool of a Captain, or the shrewd suspected Knave of a
Merchant.



Where there is a plentiful Estate a Fool may be very con∣venient▪
But in your circumstances the Merchant, that, no doubt,
is well acquainted with all manner of subtle Tricking, wou'd, I
think, be the fitter Match.



They have both my promise to dispatch the business this ve∣ry
night, and they equally confide in't.



I must tell you, dear Madam, that I look upon both of
'em of very uncertain worth. I wish you wou'd take Courage, prune,
bristle, and display your Charms so, that you might entangle the af∣fections
of honest Sir Bellamour Blu•t; he's a man of a known value.



Alas his gruffship is already visibly fasten'd: Don't you see
how he •lounces about after the tail of your new guest Ophelia?



Here comes his friend Vainthroat, we'll engage him in the
business?





Where have you been, good Mr Vainthroat, we have wanted
you strangely.



Why faith, Madam, I have been, like an out-lying Deer,
browsing about a little in fresh pasture▪ and am now very coolly re∣turn'd
within the pale again.



Come, sweet Sir, what think ye of promoting a Match
betwixt the Widow here and your friend Sir Bellamour.



Ha, ha, ha, promote do ye call it? I think there is not three
pence difference in the piece of service, either to promote a friend
six •ounds up an Execution-Ladder, or as many steps towards Ma∣trimony.

Sir Bellamour Blunt appears at a distance, walking in
a melancholy posture.


sings in a Ballad tone.

But see where walks the doughty Knight,
Who all in doleful guise,
Metes out the time of sable night.
With Tears dropt from his Eyes.
Widow, Widow, I vow yonders Champion seems to lye under some
dire Enchantment, prithee go try whether you have ever a Spe••
about you that's powerful enough to set him at liberty.


I'll use my endeavour to unshackle him: But it shall be with
design to secure him within a Circle of my own▪ I promise him a
that.




Come, sweet Madam Thoroshift, you shall shew a Female
prowess in attacking this sowre Knight of the Lees. I'll conduct
you into the Lists, and leave you to manage the Combat as you see
convenient. (Sweetny and Widow walk up towards Sir Bellamour.)
I hope honest Sir Bellamour won't think much to be left alone with a
handsome young Widow. Pray let me enjoyn you that Love be
the subject of your discourse, and look that you handle the matter
warmly Come Mr. Vainthroat let's leave them together.





But do ye think, Sir, there's no Charms in the world that
equals Ophelia's? To my knowledge there's a certain person, that,
without offence, for Features, for Complexion, for Shape, for Air,
for Mien; nay more, one that knows how to 




Render herself Ridiculous, by a nauseous, false commen∣dation.



Come, come, a Woman of Discretion, and of a kind, com∣plying
temper, as I know who is, will bear with any thing that
comes from Sir Bellamour Blunt. Will you suffer 




The Rack rather than this Impertinence What
the Devil wou'd this woman have?



Have you to recollect your self, and consult your Reason.
Do but think how mean a spirited thing 'tis, not to resent the slights
and affronts of a young wanton Coquet; and how ungenerous
'twou'd be, not to caress the sincere and obliging offers of a person 




Who in Confidence epitomizes her whole Sex.



How, Confidence! I find you are one of those tame fools
that love to be ill us'd. And since you thus basely refuse my kind and
  32
tender Compassion for you, I'll make you smart under the lash of
my Vengeance.




As long as I'm got clear of your Smiles, I'll stand the Bat∣tory
of your Frowns at a distance. And so faith Lady I shall take
my advantage, and sheer off.




Was there ever any thing so provoking? A dull insensible
Log: Efaith I'll plague him for this, I•ll warrant him.




Ah Madam, Madam, we••e all undone, undone; yonders
the Mob up in the City, ravishing at such a rate, you never heard
the like on•t. They say there is not a Female left undefil'd twixt
Algate and Ludgate.



Then for my part, I believe the worshipful the Mob have but
left them as they found them.



O Lord, O Lord! why what, Madam, do ye offer to make
a jest of Ravi•hing?



Why it always was a jest, a meer jest, Nibs. I never yet saw
it only represented on the Stage, but it created a satisfactory titt'ring
amongst all the Females in the house.



I have told my Lord Courtipoll of it, and he's going up into
the City with all the haste imaginable.






Come, now I'll shew the world how serviceable I can
be to a State upon an emergent occasion.



O good my Lord make haste, to be ravisht by a parcel of
nasty Kennel-rakers would be insufferable, were it to be by Gentle∣men
it were nothing.







But what my Lord, do ye mean to Drawcancer it, and singly
encounter Multitudes?




No, no, Madam, I'll promise you I don't mean to strike
a stroke, I know better things▪ In the first place I'll make
Speeches. Thus I'll begin: My loving Friends and dear Countrymen. As
for the rest I may trust my genius to direct that happy Talent I have
in Oratory. Madam, your Servant. But hold! E're I go, pray Mrs
Nibs do you take this Ring, and whilst 'tis warm with these three
kisses, present it to the fair Ophelia, and let her put it on her middle
finger on her left hand. And having also solemnly kist it three times,
let her lay it close to her heart, and then put up some ejaculations for
her adventurous Lord Courtipoll. Such mysteries as these were always
thought requisite amongst the ancient Politicians, upon the under∣taking
of any grand affair. Madam, your Servant. Come along 〈◊〉.





what have you done with my brace of Lovers, I am resolved
I'll soon decide the point in controversie. But first I'll to my Cham∣ber,
to meditate Revenge upon this base fellow Sir Bellamour, to slight
proffer'd Caresses is an injury that a woman is never able to forgive.




And I shall take care to blunt the edge of your malice on
this occasion, I'll promise you.





Ha, ha, ha, yonder's my Lord marcht up into the City to
quell the Mob, forsooth.



Han't I manag'd this project rarely? I have sent his Lord∣ship
on this fools errand, so that my generous friend Sir Bellamour
might have the greater freedom to prosecute his Amour with Ophelia.



Faith 'twas well contriv'd, and I'll assist thee in any thing
with all my heart, Girl.










Now Doll I am a little at ease; my Settlement is not only
a sufficient maintenance for my self, but for any Spark that I shall
best fancy; so that I may now when I think fit, turn honest with a
safe Conscience.



And your humble Servant Country Doll here is jumping into
preferment apace. In the first place, I am to be married to super∣abundantly
nice Mr. Prim, and by that means I shall forthwith com∣mence
Gentlewoman, and become acquainted with people of Qua∣lity:
Then, no doubt, upon the discovery of some private qualifica∣tions
that I am Mistress of, I shall soon be resorted to by the greatest
men in the Kingdom. Madam, shall I beg a small favour at your
Ladyships hands, says one Lord. It lies in your Ladyships power to
relieve a person in very great distress, says another Lord. Oh how
I'll bristle when they come cringing to me for a Cast of my function.



Gad a mercy Doll.



But what have you done, Madam, with Sir Wealthy Plainder?
Certainly he's not to be neglected till he's a little better fleec'd.



Hang him, an old rivell•d skin impotent Cur, a bundle of
dried Kexes would be a better bed fellow.



What the Devil signifies his Carcass, so his Purse be but pro∣li•ick.



Well Doll, I'll freely remit both his Carcass and Purse too
into your hands, manage him as you think convenient; you may
easily contrive to personate me, there is no danger that he can make
any discovery of the cheat.



Faith then I'll about it immediately, I'll go send him a chal∣lenge
in your name, appoint some convenient place, and should he
prove backward, and refuse to bleed freely, I'll first rifle the old
  34
Rogue, then beat him into better manners. I know he carries two
or three hundred pieces always about him, and I will rip the very
Wasteband of his Breeches for him, but I'll find it out; such a summ
as that will furnish me a small secret Apartment with an Indian Pallet-Bed,
and a large Glass at the head on't, a set of Dutch Nudities, a
Silver Chocolate Pot, and a Punch Bowl, and some other pretty
utensils that are absolutely necessary for one of my employ.



Ha, ha, I fancy Doll thou't become thy promotion very
well, indeed thou hast something in thy face that looks very reve∣rend.



Nay I am confident I shall be as punctual in all the formali∣ties
of my Calling as any body. I can double my Chin, pout out a
wanton Lip, wag the Head, and tip the wink, as well as e're a standing
Bawd in Christendom.



O rare Madam Dorothy.



Well, Madam, with your leave I will now go look after Sir
Wealthy Plainder, and manage that affair.



Do so Doll, and I will go see how my Sister Thoroshift goes
on in her business.








Yonder's the Arbour that trusty Nibs promised to decoy
Ophelia too. 'Tis to be hoped that the serenity of the night, and the
sweetness of the place, may so becalm her bosom, that it will be the
more susceptible of the soft inspirations of love.

(Goes into the Arbour.
Enter Sir Wealthy Plainder with a small Trunk, Sir Bell.
peeping out of the Arbour.



So, under this Bench will I conceal my dear, dear Treasure
here, (Kisses and hugs the Trunk.) till the damn'd ravenous Mob be
quell'd. Sure no body sees me but the Moon yonder, and a my
Conscience, Madam Luna scorns to tell tales: had she been a blab of
her Tongue, the Gods would never have chose her out for a Mid∣wife So,
now I'll to my Minky, and recreate the flesh a little.
I'll make the young Jade practice a thousand pretty Dalliances; she
shall rub my Ears, clap my Cheeks, scratch my Knees, and tickle me
under the short Ribs, e'faith, Ee, e, e, e, I'll shew her how, I'll shew
her how presently.


Sir Bellamour Blunt comes out of the Arbour.



A pox of thy damn'd lascivious hide, for an old doting
Letcher However, methinks this proves very lucky. I
may certainly, with all the justice in the world, carry off this old
  35
villains belov'd Wealth And so constitute my self Trustee for the
much wronged Ophelia.






Here is a lovely night, Madam; the Sky looks clear and glo∣rious,
the Air is fresh, and the Banks are fragrant.



The night is pleasant indeed, and the place agreeable.



And very suitable for Love Adventures, is it not, Madam?



The truth on it is, this might be a proper Scene for some of the
idle Romantick Stories we meet withal in Novels As when Olimpia,
lying under the constraint of severe Parents, being wholly debarr'd the
object of her affections, restless in bed, she slips on a loose Garment,
takes her Lute, and steals gently forth into the Garden, where, having
burthen'd the ambient Air with pressing sighs, and long complain
to the regardless Plants, at length the lovely Nymph warbles out some
soft and killing words made of her absent Swain. Celadon, conceal'd in an
adjacent Arbour, surpriz'd with the unlookt for harmony, rushes out of
his melancholy covert, flings himself at the feet of his charming God∣dess,
and there expires in the highest Transport of an amorous passion.

She speaks this slightingly, as ridiculing the matter.


And would not this, Madam, look very prettily, were it to be
performed in reality? Pray let me beg of you to begin the story at the
Song, and see how fate may order the Consequences.



I will not deny you a Song, Nibs, but I believe the story as you
call it, is like to begin and end with it.



ALL things seem deaf to my complaints,
In vain I roam the Groves along.
Hear me ye Loves departed Saints,
That to Elizyan shades are gone.
If to my faithful Celadon I prove not true,
Let it be both our dooms never to come to you.

Sir Bellamour rushes hastily from the Arbour, and flings himself
at the Feet of Ophelia.



(shreiks out.) O h! what piece of rudeness is this?



Ha, ha, ha, 'Tis your faithful Celadon, Madam, expiring in the
transports you just spoke of. And now to go on with the Novel.
Olimpia, struck at the sudden amazement of her unexpected Celadon, con∣tinues
for some time silent as the night, and senceless as a statue, till re∣collecting
the sufferings of her faithful Swain, a relenting pity soon seizes
her trembling heart, pity the kind harbinger of triumphant Love. What
then should ensue, but a whole train of Tears, Fires, Flames, Raptures,
and so forth, which are things that never admit of a witness. I shall
  36
therefore beg leave to drop a hasty Curtzie, (Curtzies) and so withdraw.





(rising.) Thou dear charming Creature!



Ha, ha, ha; what, have you been all this while studying of
that Speech There's a flight with all my heart.




And must my passion for ever be the subject of your Rail∣lery?



Your passion, I suppose, is like other mens, of the same con∣tinuance
as your courtship.




Cou'd I suppose my self capable of altering my esteem by a
possession, I'd sooner tamely surrender my breast to be possest by Fu∣ries,
nay, by Envy itself, the worst of Fiends, rather than urge you one
syllable farther.



So, so, I find your are resolv'd to take a share in the Novel;
this is all Romantick to the highest degree.




I'm not us'd to any thing but truth, Madam.




Pray don't be angry, good Sir; aud I'll give you a piece of
truth in return to your truth, you so much boast of You must know
then that my affections are at present a little upon the float; they may
in time fix, and come to a sediment, then if a draught of the dregs of
Love will go down with your Constitution, I may perhaps have a dose
or two at your service. And so adieu, sweet Sir Bellamour.





(laying hold of her.)Hold, Madam.



How dare you be so saucy? Unhand me I say, or may I never 




(loosing her) No imprecations I beseech you Lady, what I
have to say nearly concerns your interest.



Out with it quickly then.




Do but step into this Arbour with me, and there 



There you'll play the Satyr perhaps, 'twill concern my interest
truly, to give you an opportunity to proceed farther with this brutish
force you have so rudely began.




Don't you thus wrong the innocence of my thoughts.



If your intentions be just, why can't you make this grand dis∣covery
you pretend to, here in the place where we now are?




Stay but a moment and I'll convince ye.




What can he be gone for? Be it what it will, I am resolv'd
I will not stay to be convinced, satisfying a curiosity has ever been very
fatal to our Sex.







Widow Thoroshift above at a Window.


That must be Sir Bellamour's voice. I'll take this opportunity
and fling him the Letter I have prepared.

(Flings out a Letter.



Ha! (Taking up the Letter) Whence can this come I wonder•
it may perhaps contain what a Virgin modesty might refuse to discover
face to face. (Opens the Letter) I can by Moon-light perceive that 'tis
subscrib'd Ophelia,•tho I can't in this place read the Contents I am
impatient to read it.




So, the bait he swallows greedily, and I'll take care to ho•k
him.






This is the place appointed; and •m confident the old Dotard
will punctually answer my Defiance I vow here he comes already.






Minx, Minx, Minky, Minky, ha! sure yonder must be Pet∣ticoats
that are sailing about there: 'Sboblikins if they be, I will make
'em fly presently. VVhy Minky, Minky▪



So, this Arbour is a convenient place for the execution of my
design Here, here, Sir Wealthy







(Answering int the same tone.
Doll slips into the Arbour, and Sir VVealthy follows her.)



(within)  A hey! why Hussy, what a murrain ar't a doing.
Nay Minky, don't play the fool with a body at this rate.

Re-enter Doll with Sir VVealthy's Breeches.


So, there let the old bearded Goat stand and cool himself a little;
'tis to be hoped before morning, the Cuffs brisk thoughts of wenching
may be pretty well over Now I will go strike up a merry bargain
with Mr Prim as soon as he pleases: and as I have already taken posses∣sion
of the Breeches, so to his sweet comfort, shall he find, that I will
make bold to wear 'em stoutly, that I will.






If I should agree to the proposals you make me, Mr Nicky∣crack,
I fear upon the least dissatisfaction betwixt us, you would be very
apt to fling in my Dish, a spice of my former practices.



Ah, no, no, not in the least, Mrs Minx Come, pray let's be
brief in the matter. You have now a pretty Income, for which you
may please to remember, that I have been in some measure serviceable
to you. I my self am not without a reasonable stock of Ready, with
which I don't doubt but I shall riggle my self into some employ or other.
And we will live so sweetly.



And pray what employ do you think would best suit with
your Genius?



My Genins, indeed, will require some very honest employ.
VVhat think you of a Tax-Collector, a Military Pay Master, a Change-Broaker,
or a Sollicitor in Parliament?



A parcel of very consciencious Callings, truly.




(bawling out within.) Ho lo Minx, why what the Devil
at't a doing, and who is that thou hast got with thee?



Hark! Some body calls out, let's go see who it is?



I protest 'tis Sir Wealthy Plainder, by all means let's unloose
him. (They go into the Arbour and lead out Sir VVealthy with his hands
bound)  VVhy what is the matter Sir Wealthy, in the name of wonder
what have they done to ye?




Prithee leave fooling at this rate, give me but my Breeches
again and all shall be well, faith Child. Then Minky, we'll go into thy
Chamber, and there we will fairly unrip 'em. Every tenth piece shall
be thy own freely, and for each piece I'll have a tubbers at bowls in a
Summers day. Ta Doll, di, da, doll, di, da, doll.




Ha! Now I smoke the business. Ha, ha, ha, he's uncas'd I
find. He may Ta doll, di, da, doll long enough before Doll will refund
again, I'll warrant her.  Sir Wealthy, I can't imagin what you'd
be at. Mr Nickycrack and I are but just come into the Garden, and how
you come tied after this manner, and what you have had done to ye, I
know no more than the man in yonders Moon, not I, I'll promise ye.



I profess Sir Wealthy I don't know what to think of your
Ta, doll, di, da, doll; for my part I'm afraid your Worship is at
present something Lunatick.




Why, what a pox! wou'd you both perswade me out of
my Christian name? Had not I a Letter from you, Mrs. Minx, to meet
you here in the Garden? and accordingly I came. You beckon'd, and
call'd me into this Arbour, tyed my hands for me, and then run away
with my Breeches.



Not one syllable of this is truth, by jenkins; now you make
a body swear.



In short, Sir Wealthy, you are either disturb'd in your brain, or
have been most horribly abus'd; for, upon my salvation, this Lady and
I have been together for this half hour, and were but just come into
the Garden as you call'd out.




O Lord, O Lord! such doings as these wou'd make my
Brains burst about my Ears, tho my Scull were ho•p'd with Steel.
May the Gods send I find all safe under the Bench. (Looks under the
Bench, then flings it down in a rage) Hell, Furies, Blood, Fire, Death,
Destruction; and what is worst of all, Woman, Woman, Woman.
I run, I burn, I fly; I'm here, I'm there. I'm ev'ry where, I'm no where,
nor never will be any where again.

(Runs off, tearing like a mad-man.


Why, what is the Devil in Sir Wealthy?



I believe Legion himself has possest him: He seems at present
even too mad for Bedlam.



Had I but a grant of his body, I'd cage him up e'faith, and shew
him about the Country for the Wild Man.



You had best prevail with my Lord Courtipoll, to beg him for
you.



Ay that would be wise work indeed, to set on a Fool to beg a Mad∣man.



Prithee Mr Nickycrack, let's go in and examin Doll about this bu∣siness,
I believe she's able to unravel the whole matter.



Madam, if you think convenient, I•d rather be for tying a knot of
our own, than unravelling fifty of other peoples.



Why look ye, Mr Nickycrack, I hope you'll give me half an hours
time to consider of your proposals. I am not unthoughtful of your former
favours. And can at present assure ye, that I hate to be ungrateful. But
what requires the most expedition is my Siste•Thoroshift's business.



Madam, I've employ'd Mr. Plodder, my chief Implement of Intel∣ligence,
and expect his return every minute. I am confident that by his
means I shall know the value of the Merchants stock; and of the substance
of the Souldiers preferment to a single grain.



Well, when that's effected then the Parson goes to work, and
Marriage you know is a fruit, that like Nuts generally grows in clusters.



And egad as soon as the Bough is shak•d, I•ll be ready with my open
arms to take into my bosom the dear sweet Nut that falls to my share▪





That you may, Mr Nickycrack, and get at the Kernel without en∣dangering
your Teeth by cracking the shell.



Phoo! pox of cracking of shells, what care I for cracking of shells.

Who most depends upon a Maidenhead,
Is at the best, but by a Phantom led.
The end of the fourth Act.




Sir Bellamour Blunt with a Letter.



(Reads.) SIr, considering the usage I meet withal from the most un∣natural
of Parents, and being in some measure acquaint∣ed
with the honourable character you maintain in the world, I have at
length resolv'd to confide in your pretensions, and commit my self wholly
into your custody, not doubting but I shall meet with a reception worthy
your self, and suitable to the present exigencies of your distress'd Refugee, Ophelia
At the end of the Gallery leading to the Back∣stairs
when the clock strikes one.
Oh happy Summons! This is the place, and I am confident it draws near
the time. (The Clock strikes) There goes the blessed stroke, from this mi∣nute
I'll date my account of bliss, which may be Gods multiply till the
summ equals the extent of my passion.



Enter Widow Thoroshift Maskt, Captain Bownceby, and Broa∣kage,
watching her at two several doors.



(Running to her and embracing her) Ophelia! I am not able to say
more. But 




Hell and Hand-granades! I have watched to fine purpose, to be at
length an eye witness of the loss of my Mistress No, I ll first be ramm'd in∣to
the mouth of a Cannon, and be discharged against my Enemy, with my
heels foremost, to kick the breath out of his Stomach. (Goes up to Sir Bel∣lamour.)
Who are you, Sir, that dare shew this familiarity with a Lady to
whom Captain Bownceby make pretensions. If you think fit, Sir, to dispute
my Title, you shall find it writ in legible Characters upon this invincible
Bilboa Blade. (Draws his Sword, retires to some distance and flourishes it.) Do
ye see, do ye see, Sir?




If you'll walk a little nearer, Sir, you shall see me break your
Bilboa Blade about the ears of you, and imprint its Characters upon your
Skull; I am confident 'tis soft enough to take the impression.



Ha! A rough Dog! I fear this: what a damn'd sowre look he has?





Gad I ll venture out. Captain I see you are like to be engaged, and
tho we are Rivals as to the Widow yonder, yet, with your leave, we will
joyn our Forces against the common Enemy.




With all my heart, honest Broakage. Come, prithee do thee march
in the Front, and let me bring up the Rear. By my experience in War I'll
undertake to make good the Retreat, should we chance to be over-press'd.



No, pray Captain do you take the honour of leading, because you
know how to give the Onset with advantage.



Nay, good Mr Broakage.







I protest you shall.

(Putting each other forward by turns.


I vow it must be you.



What if we first parley, and make our demands in form, and upon
refusal, then fall on?







Hark you, Sir, will you surrender the VVidow, or not?




Pray, Madam Ophelia let me beg of you to withdraw for a mo∣ment,
whilst I correct the insolence of these two Coxcombs.



Death and Thunderbolts! 'tis none of Ophelia, 'tis the Widow Tho∣roshift.



Odsniggers, Sir, 'tis the VVidow Thoroshift; do but look, and if it
does not prove so, we'll be content you shall bear her off; and we our selves
will attend your Triumph in chains.




(looking earnestly upon the Widow.) Ha! am I impos'd upon? since
'tis so, Gentlemen, pray take the Lady, I will surrender before you draw
down your Artillery. I must confess I look upon the Fort so battered, that
its not worth the keeping.




Am I not only discovered, but affronted with a second contempt?
Villain I will have thy blood.

(Offers to snatch the Captains Sword.)


(laying hold on her.) Patience, patience, good Lady.



Loose me, ye Poltroons ye. Had either of you the respect for me
  41
you pretend to have, or the least dram of Courage, you would a ster him,
and cut his Throat this moment.



Captain, Captain, you understand the business, prithee after him,
and fet•• back his head to expiate for his sawcy crime.



Brimstone and Blunderbuss Bullets, Madam, had I thought it man∣ners
to have done it before you, I'd have whipt it off before he had stirred
a step. But if your Ladyship pleases to lay me any night in Ambuscade
under his Bed, if I leave him an inch of neck to tie his Cravat upon in the
morning, may I end my days under a Hedge, and have my Eyes closed
with Caterpillars.



And after that, Madam, if ever he troubles your Ladyship more,
I'll undertake to decoy him aboard a Ship, and so Spirit him away to one of
my Plantations.



Gentlemen, now my passion is something over, I am ready to ac∣knowledge
that I am equally oblig'd to both of you, for thus espousing my
Quarrel. 'Tis a miserable case that I am forc'd to keep my self on fair
terms with such a couple of ninny Lovers as these. (aside) Gentlemen, I
am now going to see trusty Nibs married. She has got one of our Modern-Play
Lovers, that lies in wait for her, and yet knows nothing of the matter.





(whispers her in one ear.)




(Runs and whispers her in t'other.)


You are very civil, Mr. Broakage, thus to take out of one ear what
I whisper'd into the other.



No jarring, Gentlemen, on penalty of my eternal displeasure. As
soon as Nibs is married, we'll get together, and dance till morning.



Captain Bownceby shall be ready to attend your Ladyship, with ev∣ry
Caper five foot high.




And your obedient Slave, Mr. Broakage, shall Coupee and Coulee
to your Ladyship, as dextrously as a Beau does to himself at the great Glass
in the Chocolate-house.



These Beaus have a fine time on't, when such Blockheads as thee
must have a fling at 'em. (aside.) Gentlemen, I am your servant




Now, Sir, the common danger is over, what if we about again as
we were?



You are in the right, I protest, Captain; but first let's embrace.
Your Servant, noble Captain. Exeunt. Capt Your Servant, sweet Mr
Broakage Now mind to turn short upon your left heel at the word of com∣mand.
To the right about• march.






I vow I am glad to see your noble Lordship safe returned; how ge∣nerously
it was done, thus to expose your precious person for all our safeties.




As it happened there was no danger, the business only proved
a Match at Foot-ball in Moor-Fields, but I have been so plagued with the
insolence of onstables, not one of the Scoundrels would kn•w me to be a man
of quality; but after abundance of barbarous usage, I was hurried before a
City Magistrate, who at first very hastily sent word, that we•e I the best
m•n in the Kingdom I must be secured till morning. But at length upon
much sollicitation, he and his wife examined the business, and upon her
command I was set at liberty Upon my honour she was a very prett• wo∣man,
and took occasion to draw up her Breasts, mump her Mouth, and say,
she believed I was a person of quality by my white Hand and diamond ••ng.



O goodness! sure every body may know that by your graceful de∣portment.



It is fifty to one, my Lord, but you'll have her at Court e're long a
solliciting Knighthood for her Husband, and then 




Then I'll take care she shall succeed e'faith. And when the
beast of her Husband has his shoulders loaded with a Sirdom, it shall be
my business to give the addition of a corniferous badge, and adorn his front
with a courtly Cuckoldom But Mrs Sweetny, where is Ophelia?



Alas poor young Lady, she's very dutifully attending upon her
Father Sir Wealthy, my Lord, is of a sudden run quite besides himself.
See where she comes along with him.





Will you be pleased, Sir, to take a little repose?




No, Child, lust and villany never sleep.




Good lack, what is to be done with him, see how strangely
thoughtful he looks.




Be gone, Ophelia, there's a cup of Poyson by you, nay, the
deadly draught was prepar'd by thy Fathers own hand; be gone I say.



This sudden care of me is wondrous strange; by this my Father
rather seems to have recovered than lost his sences. (aside) I•ll go try what
account I can get of the occasion of all this.




Why how now old fellow, what art run mad?




Yes, young Coxcomb, I am mad.



Then here's one shall match thee faith. (aside.) My Lord, a person of
your universal knowledge, may find out the nature of this Gentlemans di∣stemper,
and by that means a recovery may be thought on.




Ha? let's see what's to he done with him; why if the Gentlemas
Noddle has sprung a Leak, the best way will be to ply the pumps. Mr
Vainthroat, do you take the other arm, and I will manage this, and let's
work him a little.




(flying from 'em) Loose me, thou fantastick Vanity, thou finisht
folly.




You are very familiar with your betters, methinks good Mr
Mad man.



Its a sign indeed the poor Gentlemans distraction is very great, he
could never have thought that your Lordship could possibly have been a
fool else.




Let us consider Mr. Vainthroat By what I can apprehend of
him he only affects a surly humour, and under the pretence of madness
takes the liberty of being sawcy; prithee let us laugh him out on•t.



With all my heart, my Lord, say what you will, I will have a laugh
at your service I think I may safely promise that, for the Coxcomb is
scarce capable of saying any thing but what is very ridiculous, and yet has
the vanity to think a man laughs at the gayety of his parts.





Ha, ha, ha, what, Sir Wealthy has my quondam Mistress put
thee thus in the dumps. Its a sign thou wert a Madman to venture coming
after a man of my quality Mr Vainthroat.



My Lord. Oh ha, ha, ha. S'bud I'd forgot to laugh at the right
stop.





Come Knight, prithee cheer up Man, I'll make thy posterity
  43
amends for thy misfortunes, I'll infuse into Ophelia, such a stream of sense
and solidity, that she shall become the mother of a Generation distinguisht
by the name of the Matchiavellian Courtipollions.



Ha, ha, ha, there I was ready for you, my Lord.




And I am as ready to despise both your impertinences.




I find nothing will move the sullen Sot, prithee for Ophelia's
sake, see him safe to his Chamber, while Mrs Sweetny and I go and push on
my affairs with the Virgin that I have now upon my hands





Like a man of your quality






O Sir Wealthy, I was looking for you. Pray don't give way to this
strange sort of splenatick humour; do but walk in, and you'll soon find
how matters stand.




What care I how matters stand, I could now, with a steddy
unconcern, see the crazy props of Nature slip their hold, and all this giddy
world stagger into eternal Confusion.




Ha! what is the old Rogue turned Stoick?



Faith I can▪t tell what to make of him, not I But Nickycrack I
am in expectation of flinging of Stockings, and lapping of Sack-possets, and
so forth. Is there any thing to be done to night or not?



Yes faith, there will be tickling work anon; you shall see me take
my turn too.



E'gad it shall go very hard but I'll have some tickling amongst ye.
Bite of the Bridle as soon as you will, I'll take my turn in the Saddle I'll
warrant ye.



See here comes one couple already; the finical Mr Prim has very
nicely espoused honest Country Doll.





Joy to thee Doll. What has the Court then struck a lasting Covenant
with the Country?



Yes indeed, poor Doll here has at length been bribed to betray her∣self
into the bonds of Matrimony.



Gentlemen, no more plain Doll, I beseech you, I am confident she
can now lay a just claim to the title of Madam Prim, and I hope that term
won't in the least damnify your voices in the expression, Gentlemen; prithee
my dear, mind my way of talking, you must now strive to leave off your
Country Dialect, and give to every word you speak, a pretty gentile court∣ly
twang





Here's Mrs Nibs, I dare say is married too, by the solemn paw
she takes, and by that pretty blush which she cunningly assumes, to bid a
formal adieu to what she has long parted withal. Is it not so, Mrs Nibs?



Yes indeed, I am fast enough; but what's the jest, is, the man that
has married me, knows not a syllable of the business.



If half the Husbands in the Kingdom were to be kept in the same
ignorance, • my Conscience they'd have reason enough to think themselves
happy fellows. Were I to advise you, I▪d never let him know it, lest he
should repent his bargain, ha forsooth?



Pray, Mr Vainthroat, for the future, vouchsafe to let your For∣sooths
be Madams when you speak to me, for I assure you I have married a
man of Honour.



You won't pretend to take place of Madam Prim I hope.



Madam Prim! Ha, ha, ha, that's a good one e'faith.



Pray, Madam, why this publick derision of a person that has mar∣ried
a Gentleman.



A Gentleman, ha, ha, ha. Had my Husband no better a pretence to
his gentility, I should blush to hear my self Madam'd. If you will give me
leave, I can give you an exact account of your pedigree.



By all means let's hear it.



Well, then, I dont love to say much, but what I do say shall be to
the purpose. Jacob Scout, the Beadle of Cripplegate Parish, will be ready at
any time to justify upon Oath what I am going to say. You must know
then, that this very Gentleman who pretends himself of Prim Castle in the
borders of Scotland, was not many years since a squauling bantling, laid in a
Hand-basket upon a Bulk in Woodstreet, and being taken care of by the Pa∣rish,
old Scout the Beadle was his Godfather, and afterwards 



You're a base Detractor of my Honor, and I'll have you 



Nay, hold, hold, let's hear the full charge before you make your
reply, good Mr Prim.



Afterwards I say, this Gentleman Mr Prim, when he was grown a
little up, was put in among the Blue-coat Boys, and my Lord Courtipoll
being one day a visiting Christ's-Hospital, his Lordship discovering some∣thing
in the youths face that promis'd a future dexterity in the subtle voca∣tion
of pimping, he was pleased to entertain him in his service, where he has
continued ever since.



O dem her discovery.








E'faith Nibs, if I ben't even with you for thus publickly exposing
Mr Prim, I'll be bound to forfeit all the famous qualifications of my Sex, and
be a scandalous Apostate to the whole race of Womankind.



Nay, not so, pray child, that would be the way to baulk the Devil
of his due, and it is pity he should be wrong'd of one single Member of
the Sex.



I find Mr Prim, your Lady does not require much instruction in
her speech: methinks her Dialect is very courtly of a sudden.



No, nor in any thing else relating to the Town, I'll pass my word
for't. I dare say Madam Prim here, knows as much of assignation, snapping,
fastning, loosening, and counterfetching, with all the numerous turns of
Jilting and Coquetry, as well as ever a Hackney Coach-plyer, Pit-padder,
or Gallery-galloper about the Town of London.



Death! is it so too?

(Stamping and biting his nails.







The danger is over, the danger is over; Ta, doll, di, da, da, ra.



How came you empty handed then? where's the Bride?



She's safe enough boy, you shall see her betwixt a pair of Sheets with
me presently, and if you lie near me, you shall hear me a thundering it a∣way,
a hammering out of young Hercules's, ye dog you.



Gad they'll be very wooden ones if they're like their Father.




But if you have got the Widow, Captain, pray what have you
done with the Merchant?



Ah poor Broakage, I cannot imagin what will become of the puppy,
it's fifty to one but he has already knotted his Garters, and is gaping about
for some convenient noosing place or other.



Here he comes e'faith, as merry as your Worship.




Now, now the Fight is done; Ta, di, doll, da, ra, da. The Wi∣dow•s
mine own, faith boys. Now, Mr Captain, you may march about your
business as soon as you please, ha, ha, ha.



Why what•s the fellow distracted, ye Nehemian Ninnyhammer you,
I say I have married the Widow.



Why ye Belzebubbian Blunderbus ye, I say I have married the Widow▪



You are both very confident of the matter, methinks, be it how it
will, it is time for me to look after my own Match: but to prevent disputes
in my case, you shall see me enter with my Bride in my hand I•ll warrant
ye.




No quarrelling, pray Gentlemen, since you have both married the
Widow, why should you fall out about the matter?



What sayst thou, Jeronimo? Peace or War, the Olive branch or the
Bilboa Blade?



Why faith Captain, let's have a Truce at the least, since we have both
courted her in amity, and married her in amity, e'•e let us both keep her
in amity Here comes the Lady, pray let her decide the business.




Madam, here is a great Controversie, which of these two Gentle∣men
does your Ladyship design to own for a Husband?



To deal plainly with you, it's scarce in my power to tell; they were
both so urgent for privacy, that having neither light to discern, nor speak∣ing
loud enough to distinguish a voice, all that I know is, that a Husband
I have; but which of these two Gentlemen 'tis 



'Tis me, by Jerico.



By Jerico, ye sneaking Whores-bird. Tis me by. Jove, Madam, and
all the rest of the thundring powers above.



That will soon be decided by the contents of this little Ceremonial
Implement.




Pray then let that little Ceremonial Implement, as you call it, clear
this matter in dispute.



It shall so, Sir, I'll read the Motto, then let the Gentleman from
whose hands I reeeiv•d it, claim me for his own lawful Spouse till death does
us part. (Reads.) The Widow's my own, Flesh, Blood, and Bone.



E'gad so she is, and accordingly I'll take possession.



Why what the Devil then 〈◊〉 of mine, ha?



That, good Captain, you shall know presently. Nibs, read the
poesy of your Ring.



(Reads) I swear by my Courage, I'll rummage your Stowage.



Hell, Blood, and Furies, thy Stowage! why what a pox shall I get
by that, ha?







Your Servant, sweet Captain, indeed you promis'd I should be a
Captains Lady, but I did not think you were so kind to design me for your
self, good Captain Come, Sir, don't be discouraged, I•ll undertake to
  46
do those good offices for you with your General, that shall make you
bownce forward in preferment at a strange rate.



Like enough, faith Nibs, your bowncing in the business may do
much. A nights service for a General in the Trenches, will do more for
the Captain•s advancement, than his own service in Siege Trenches all his
life time▪ But here comes a couple hand in hand that ha•e made sure work.
 And here comes ano••er couple, tho the
Lady at present seems to carry it a little too shy for a Wife





I have •old you, Madam, how I came to discover it, and know∣ing
what usage you have met withal, I did believe my self bound in justice
to secure it. Here tis for you, (Gives her the Trunk.) Its value I know not.
If you think my concern for your Interest merits a good esteem for you, I
shall look upon my self over-paid.



I am not, Sir, to be brib'd into an esteem; but here comes my Fa∣ther,
to whom I suppose it may properly belong, I shall therefore take care
to restore it.





Here is something, Sir, which this Gentleman, Sir Bellamour Blunt,
would willingly f•rce upon me, knowing that 'tis my duty to acquaint you
with what offers are made me, I humbly remit it into your hands.




(Taking the Trunk) Ha! is it so? Well Child, this I shall take
care on, and if you think good to make the Gentleman any acknowledge∣ment
for his piece of service, pray do it with your person, if Sir Bellamour
will accept of you without the Casket.




Most willingly, Sir Wealthy.



Then I must blushing own, that my inclinations suits with my Fa∣thers
commands; and my only regret is, that so deserving a Gentleman as
I believe Sir Bellamour to be, should meet with so poor a bargain.




Madam, I love you, and the possessing the object belov'd, is, I
think, the greatest treasure that this world affords.





Here's strange coupling, my Lord, of a sudden; your Virgin too has
given you the slip, e'faith, and tho not Parson-fetter'd, yet she ha• fairly
surrenderd herself in order to it.




Ay! say you so? then it must be so.

Knocking without, Doll goes off, and immediately returns with a Letter.


Here's a Letter directed to Mr Nickycrack, to be delivered with all
the speed imaginable.



I guess from whence it comes; but be the Contents what they will
it comes too late for prevention. (Looking in the Letter.) O miserable, misera∣ble
news I protest! for my part I han't power to read it.



(Taking the Letter.) Let me see it, I•ll read it read it out contain
what it will. (Reads,
 Sir, as soon as possibly I could get my full intelligence
I have sent you this, to give you an account, that Captain Bownceby, as you
call him, is no Captain, but a blustering Subaltern Officer that was casheer•d
for •owardice



Blood and Fire-balls! Furies and Fugacies.




Ha, ha, ha, alas poor Nibs! you are a Captains Lady, forsooth, and
have married a man of Honour, ha, ha, ha.



But to proceed (Reads.) As for Mr Broakage, he is no Merchant,
but has been employed by the Jews to drive some rooking bargains upon the
  47Change, where he is at present so far out of Credit, that is apprehended, I be∣lieve
his ears must attone for his former practices.





A curse upon his Plodship!



Why what out of countenance, Mr Broakage, why it is but moving
into one of your foreign Plantations man, hah?



Come chear up, Mr Broakage, to tell ye truth my circumstances are
as bad as yours can be, and since we have trickt one another, there's no re∣medy
now, but to rest satisfied, and lay our heads together, how we may
sham old Creditors, collogue in with new ones, make a •earing figure, and
so trick all the world besides



I hope, my Lord, I have no ways incurr'd your Lordships displea∣sure,
by taking possession of a Relict of your Lordships.




What my Country Pug married, ha?



Your Country Pug knows as much of the Town as another body;
and tho by my Country pretensions, I have made shift to ••ll your Lordship
out of a Settlement, yet I do not question but I shall make as just a Wife
to Mr Nickycrack here, as any sits at my Lady Mayoress•s Table, at a Lord
Mayors Feast.



That I believe you may, Madam, and hold on dealing with the
Court into the bargain.




Ha! since you are so pert, Mrs Minx, I can satisfie you that your
Settlement is not worth one farthing, it's drawn upon an Estate that I can
make no Title to.



O fie! I hope not so, my Lord, that can never be acted like a man of
Honour.




But it can be acted like a State•man tho, and that's my preten∣sions,
Sir.




Now good people, give a Mad man leave to speak: I have at length
observed, that for the procuring of this Devil of Wealth we stick at no Base∣ness,
and the possessing it does generally serve to foment our Villanies. I
will therefore before all these witnesses voluntarily part with my greatest
store, and put it into the hands of a Gentleman, that if I mistake not, is
Master of such vertuous inclinations, that will direct him in the right use of
it. Here, Sir Bellamour, (Gives him the Trunk) let what's in here
serve to guild Matrimony, and make the bitter dose of woman go down the
better.



Then Joy to my old friend, Sir Bellamour Blunt, and to his beautiful
Ophelia. If there can be such a thing as Felicity in a married state, it must
certainly be found in such a well match'd pair as these.



As far as I find, here is every body well match'd.




Come then, let us grace these solemnities with a Dance: but
the next Virginity Game I undertake, shall be play'd with more politick
Caution, I'll pawn my Honour for't.




Now Gentlemen, let each man to bed with his own Wife.
And however most of us 
May branded seem, for being old offenders,
In feats of Love let none be bare pretenders.


