



THE waining moon has set behind the hill,
And the faint twilight of the morning seems
To wander o'er the East. The storms that long
Have shook the desart, now are pass'd away,
And Altay's stream retards the war no more;
Here Zingis forms the Nirons of the west;
And royal Aunac on the farther shore
Marshals the Naimans, and demands his throne.





The emperor of Tartary commands
Thy presence, Cubla. 



Zingis should have cloath'd
His haughty message in less odious terms.
Does he presume to hope that I will join
His rebel sword against his antient lord?
Tho' near ally'd to Zingis tho' I own
His parts unequal'd his desert in arms 
Nevian, my soul approves not of the means
By which he seiz'd the scepter of the East;
And drove great Aunac from the Tartar throne.



'Tis less a vassal's duty to approve
Than to obey his sovereign's high commands.



A vassal! By that honor which descends
From a long line of ancestors to Cubla,
My soul rejects the thought. What tho' my tribe
In Aunac's wide dominions form'd a state,
And my brave fathers listen'd to the voice
That issu'd from the throne, and rose in arms
When war was in the field; shall I become
The property of treason be transferr'd
The mean appendage of a crown usurp'd?



Beware of treason Cubla, can thy tribe,
Bold as thou art, and confident in war,
Contend with him who rules the Eastern world?
Zingis is king and now that homage claims
Which thou didst pay to the imperial throne. 



Presumptuous man! does he prescribe to Cubla,
Or talk of homage! he who broke all ties
That bind the faith of subjects to their kings!
Whence is his right deriv'd?



He has been wrong'd 



Wrong'd didst thou say? what wrongs can justify
His usurpation. Should the world permit
Private ambition thus to seize on crowns,
Each daring villain that dispises life
Would be the king or tyrant of mankind.



Rashly thou dost condemn. Does Cubla know
The Cause and progress of this bloody war?



From the chill bosom of the stormy north,
From Corea's distant clime, where I have long
Employ'd my sword against my country's foes;
Last night arriv'd amidst domestic broils,
I know not aught but that my king's dethron'd.



The prince of Soigara the bold Zemouca,
Was the first mover of this civil war.
He, jealous of the fame and deeds of Zingis,
And that high confidence his rival held
With Aunac to the royal ear convey'd
Malicious falshoods, and intended treason.
At length the monarch list'ning to his voice,
Divested Zingis of his high command.
The chief retired, and darkly pass'd along
To his own native tribe the hardy Nirons 
They thought him wrong'd they started to their arms,
Determin'd to defend him from his foes. 
Zemouca came his host was roll'd away.
The king advanc'd; in Tangut's bloody field,
The valiant Zingis triumph'd o'er his lord.
Amidst his ruin'd armies in the fight
The son of Aunac, graceful Zangon, fell;
Whilst o'er his mangl'd corse his father fled,
And left his capital and throne to Zingis.



Zemouca was to blame. 'Twas dangerous
To drive a hero to the last extreme.
The very coward, when bereft of hope,
Turns on the lifted sword that threatens death.
But now let Zingis grant his sovereign peace,
And give the nations back to Aunac's sway;
Fame will applaud the deed. He hopes in vain


The aid of Cubla to support his crimes:
But since my sister was his favourite spouse,
And gave to him a son the princely Timur;
For Timur's sake I will not join his foes.



'Tis not enough. Inflexible severe,
Tenacious of his power, and, like a god,
Decisive in his councils he declares
Himself the foe of temporizing friends.
Consult thy safety. Know, the Naiman prince
Betrays his sovereign, and sollicits peace.



Betrays the king to Zingis! Tell your lord,
Should he imbrue his hand in Aunac's blood,
Cubla must be his foe. My safety rests
Upon my sword. This day I would confer
With Zingis quickly I will join his camp.
Haste, and convey this answer to your chief.



It grieves me to behold my former friend
Thus rushing headlong into certain ruin.
Cubla, let me conjure thee guard thy words,
And talk not thus of Zingis. He is stern. 
I'll bear a milder answer to the king.





Hail, prince of Eluth!







Straight from the tents of Zingis 




Already Cubla's mind. Has Zena's sword,
With fortune, turn'd against his antient king?



Blame not thy friend, tho' the event of war
Hath made me vassal to successful Zingis;
My soul is faithful to unhappy Aunac.
I mean to serve him.



Darken'd is his fate 



Tho' few his friends since fortune left his side,
Tho' scarce his strength his armour can sustain,
Still unsubdu'd in soul, to Altay's banks
He leads the poor remains of former fields,
And strives to raise his hoary head above
The cloud of his misfortunes. On thy aid
He rests his latter hopes.




Betrays his king. 



That Cubla may prevent 



Explain thy words. 




His aged king Nay more, will raise him high, 


Again restore him to the Tartar throne.
He plans a daring purpose in his soul.
He near this place is striding thro' the night,
Like the dark genius of devoted Zingis.
'Tis thine to point his thunder to the mark,
And rouse dishonour'd Timur. 




Were Timur's backward steps beheld in war?
Did Timur fly?



Untarnish'd is his fame.



Whence, then, is this unmeritted disgrace,
That hangs so darkly on my sister's son?



When with his ruin'd armies Aunac fled
From Tangut's bloody field, young Timur press'd
Upon the rear and seiz'd the hapless king,
As faint and wounded by a brook he lay,
His grey head leaning on his daughter's breast,
His only child, the beautiful Ovisa.
The hero saw he pitied, and he lov'd 
Brought the fair captive to the Niron camp,
But gave her father's freedom to her tears;
She in return bestow'd on him her heart.
For this, fierce Zingis from his presence drove
His generous son. The exil'd Aunac heard
Of his fair daughter's love her choice approv'd,
And, by an embassy, propos'd to yield
The bright Ovisa to young Timur's arms;
To name him heir of Tartary should Zingis
Consent to end, with peace, this civil war.



Yet still the tyrant keeps his sword unsheath'd. 



He does nay more to-morrow Octar comes,
His favorite son, tho' by a second bed,
To wed the weeping captive to derive
From her a title to the Tartar throne.
But e'er to-morrow should'st thou join thy sword
To bold Zemouca Aunac still might reign,
And name young Timur heir to all his realms.



But what intends Zemouca?




To cross the Altay when the night returns,
With terrible assault to rush on Zingis
Amidst his armies. By a great exploit
To win the East, or lose his noble life.
He sent me hither bade me to entreat
His sister's husband his own former friend 
If yet the memory of what Aunac was 
If pity for a failing line of kings,
Who rul'd mankind with justice, touch thy breast 



Go bid the chief approach. This great design
Becomes the spirit of the bold Zemouca.

Th' injustice done to Timur the disgrace
Thrown on my line the partial favor shown
To Octar, sit not easy on my mind.
The voice of Aunac too the dying voice


Of ruin'd Majesty is ecchoing here. 
I will support him.
Enter MILA.
Partner of my life!
What anxious cares send Mila from her tent,
At this dull hour of darkness, when the world
Sleeps in the skirts of the retiring night?



Why didst thou leave me, Cubla? Is there aught
Unfriendly from the Niron?







To meditate alone, bespeaks a mind
Not well at ease, let Mila share the grief
That labours in thy bosom.




I know no cause of grief. Determined minds
Brood not upon misfortunes; they forget
The accidents of life. When this base world
Shall throw disgrace upon them, forth they rush,
Swift as the lightning's flash that wings the storm,
And right themselves.



Has Zena then inform'd 



Yes, Mila, all; I know how Cubla stands
With that presumptuous man. He has disgrac'd
Me, in my nephew Timur, yet expects
My aid in battle.



He commands it, Cubla,
Nay threatens disobedience with those frowns,
That lords assume to vassals, when they fail
In duty to the throne. This hour, Ovisa,
By private message, to my ears conveyed
His gloomy purpose.



What can he intend?



To treat thee as a foe, shouldst thou delay
to pass beneath his standard with the morn.
This tedious march from Corea's distant realms,
He construes into treason; but the cause
Lies in his policy, thou art the lord
Of Eluth's warlike tribe. A chief of pow'r,
And dang'rous in the state. The king himself,
The all-subduing Zingis, mark'd the path
Which leads to empire, and he fears that Cubla
May do with him, what he has done to Aunac.



I am beset with perils, yet this state
Suits well the active tenor of my soul,
Which loves to dwell in storms. I have resolv'd
To stretch my hand to Aunac, and support
That ruin of a king. (Noise within.) But hark! what noise
Swells in the camp of Zingis? Go, my love 
Regain the tent I must explore the cause
From whence this tumult rose. By dawn of day


I'll meet thy brother to concert the plan
Of deeds more daring, than were e'er atchiev'd.





'Tis done, but still my fears 




My sister's voice! 



My lord Zemouca, welcome to my soul!
O chief of the Soigara! from what a world
Of troubles art thou come! 



Yes I have strove
With some disasters, Mila, since the Niron
Led his rebellious tribe to Tangut's field,
And triumph'd o'er his lord. Had loyalty
Been less my choice Had ease been more my care,
Than self-approving honor, and that pride
Which lov'd to stand alone, when Tartary
Fell in the stream of conquest to a chief,
I once scarce own'd my equal, I might use
The day to visit Mila, and have thrown
This cloud, I borrow, from the night, away.



How fares it with the king?



Not such his state,
As when in Ordu-bâla's splendid halls
He rul'd the nations On the farther side


of Altay's foaming course, my tribe surrounds
The king of Tartars narrow is the camp
Of him, who covered Asia with his hosts!
But still this sun which moves behind a storm,
May issue forth, and shew his evening beams,
Before he sets in night.




Prevail in battle 



May heaven's lightning blast
His armies and himself. Perfidious man!
He treats with Zingis.



Tartary is lost 
The house of Aunac trembles to its base,
And in its ruins will involve Zemouca.
Why dost thou stand, against a world in arms,
With unavailing valor?




Ere next the night shall from these fields retire,
Aunac shall reign o'er Asia. I have form'd
A plot with Zena, in the Niron camp.
Cubia will join us with his warlike tribe.
At the dead midnight hour, we mean to rush
On Zingis in his tent.



To rush on Zingis!
The deed is desperate.



We claim thine aid
To forward our design. To thee is known
The love of Timur, and his late disgrace
For the escape of Aunac. Thro' their tribes
The Nirons murmur for their gallant prince
Who led them often to the fields of fame.
Go to Ovisa: let her arm the son
Of haughty Zingis in her father's cause.
Thus shall she wrest from tyranny the world,
And rule the nations with the man she loves.



And does my brother then resign Ovisa?



No Mila, no. She beams upon me still,
Thro' all this tempest which involves my soul.
The Queen of Asia! But I must be calm,
The softer passions suit not with a state
So desperate as mine. Zemouca first
Must stretch his hand to Zingis, the event
May lead thy brother to his soul's desire.
Why, Mila, why in tears?



I'll bear, my lord,
Thy message to Ovisa. But my mind
Forbodes, I never shall behold thee more.



That heaven alone can tell my sister stay! 
Perhaps thou'lt ne'er behold me, and thy lord
Treads too a dangerous path. Let not our foes
In thee extend their triumph to our dust,





It is thy thy brother's gift. Our house
Was ne'er dishonour'd.



Son of daring Tangor!
Our house was ne'er dishonoured, nor shall Mila
Stain the unclouded glories of her line.
I know the purpose of this present Here


This friend shall rest. I'll call it to my aid
When thou canst not defend me from my foes.



CUBLA entering with CAREDI.


Caredi, hasten. Call the chiefs to arms,
Rouse my brave Eluths I will join them straight.
I like not this confusion, this uproar,
That Zingis raises round him in his camp,
He may perhaps intend My lord Zemouca,


How fares it with my brother and my friend;
I fear our zeal for aged Aunac's cause
Shall not avail.



Has Cubla learn'd from whence
This tumult rose?



All night the high divan
Sat in the tent of Zingis, and gave ear
To proffered terms, from Naima's perjur'd prince.
'Tis said they were axcepted. But the voice


Of war resounds thro' all the Niron camp.
The nations start, with ardor, to their arms;
Some daring enterprize is formed by Zingis,
Against deserted Aunac.



Fear not that 
Tho' Zingis loves to move thro' bloody fields,
He tries not force, where policy avails.
If Naima promis'd, with her sovereign's blood,
To end this contest, Zingis will delay
To cross the Altay. When the night descends,
I will remove the king, at once prevent
The Naiman's treachery, and rid the world
Of the usurper.



But that eagle sits
Too watchful on his rock, we must not trust
Much to the foes neglect, for Zingis owes
To fortune less his greatness, than to skill
In war's extensive art. We are too few
To reach him, thro' his armies; we must raise
Some other swords to penetrate those lines
The Niron draws around him.




Depends not on our numbers. We command
A hardy race, the Tartars of the north,
Whose souls partake the nature of the storms,
That rush across their climate. They delight
In the abrupt decision of the sword,
And love a deed of danger. Nor on them
Rest all our hopes: the fair Ovisa arms
Dishonour'd Timur in her father's cause.


His late disgrace, ambition, love, revenge,
Shall urge him on; and should the chief prefer
A tame submission to the will of Zingis,
To Aunac's daughter, and the Tartar throne,
Our glory must be greater, and our fame
Arise proportion'd to the perils round us.



Friend of the hapless Aunac! In thy voice
Speaks forth the hero, and thy noble fire
Falls on my soul, and kindles it to flame.
Ere next the light which now bursts from the East,
Shall gleam on Altay's streams, the Tartar tribes
Shall own another lord. Myself will rouse
The lion Timur; if that spirit dwells
In him, which animates th' Eluthian line,
Dishonour sits not lightly on his mind.
But where, Zemouca, shall my tribe receive
The king to night?



Upon that narrow point,
Thou seest a lonely oak. The morning star
Looks thro' its wav'ring branches, there the rock
Stretching into the Altay, breaks the stream,
And forms a peaceful eddy. In that place
Shall Aunac land, when the wan moon descends
Behind the western hills.




To-day the court of Zingis, and disguise
For once, a soul that scorns to hide its hate.
I will exhibit every mark of zeal,


To blot suspicion from his jealous mind,
And turn the keeness of his eye from Cubla.
But leave this camp, the dawn already gleams
Along the field. Go, in that show'r retire,
That darkly rushes o'er the Altay's course.





Whilst this blunt warrior, void of all design,
Can thus encounter perils unconcern'd,
Shall I, whose eye is fix'd upon a crown,
And on the brightest star that ever rose
Upon the eastern world, the fair Ovisa 
Shall I shrink back? Shall I encourage doubt
To shake my resolution? Hence away 
All further fear of death; already he
Hath stalk'd around me in each hideous form. 
But yet this stubborness of heart this pride,
Which bore me up against this prosperous man,
Hath quite fatigued my soul. I'll stray no more
Thro' Asia, every foe I raise to Zingis,
He adds unto his vassals. On this plot
I rest my latter hopes, and should I fail,
I'll wrap me in my courage and retire
From this base world amidst the storms I raise.









IF e're the spirit of a warrior slain,
Journey'd in storms across the troubled sky:
Last night, my brother Zangon pass'd this place,
And call'd Ovisa hence. The voice was deep,
As when high Arol, shaking all his woods,
Speaks to the passing thunder. Thro' my soul
A pleasing horror runs; perhaps not long
Ovisa tarries here. The silent tomb
Is not the house of sorrow. Airy form
Of him who is no more! Where dost thou dwell?
Rejoicest thou on golden-skirted clouds?
Or is thy murmur in the hollow wind?
Where ere thou art, mine ear with awful joy,
Shall listen to thy voice! Descend with night,
If thou must shun the day. O stray not far
From the remains of Aunac's failing line.




Hail bright Sultana! let a faithful friend,


Thus pay the homage which she owes a race
Who rul'd so long nations.




Belov'd companion of my better days!


Why dost thou, at this melancholly hour,
Intrude upon the sorrows of Ovisa?



To chace the cloud that hangs upon thy soul,
I come the messenger of Aunac's friends.
They sent me to disclose 



I know it all.
Octar is come!



Far other news I bring.
Are we alone?



From mortal ears remov'd.



The sate of royal Aunac now depends
Upon Ovisa. Should she lend her aid,
The king might reign. 



Then he already sits
Upon the Tartar throne. Why dost thou think
So poorly of Ovisa? Haste, explain
This mystery, for doubts begin to blast
Then sudden joy that lighten'd o'er my soul.



A plot is forming in the Niron camp,
By Omrahs of renown, whom Cubla joins
With all his Eluths. By the midnight hour,
The king, thy father, with Zemouca, comes
To head the bold conspiracy, and rush
On Zingis 'midst his armies.




Of desp'rate daring. Didst thou say to night?
Assist them heaven! But what avails the aid
Of desolate Ovisa!




Already hold the balance of the East.
Ten thousand swords, obedient to thy call,
May be unsheath'd for Aunac. In this camp
The Tartars murmur thro' their martial lines,
For the disgrace of Timur. Arm the prince
Against his father.



Ha! I'll hear no more 
To recommend a crime my soul abhors,
To make a parricide of him I love,
Suits not the feelings of Ovisa's mind.
By private stratagem, by open war,
By any means, let cruel Zingis fall;
But let him fall by foes The fame of Timur
Must not be tarnish'd; nor shall I advise
A deed of such complexion. Mila, know
I may be wretched but must not be base.



Then let Ovisa triumph in a heart
That feels for Nirons. Did the cruel race
Once melt at the misfortunes of her house,
Or spare the line that rul'd the eastern world?
By him thy brother fell By him the throne
Of Aunac was usurp'd. Thy father driven,


A feeble exile thro' the Tartar tribes,
Thyself a captive. But Ovisa feels! 
Heavens! Is it any crime to rid the world
Of him, who riots in the blood of nations,
And makes a pastime of dethroning kings?
His guilt Ovisa 



It is more than common;
And heaven some signal vengeance has prepar'd
For him who widows Asia with his sword:
But let us not, in punishing, give birth,
To greater crimes than his.




Thou know'st not half the horrors of thy state.
To day dishonour'd Timur must retire,
A lonely exile from the Niron camp.
Tomorrow Octor comes with brutal lust,
To force thee to his arms. To night thy father 







Must welter in his blood.
The price is fix'd for Aunac's sacred head,
A peace to Naima. Soon as night returns,
Perfidious Tajan will surround the king.



No more I know the rest misfortunes crowd
Too much upon me. What should I resolve,
Hemm'd in on every side? I'll urge the prince,
And yet he must abhor me.




As if by heaven directed to our aid.
This is the time. Remember thy condition.





He comes. With undiminish'd pomp he moves
Behind his cloud As when the sun thro' mist
Rolls on his faded orb. He greater seems,
Tho' lost to half his beams. And shall I plunge
This god in parricide?




I did resolve 
But cannot speak the tumult of my soul. 
Queen of the East!



That title ill becomes
A state like mine. This instant leave me, Timur,
If thou regard'st thy peace.




Where dwells the peace of Timur, but with her
Who reigns within his soul?



Have we not prince 
The house of Aunac have we not involv'd
Thee in misfortunes? Pinion'd down thy fame
That spread to heaven? Cover'd thee with shame?
And thrown disgrace upon the first of men.
We made thee no return, for kings dethron'd.


No savuors can bestow. Ovisa gave,
'Twas all she had to give her heart to Timur.



'Twas all that Timur wish'd, thou matchless maid 
But whence is this distress this sudden grief
That labors in thy bosom? Tell me all;
My soul is up in arms against those ills
That press upon thee.



Timur would not chuse
To hate Ovisa.







Then let him not
Enquire into her griefs. She may propose
A dreadful task. O leave me to myself,
My soul is young in mischief and demands
Some time to harden ere it can resolve
On what my state requires.



Speak but the word,
Thou bright divinity that rul'st my soul;
And then I will what will not Timur do?
I will I know not what but something more
Than ever mortal did.



Take heed young prince!
Be not too rash to promise Timur's word
Is like a god's, irrevocably fix'd: 
But were my suit once known, 'twere criminal


Not to refuse it. Daring son of Zingis! 
I know thy lion-heart delights in perils,
When honor leads thee to her bloody fields,
Yet what I would propose would throw a damp
On all thy courage. In Ovisa's cause
There's more than danger Guilt. Thou shrinkest back.
I thought it would offend. My soul approves
The noble horror that invades his mind.
I leave him to his virtue.





Stay by heavens! 
Thou must not thus depart. Ovisa speak,
Speak all thy wishes and they shall be done. 
Propose the peril. Guilt can never dwell
In such a cause as thine.



Then know, my state,
Uncommon in its horrors, now demands
The sword of Timur. Zingis shuts the door
Of hope against thee. Octar comes to-morrow 
What shall I do?



I will defend 




Who shall ward off the hand of death from Aunac?
To-night he falls. The cruel Zingis gives
A peace to Naima, for her sovereign's head.
A midst the ruins of a falling line
Ovisa stands alone.



I know thy soul,
And quickly will resolve. 




Recall the thought, and be thyself again.
Ovisa loves thy virtues, not thy crimes,
And should'st thou stain thine honor, who can tell
What she would think of thee?





The light is gone
And left me darken'd, on a stormy sea
Of various passions toss'd. What should I do?
To hide me in the cloud of my disgrace,
And leave Ovisa and the world to Octar;
Death dwells upon the thought. But to ascend
A throne, besmear'd with blood, a father's blood,
And reign a horrid parricide in Asia,
Suits not a soul like mine. 




While others watch the motions of the foe,
Marshal their tribes, or furbish up their steel
For battle. Timur, whiles his time away
Before the shrine of beauty. Blush, young man,
These are not arts in which our race excell'd,
Nor these the means by which they rose to fame.



Is Cubla, like the world, whose censure falls
Not on the guilty, but unfortunate?


As if success could recommend each crime,
We only call the prosperous villain great. 
Let Cubla judge of Timur, by himself,
By the high spirit, which descends to both
From Eluth's line of kings; and he may know
Disgrace, unmerited, can never damp
The vigour of my soul.



Yet still thou bear'st,
With tameness, which but ill becomes our race,
This weight of infamy, by Zingis, thrown
Upon thee, in his wrath.




Thro' honor and his duty, he might raise
A flame, the billowy Caspian shou'd not quench.
But tho' my soul, undaunted in the field,
Swells at the growth of danger and demands
More than my share of battle; there are things
Which make me shudder, Cubla, and betray
A woman's weakness. Dark conspiracies,
Frauds cover'd o'er with art those devious paths,
That lead the villains of the world to power,
Please not the open spirit of my mind.
I hate pre-eminence that springs from guilt,
And never, but thro' honor, would be great.



Timur farewel. A man that can submit
To such indignities, as thou hast borne,
Deserves not my attention. Hence away 
Involve thee in obscurity. It suits
The tame morality of Timur's mind.


Go leave the throne to Octar To his arms
Give up Ovisa.



Ha! that strikes me home.
Say, what dost thou advise?



To draw thy sword
Against thy father Zingis that proud man 
That tyrant of the East. Thou startest, Timur,
His crimes, indeed, may shock a soul like thine. 
He, who without remorse, has trod on kings,
Has broke all sacred ties that bind mankind 
Has ruin'd nations to be reckon'd great,
And is unjust, not only to his foes,
But to his son. 



My heart with horror shrinks
From such a deed. 



So feels the feeble mind,
That trembles at the thought of arduous deeds,
And would impose its fears upon the world,
As the effects of virtue. Go weak boy,
I did advise thee. Nay I dare do more.
Go, tell thy father, Cubla is his foe:
This very night, in concert with his friends,
He means to prove it; but his friends are such
As shudder not at danger.




My courage, should prepare to rest his hand
Upon his sword. No mortal man but Cubla


Durst thus. But I'm too warm. Thou said'st to night 
My soul is dark, and secret as the tomb.
Unfold thy purpose.



Yes to night, I meant,
But thy officious virtue interferes,
To raise thee high in Asia. To thy arms
To give Ovisa Place thee next to him,
Who ought to rule the East. To make thee heir
To Aunac's vast dominions. Dost thou still
Harbour a doubt? What darkness travels o'er
Thy thoughtful features? Is the fair Ovisa
Indifferent to Timur?








Time is on the wing.
We must resolve. But ruin'd are my hopes!
There Nevian comes, and he must not perceive
That we confer. Long practis'd in the arts
Of policy, and guile, from every word
And motion of the eye, he draws conclusions.
I'll soon return.






Hail! gallant son of Zingis!
I come not sobbing like thy other friends,
With sad condolance and a woeful face,
To teaze thee with my pity. No, I bring
Thy pardon, Timur.



Pardon, didst thou say?



Yes, full forgiveness from the king thy father.
I thought it would surprize. 



It does indeed. 



I did it all inexorable long
On my address, the lord of nations frown'd,
But still I urg'd. At length he heard my suit,
And bade me call young Timur to his presence.
A fair occasion offers to retrieve
The honour thou hast lost thy injur'd fame.
He now restores thee to thy former rank,
And sends thee forth, with half his warlike tribes,
To give the final blow to exil'd Aunac.
The troops, already marshal'd in the camp,
With shouts await thy orders.



Let them shout 
Timur shall wait his time.



What do I hear?
Is this th' impetuous Timur? He whose soul
Rush'd on before him to the fields of fame?
And does he hesitate?




Least in my rage 



What means the son of Zingis?


This is the very frenzy of the mind.
I am the friend of Timur.








His late disgrace disturbs
His reason. When the angry lion roars,
There is no safety near him. To the tribes
I'll bear the welcome news of thy return.





Was ever mind so agitated, torn
With such contending passions, as assail
At once the soul of Timur? To reject
The proffer'd service, puts immediate end
To all my hopes. The king can not escape 
Should I decline, another foe will rise
Against ill fated Aunac. Here she comes!
Distraction let me fly. She bade me shield
Her ruin'd father, from the hand of death;
And I, in my humanity, assume
The office of his murderer.





Is then the presence of the lost Ovisa
Hateful to Timur? Prince, I do not come
To make thee deviate from the splendid path
Thy soul delights to follow.








That, from thy beauties, beams upon thy soul. 
Thou must not leave me. But thou must away 
Denounce thy curses on me. In thy words
Of softness dwells unutterable pain.
O turn from Timur these indulgent eyes,
That shed soft pity, from their lucid orbs 
For I do not deserve it. False to thee 
False to my word A traitor to my love 
Thy father's murderer.



What means the prince,
He is not dead?



But he must die Ovisa,
And by these hands. The cruel Zingis grants
My pardon, and commands me to the war:
To lead the Nirons o'er the Altay's stream,
To rush upon thy father in his camp,
And end this contest, that inflames the world.


Hark! The impatient troops proclaim their joy
To see their prince restor'd, and shout for battle.
I come. Ovisa 



Timur, leave me. Go 
And, on the ruins of our falling race,
Rear to thyself a monument of fame.
Think not I seize thy skirts to keep thee here.
Think not I weep, these eyes are only dim
Think not I breath a sigh.




Feel all my pangs A moment of their woe
Might expiate the crimes of half a world.


But Nevian comes! I must away My love,
Canst thou forgive me. No Ovisa No 
Let not thy tenderness of soul extend
To such a wretch as Timur. Yet his fate
Is most to blame.



Then hear me son of Zingis!
As love cannot detain thee On my knees,
Once more, I beg an aged parents life.
O spare him, Timur; touch not his grey hairs,
Let him escape; for Zingis will not long
In Aunac have a rival to his power.
The king, my father, worn with grief and years,
Already hastens to the silent tomb.



By him that reigns above, he shall not die.





He's gone, and left me lonely to my woes. 
Hasten thy journey, sun and gracious night,
Receive me to the bosom of thy gloom.
The rustling wind, that whistles thro' thy trees,
The solemn, serious, melancholly notes
Of thy own bird, are music to mine ear,
And please the dreary horrors of my soul.
Enter MILA.
Mila, thy tears will flow in vain. My grief
Admits not of thy comfort.




Equal my wishes, soon the light of joy
Would brighten on thy forehead. But my voice
Must now be like the raven's to thine ear.
The van of Octar's army, from the hill,
Is seen to pour along in clouds of dust;
Edg'd round with gleaming arms, a chosen troop
On lightning hoofs come flying to the camp.
It must be he. 



Where shall I hide my head?
Timur where art thou? Call him to protect
The lost Ovisa Timur. He is gone!
But why should I complain? High heaven decree•

At once the fall of our devoted house;
Ovisa will not stay a feeble light,
Behind the sitting glories of her line.






ZINGIS and Attendants discovered on a Throne.
A Flourish of Trumpets.


GO, Nevian, issue forth our high decree
To all the princes, potentates and kings,
O'er whom the scepter of our power extends,
On the first morning of the ensuing year
To meet in Ordu-balâ's regal halls.
We mean to publish laws to rule mankind 
To bind the nations in one general chain
Of policy to mark, with strict regard,
The bounds of justice between man and man,
We call this council not that we require
Advice, but proofs of their allegiance due,
And prompt obedience to the will of Zingis.



The king shall be obey'd his high commands
Will be receiv'd thro' Tartary with awe,
And all its princes hasten to the throne.





Suida, prepare thyself. We send thee hence
To distant regions, near the rising sun 
To great Canbâla seat of Altun Chan,
Who stiles himself the monarch of Cathay. 
Make full demands for all his ravages


In these our kingdoms, when they shrunk away
From every bold invader's sword and groan'd
Beneath that worst of tyranny a race
Of timid ministers, and feeble kings.



Proud of the trust, and zealous to obey
The lord of nations, Suida stands prepar'd.





And thou, Jelizou, hasten to the west,
Where Mâhmud, the Charizmian, has confin'd
The Caspian, in the circle of his empire.
Tell him, while, as a son, he shall revere
Our pleasure, we will act a father's part.
That now it is our sovereign will the doors
Of commerce should be open'd with our realms.
Not less on means that civilize mankind
We rest our glory, than on fame in arms.
But, in the pride of hosts, should Mâhmud scorn
Our proffer'd friendship call him forth to war;
That he may see his kingdoms weeping blood
Beneath the sword of Zingis



Too well the pow'r of him who rules the east
Is known by Mâhmud, to reject his friendship.






Letters from Rizia, empress of the south,
To whom the sable Indian nations kneel,
With presents her ambassadors attend,
And long to greet the sovereign of the world.



They shall have audience. Say, what tidings bring
The messengers of Octar?




His standards high erected on the plain.
This morning his astrologers presag'd
Some dire misfortune threaten'd by the stars,
Which stops his progress. 



Should the stars presage,
And join their influence as they roll above
To aid the foes of Zingis he would trust
More to the prowess of a single arm
Than he should fear from them. But what of Timur?



We saw his warrior's covering Altay's course,
And Aunac's banners waving on the shore 
Soon the loud roar of war 





Victorious from the field. He brings in chains
A captive train. The aged monarch, Aunac,
Stood in the front of battle, till his lines
Grew thin by Timur's sword. A chosen band,
That fought around their king when all was lost,
Bore their unwilling sovereign from the field;
The fierce Sidasco, pressing on the rear,
Pursues his flight.



Did not the Naiman prince
Support the king, for whom he rose in arms?
He bore a specious cause upon his sword,
Yet shrunk from danger: so I knew him still
A dark, designing, and deceitful man,
Expert in policy, but cold in war.
These are not means to gain the terms he claims.
He knows us not a coward never finds
A friend in Zingis.
Enter TIMUR, with Prisoners.
Thou are welcome, Timur,
This strict obedience to our sovereign will,
Confirms thee in our favour. Such exploits
Become the son of Zingis. Who are these?
We want no captives thou art young in war. 
Ye bold, rebellious men, who did insult


Our pow'r with feeble hands who durst contemn
Repeated offers of our royal grace,
Which, thro' our vast dominions, were proclaim'd,
Must perish in your folly bear them hence,
And execute our judgment. 



It must not be. Let Timur intercede
For these unhappy men my word is pass'd
To save their lives my honor was engag'd
When they resign'd their unavailing swords.



Audacious boy no more didst thou presume
To pardon traitors? Know'st thou not that Zingis


Is sovereign here, and that he delegates
His pow'r to none? Say, when didst thou perceive
By art, by argument, by open force,
Our resolutions alter'd? hence, away,


And lead them to their fate.




Stand off, ye slaves! 
By heavens they shall not perish. Thus oppress'd,
I must forget that passiveness of soul 
My duty to a father with my blood
I will protect them.



Ha! thus to my face 
Dost thou not fear? Should Zingis sacrifice
This victim to his fury? Or begone 
I will not slay thee take thy captives hence,
I give them to thy pride. This insolence
Shall not unpunish'd go. Our steps to fame,
To the dominion of the eastern world,
Must not be thus retarded by a son,
Who, in his disobedience, throws disgrace
Upon the power of Zingis. From our presence
We must remove examples that suggest
Rebellion to our subjects. To the north
We send thee hence to-morrow to a clime
Tempestuous as the temper of thy soul.
In Tuba's forests, and those spacious vales
Where dark Selânga roars into the main;
Compel the haughty Tomats to obey:


The ocean only shall our empire bound.
Enter SIDASCO.
My bold Sidasco! 



Sovereign of the world!
The war is ended Aunac comes in chains.



Our faithful chief, to thee 
Enter OVISA suddenly, and kneels.
Who durst admit
The princess? Let the captain of our guards
This instant be arrested. Rise, Ovisa 
Why dost thou kneel? What wouldst have from Zingis?



If e'er thy heart was soften'd by distress,
If e'er thy soul rejoic'd in generous deeds,
O spare my father; let him die in peace 


Thou must not leave me, Zingis. O pronounce
The words of mercy. Aunac's strength has fail'd,
His friends forsook him; he is left alone,
A poor old man! No cause for fear remains.
The brave are never cruel they delight
To stretch their hand to raise a fallen foe,
To speak the words of comfort There he comes!
What, Timur, hast thou done? Is this thy faith,
Thy plighted faith to me? Like all thy race,
Art thou perfidious! Timur, 'twas not well
Thus to betray the poor, the lost Ovisa! 



Hear me, Ovisa, e'er thou shalt condemn.



Hear thee, false man! 
Enter AUNAC, in Chains.
Look there behold him there 
These are thy works the ruin thou hast made.
O Zingis! Zingis! wilt thou slay the king,
The king that lov'd thee cherish'd thee? alas!
The tyrant is inexorable. Thou
Alone who pitiest the distress'd Ovisa,
O king! O father! to thy friendly tomb
Receive thy daughter.



Welcome to my arms 
Thou lovely beam, that gild'st my parting hour!
My eyes are blest my wishes at an end.
These hairs have long been whiten'd o'er with years,
And my disasters bend me to the dust.
Why should I wish to live? to haunt this world
The ghost of what I was? But thou art young 
Yet, can I leave thee lonely midst thy foes?
Shall those who riot in thy father's blood
Derive from thee a title to his throne? 
Yet, what should I advise?



I know thy soul,
And have resolv'd Yes all the fated line
Shall fall at once, and leave the East to Zingis.


My heart, indignant, spurns this world away;
My rising spirit struggles to be free.



No more! Sidasco lead thy captive hence 



I would entreat but stern in his resolves;

He melts not at distress nor lends an ear
To those whom fortune left.




Plunge not in our misfortunes. In thy breast
Thy father's rigour dwells not. Brave, yet mild.
I had a son like thee, whose rising fame
Shone thro' the gloomy winter of my age.
But he is fallen, and of our royal house
She now remains alone. Ovisa, come 
Embrace thy father tho' my breast is cold
To all the world my spirit burns for thee.




It is too much Tho' ruin must ensue,
I will obey the impulse of my soul.






Why am I d'sobey'd! 



Omrah, lead on 
This presence is unworthy of a king 
We leave him to the horrors of his soul.
But we will not upbraid Yet know, we scorn
Thy utmost rage. For he who longs for death,


Like us, may smile at tyrants when they frown,
Ovisa, one embrace It is the last 



We must not part together let us die.



Conduct her to her tent.




This little boon this privilege of death?
Relentless tyrant know, thou shalt not long
Divide Ovisa from her fallen race.





Something like pity shakes my firm resolves,
And almost melts the iron heart of Zingis.
The king is old; yet may ambitious men
Hold forth a cause so specious whilst he lives,
Some dark conspiracies may rise around us.
But to imbrue our hands in Aunac's blood,
Would tarnish half the glories of our reign.
Enter TIMUR and an Attendant.
What wouldst thou, Timur? Go; thy looks bespeak
Thy purpose go while Zingis rules the world,
He rules himself is absolute in mind,
And none shall alter his determin'd will.





In vain he rages; Aunac has escap'd;
My chosen troop have rescu'd him from death,


And bear him far from danger. Haste away;


Inform Ovisa lest in her despair 
Tell her what Timur for her love has done 


But ruin follows. What shou'd I resolve?
My father's rage is deadly. Should I fly,
And bear Ovisa to the Caspian shores?
This sword is my inheritance the world
Is wide enough for conquest: other thrones
Will rise for her in Asia. 
Enter ZEMOUCA.
Who art thou,
That thus intrud'st upon me?




In Asia is Zemouca 




Why dost thou tarry? hence, away should Zingis
Hear of his mortal foe not half the East
Could save thee from his fury Leave this camp;
To thee it is the hungry lion's den.



In my prosperity I harbour'd not
A fear of death. Why should he now begin
To shew more dreadful to me, thro' this cloud
Which has involv'd my state? To thee I owe
My life in battle. Thou hast sav'd it here,
Among thy captives, at the risque of thine,
And I do mean to make thee some return.



I want it not. A generous action brings
Its own reward, a feeling of the soul
Of greater value, than aught thou canst give.
Zemouca leave me, there is danger here
To thee To Timur, should it once be known,
That he preserv'd the greatest foe of Zingis.



Time hurries on, and thou consider'st not,
That sorrow hastes apace. With morning comes
Thy brother Octar, Towards the stormy north
Thy troops file off already. Wilt thou leave
Ovisa and the empire?




To urge me on to parricide?




Thee, not to parricide but open war,
A foe invades thee, seizes on a throne,
By justice thine; nay, forces from thy arms,
The first of women. Timur has the pow'r
To right himself, yet passive in his soul
He in the tyrant still beholds the father.



Zemouca, thou presum'st on thy condition,
And therefore art so bold. I know from whence
This zeal arises, and behind thy words,
Perceive the gloomy workings of thy soul. 
I blame thee not, my father is thy foe,
And Timur is the rival of thy love,


Both then should perish. But thou know'st me not,
I am not made by nature for thy purpose,
I look thro' artful men, and hate deceit,
As I abhor the crimes thou dost suggest.




Curse on the virtues of this haughty boy,
They level my designs. I hop'd to rouze
To strife, the hateful family of Zingis,
And from the bosom of the storm to rush,
To seize Ovisa, and the Tartar throne.
But still some means are left.





Why dost thou loiter here, for Zingis knows
Of thy escape from death. From post to post
He rushes in his rage. (Flourish.) Away, he comes, 
Retire Zemouca, I will meet thee soon,
Beside the rock, that with its crooked pines,
Sounds to the passing Altay.




Why should I fly, Is Zingis more than man?
But yet this headlong fury this despair 
Suits not the brave; not he alone must die,
This mighty fabrick he has raised, shall fall,
And whelm his race in ruin.








Our mortal foe Zemouca from our rage,
To favour Aunac's flight, and in this war
To lengthen the misfortunes of the East,
Are crimes beyond our mercy. Haste Sidasco,

Pursue the king. Bold treason is awake,
Let all our guards be doubled, let our spies
Beset the tent of every prince and chief.
Call Timur hither, He must be secured.
Ovisa's beauty is the secret source
From whence these deeds of disobedience spring.
The cause must be remov'd. Let her be sent
Without delay, to Octar. Zena, thou
Conduct her hence. To thy command we give
The troops of Timur: lead them to the north.



The lord of Tartary shall be obeyed.




Have we not, Timur, with a father's care,
Rear'd thee to manhood? Have we not with pow'r
And princely dignities invested thee?
Have we impos'd restraint upon thy will?
Or enviously witheld thy steps from fame?
Yet thou hast these indulgences return'd
With disobedience, treachery, and treason.
Twice hast thou suffer'd Aunac to escape,


Once sav'd our greatest foe, retarding thus
Our course to glory; dost thou think such crimes
Can be forgiven thee?



Timur does not mean
To justify his conduct, or assign
The rigor of his father, as the cause
Of disobedience to his high commands.
But in my soul, some other passions dwell,
Than those that tend to desolate the world;
I feel for the distress'd. How could I see
Ovisa's father slain amidst her tears!
The king, who gave his daughter to my love,
With all his realms 



Dost thou presume to claim
The kingdoms conquer'd by the sword of Zingis?
Rebellious boy forbear. 




I claim not aught but her, the fair remains
Of the long line that rul'd the eastern world.



Thou shalt not shake thy father's firm resolves 
Know that our mind hath been divested long,
Of all those feeble feelings, that might stop
Our progress to dominion. On a plan,
Extensive as the object we pursue,
Is form'd our conduct, which nor perils sway,
Nor those soft passions, that are better nam'd
The frailties, than the virtues of a king.


Zena, to-night, conduct her hence, thy rout
Lies thro' the camp of Octar.




There's danger in the service. Touch her not,
Should I complain, a tempest might arise,
Which would involve in ruin and in death,
The host of Zingis.



Ha! he utters treason, 
Seize him. 



The man who dares approach me first,
Shall perish in his insolence. This sword,
Which Zingis gave, shall nver be resign'd,
To other hands than his.

You now may come
And execute the orders of the king.




Forbear, the race of Ogus, first of men,
Were ne'er disgrac'd with fetters, like their souls,
Their bodies still were free. Take back thy sword,
A soldier's spirit dwells upon his arms.
Know, Timur, tho' thy crimes excite our rage,
We'll sooner take away the life we gave,
Than break the manly vigor of thy soul.
But hope not our forgiveness. Leave this camp,
The desart is before thee. Should the sun
Rise on thee here, with death, and what is worse,
With infamy we punish thy delay.





Tamuzin, hasten to th' Eluthian lines,
Bid Cubla meet me at the water-fall,
Soon as the sun shall hide his splendid orb
Behind the hills. 'Tis done, the storm is o'er,

But the high heaving deep unsettled round,
Wears still a face of ruin. Should Ovisa
Consent to share my fate, I scarce could call
My father cruel. See, the princess comes!
She comes! and glads my soul, as when by night,
The weary traveller sees a friendly beam
To light him o'er the desart.





Receive me, Timur, Why did I offend,
I knew not all thy nobleness of soul.
Forgive the error of a mind oppress'd
With more than common ills; to thee I owe
My father's life.



Thy tears more powerful were,
Than the commands of him who rules the East.



Dark in his wrath, thy father pass'd from hence.



And all his rage is turn'd against his son.
In me Ovisa sees a banish'd man,
This night I quit this camp.




Involv'd in the misfortunes of our house,
Thy splendid glories set. It must not be, 
Timur shall not be ruin'd. Go, inform
The tyrant, that his rigor has prevailed:
I will compleat the purpose of his soul,
And give my hand to Octar.




Was it Ovisa spoke!




Thee to the love of Zingis, to that sphere,
In which thou ought'st to move, and then pursue
That course my state requires.








Thou dost not mean to leave me! 




Of Zingis were, that I should leave this camp,
Thou know'st how stern he is.



O turn not thus,
Thy wild determin'd look upon the ground.
Timur 



I must be gone, the hour is near
For my departure hence. With small regret
I plunge into the horrors which surround
The fortune of an exile. Since Ovisa 


But I will not upbraid. A prince disgraced,
Ought not to hope the favor of mankind
Should follow him thro' ruin. 






I'll not be left unheard nay then I'm urg'd
The sooner to my purpose. I resolv'd
To place thee high, to give thee back to fame,
To all thy dignities, and then demand
An end to grief from this. 





taking it from her.
Ovisa hold 
Sultana of my soul, thou must not thus
Withdraw from Timur. Thy auspicious light
Must mildly shine upon me thro' this gloom.
Forgive the jealous transports of a mind
O'erwhelm'd with love. Have I condemn'd unheard
The first of women! 




O I'm sick at heart,
My sorrows, Timur, crowd too much upon me.



Still there is hope, some valiant friends remain,
Whose firm affections no misfortunes change,
Devoted to my service. They shall guard
Ovisa hence. To-night we urge our flight
Across the desart, to the Caspian shores.
And meet what fate decrees. My soul delights
To strive with fortune, in her gloomy hour,
To triumph o'er her frowns, and to my sword
To owe my greatness, rather than derive
From ancestry a title to the world.

