






DEjected! no, it never shall be said,
That Fate had power upon a Spartan Soul:
My mind on its own Centre stands unmov'd,
And Stable; as the Fabrick of the World:
Propt on it self; still I am Cleomenes:
I fought the Battle bravely, which I Lost;
And lost it, but to Macedonians,

The Successors of those who Conquer'd Asia.

'Twas for a Cause too, such a Cause I fought.
Unbounded Empire hung upon my Sword:

Greece, like a lovely Heifer, stood in view,
To see the Rival Bulls each other gore:
But wish'd the Conquest mine.
I fled; and yet I languish not in Exile;

  2But here in Egypt, whet my Blunted Horns;
And meditate new Fights, and chew my Loss.
Ah! why ye Gods, must Cleomenes wait
On this Effeminate Luxurious Court,
For tardy helps of base Egytian Bands?
Why have not I, whose individual mind
Would ask a Nation of such Souls t'inform it,
Why have not I ten Thousand hands to fight
It all my self? and make the Work my own?





Is this well done? or like the King of Sparta?

Or like my Son? to waste your time in Tears?
What have you done, that you avoid Mankind?
And sculk in Corners like a Guilty Slave?



We have been seeking you, my dearest Lord,
Thro' all the shady Walks and dark Retreats
Of Secret Care; That false deluding Friend,
That only sooths and keeps you Company,
To prey upon your last remains of Life.



I've heard you  
Sighs.




Hear her still; She tells you true.
This Melancholly Flatters; but Unmans you.
What is it else, but Penury of Soul;
A Lazie Frost, a numness of the Mind;
That Locks up all the Vigour to Attempt,
By barely Crying, 'tis Impossible?



You both mistake me: That I Grieve, 'tis true:
But 'tis a Grief of Fury; not Despair!
And if a manly drop or Two fall down,
It scalds along my Cheeks, like the Green Wood
That sputtring in the Flame works outward into Tears.



Why would you leave me then, and be alone?
Indeed it was a Churlish kind of sorrow;
Indeed it was, t'engross it all your self;
And not permit me to endure my share.
Think you, because I am of tender Mould,

  3I cannot suffer and partake your burdens;
Alas! I suffer more by not partaking



My Wife! My Mother! O! I am so divided,
That I grieve most for both, and love both most;
Two twining Vines about this Elm, whose fall
Must shortly Very shortly crush you both,
And yet I will not go to Ground,
Without a Noble Ruine round my Trunk;
The Forest shall be shaken when I sink,
And all the neighboring Trees
Shall groan and fall beneath my vast Destruction.



That's something yet, an earnest of an Action;
Another Groan or two, and all goes well.



Well: I will live.







I'le try at least.



Do not go back: and bate of what thou saidst



Peace, peace: good Grandmother; he lives already,
And Conquers too, in saying he will try;
Nay, if the King of Sparta says he'll do't,
I ask no more then that;
For 'tis below a King to tell a Lye.



But where's the means?



The means is in the daring;
Had my own Mother liv'd, and ask'd that Question
I should have thought my Father had begot me,
Without her help, as Pallas sprung from Iove.




Think'st thou, he can defend us all, alone?



No   for I mean to help him.



That my Boy, my hopeful Lyons Whelp
Takes him and kisses him.




So Hector hugg'd his young Astyanax;
Went out to fight and never saw him more.



But why did not Astyanax go with Hector?



Because he was a Child, and could not go.



Was he a Spartan Child?



Oh no! a Trojan.




There's it, a Trojan Child: But grant me this,
There are no Spartan-Children we are born Men,

  4And tho' you say, I have but Fifteen years,
We Spartans take ten Strides before our Age,
And start beyond dull Nature.



Let me but live to shadow this young Plant,
From Blites and Storms; He'll soon shoot up a Heroe:
He must; I got him in the pride of Conquest;
For coming back from my first Maiden Battle,
Wherein I made the Great Aratus fly,
And added all his Laurels to my Brow,
I well remember that I spurr'd it hard,
And like a Meteor, shot before my Troops,
To reach my Love that night; I was a Bridegroom,
Or scarce had lost that name, and stealing home,
According to my Countries modest use,
I found my Aegiatis just undrest,
Wearying the gods with Vows for my return,
My Transport was so great, I could not stay,
But kiss'd, and took her trembling in my Arms,
And in that Fury of my Love, I stampt,
This Image of my Soul.



Where hast thou been this long long Year of Hours?



Where I have past a merry Mornings Walk,
With the best Company.







Why with my self, in laughing at the World,
Making a Farce of Life, where Knaves and Fools,
And Mad-men, that's all Human-kind were Actors.



And what part Acted you?



As little as I could: And daily would have less,
So please the Gods, for that's a Wise Man's part.



Would I could share thy Balmy, even Temper,
And Milkiness of Blood.











By! but forgetting you have been a King.



Then must I rust in Aegypt, never more
Appear in Arms, and be the Chief of Greece?
Now, by yon Blew Palace,
The Mansion of my great Fore-father Hercules

I would loose o're-agen Sellasia's Field
Rather than Fight behind, when proud Aratus led the Graecian Van.



What, when the lively Trumpets sound a Charge,
The word of Battle may be Hercules,

And after our great Grandsires Name, Aratus

Cries Cleomenes, bring you up the Rear.



If Fortune takes not off this Boy betimes,
He'l make mad work, and Elbow all his Neighbors.



My Neighbours! Little: Elbow all rhe World▪
And push off Kings, like Counters from the Board,
To place my self the foremost.



What wilt thou be, young Cockeril, when thy Spurs
Are grown to sharpness?



Why? I'll be a Spartan.

For if I said a King, I should say less:
I mean a Spartan while I live on Earth;
But when in Heaven, I'le stand next Hercules,

And thrust between my Father and the God.



Do you not view, my Lord?
As in a Glass, your Darling Fault, Ambition,
Reflected in your Son?




I love to see him sparkle out betimes,
For 'twas my Flame that lighted up his Soul:
I am pleas'd with my own Work; Iove was not more
With Infant Nature, when his spatious Hand
Had rounded this huge ball of Earth, and Seas,
To give it the first push, and see it rowl
Along the vast Abyss.



My Mother would have had my Youth brought up
To Spin with Girls in Sparta.




Well said, my Boy; Yet Hercules they say
Took up the Distass once.



Yes, when he had been Conquer'd by a Woman.



One thing I had forgot, which may import you,



You'l suddainly hear news from Greece.





Indeed forgetful, not to tell me that,
For, from my first arrival on this Coast,
This fatal Aegypt, where I fled for Refuge,
In three long Months I have not heard from Greece.

What makes thee think I shall have news so soon?



As walking on the Beach I saw a Ship
Just entring in the Port, and on the Deck
Stood Coenus.









Yes, our Coenus, the rich Messenian Lord;
I saw and knew him, but amidst the shouts
Of Mariners, and busie Care to sling
His Horses soon ashore He saw not me.



Then I shall hear of thee once more, Dear Country;
I fear too soon; shall hear how proud Antigonus

Led o'er Eurota's Banks, his Conquering Troops
And first, to wondring Sparta shew'd a King,
A King that was not Hers:
Then I shall hear of Sacriledge and Murthers,
And Fires, and Rapes on Matrons, and on Maids.



Such news we must expect.




Of those that fell in the last fatal Fight,
And liv'd not to survive their Countries Loss;
Base as I was I should have fall'n there too;
But first have rais'd a Mountain of the Dead,
To choak their way to Sparta.





Your Blood would boil, and therefore I delaid
So long to tell you Coenus was arriv'd.




My Mother, my Cleora, and my Boy 



Your Ears would be polluted with such Ills;

  7Which I must try to mollify before
They reach your tender hearing.




But let not Grief disorder you too much
For what you lost. 
For me, while I have You, and you are kind,
I ask no more of Heaven.




Because my King and Father bids me go:
Else, I have sternness in my Soul enough
To hear of Murders, Rapes, and Sacrilege:
For those are Soldiers work; and I wou'd hear 'em
To spur me to Revenge.






Now bear it like your self.



I am arm'd against it.





I heard, Sir, you were refug'd in this Court,
And come to beg a favour.




Sure, thou mistak'st me for the King of Egypt;
And think'st I govern here?








No thanks to Heaven for that: I shou'd have dy'd,
And then I had not been this Cleomenes.




You promis'd Patience, Sir.



Thou art a Scurvy Monitor, I am Patient.
Do I foam at Lips;
Or stare at Eyes: Methinks I am wondrous Patient.
Now, thou shalt see how I can swallow Gall.
I prithee, Gentle Coenus, tell the Story. 
Speaking Softly.

Of Ruin'd Sparta; leave no Circumstance
Untold of all their Woes: And I will hear thee,
As unconcern'd, as if thou told'st a Tale
Of ruin'd Troy. I prithee tell us how

  8The Victors robb'd the Shrines, polluted Temples,
Ransack'd each Wealthy House: No, spare me that,
Poor honest Sparta had no Wealth to lose.
But when thou com'st to tell of Matrons ravish'd,
Raises his Voice.

And Virgins forc'd; Then raise thy Voice,
And let me hear their Howlings,
And dreadful shrieks, as in the act of Rape.



Again you are distemper'd!





Peace, I am not.
I was but reaching him to grace his Tale
With decent Horror.



Your sick Imagination feigns all this;
Now hear a truth, and wonder!



Has not the Conqueror been at Sparta?







Nay; then I know what follows Victory.



You interrupt as if you would not know.



Then if you will Imagine, think some King,
Who lov'd his People, took a peaceful Progress
To some far distant place of his Dominions;
Smil'd on his Subjects as he rode in Triumph,
And strew'd his Plenty, wheresoe'er he pass'd.
Nay, raise your Thoughts yet higher. Think some Deity,
Some better Cerés drawn along the Sky,
By Gentle Dragons, scatter'd as she flew,
Her fruitful Grains upon the teeming Ground,
And bad new Harvests rise.



Do we Dream, Pantheus?



No sure! We are awake  but 'tis he Dreams.



The Soldiers march'd, as in Procession, slow;
And enter'd Sparta like a Choir of Priests,
As if they fear'd to tread on holy Ground.
No Noise was heard; no Voice, but of the Cryer,
Proclaiming Peace, and Liberty to Sparta;
At that a peal of loud applause rang out,
And thin'd the Air, till even the Birds fell down
Upon the Shouters Heads: The Shops flew open,
And all the busie Trades renew'd their Tasks:

  9No Law was chang'd, no Custom was controul'd;
That had Lycurgus liv'd, or you return'd,
So Sparta would have shown.



If this be true!



If this indeed be true,
Then farewell Sparta.





He reap'd no fruit of Conquest, but their Blessings;
Nor stay'd three Days in Sparta; Summon'd thence,
With sudden News that a Barbarian Host,
Was enter'd Macedonia!
And like a Mighty Deluge, rowling on,
Swept all before 'em. Thus alarm'd, he left us;
March'd Homeward; Met and Fought 'em; Nay, and Liv'd
To say the Field is mine.



Dy'd of his Wounds?



Not so; but straining loud his feeble Voice,
To animate his Soldiers, broke a Vein;
And in a purple Vomit pour'd his Soul.



O Bless'd! Bless'd Coenus! for this happy News.






O Wretch! O Born to all misfortunes! Curst,
Curst Cleomenes!



How's this! Are these the thanks you pay the Gods?
Who freed your Sparta, and remov'd by Death
Your only fatal Foe!




Can'st thou not find, that had I but defer'd

Sellasia's Fight three Days; but three short Days:
Fate then had fought my Battle with Antigonus;
And I not fighting had been still a King.



That's true; but that you knew not when you fought.



Why therefore, once again, Curst Cleomenes!
'Tis not to be endur'd.
That Fate of Empires, and the fall of Kings
Should turn on flying Hours, and Catch of Moments.



Now, by my Soul, 'tis Lazy Wickedness,
To rail at Heaven, and not to help your self.
Heaven's but too kind, in offring you the means:

  10Your Fate, once more, is laid upon the Anvil:
Now pluck up all the Spartan in your Soul;
Now stretch at every stroke and Hammer out,
A new and nobler Fortune;
Else may the Peaceful Ground restore the Dead,
And give up Old Antigonus again.



I thank thee: Thou hast added Flame to Fury.
The Spartan Genius shall once more be rowz'd;
Our Houshold Gods, that droop upon our Hearths,
Each from his Venerable Face shall brush
The Macedonian Soot, and shine again.



Now you confess the Spartan.





I struggle like the Priestess with a God;
With that oppressing God, that works her Soul.
Haste to Cleanthes, my Egyptian Friend;
That only Man that Egypt ever made:
He's my Lucina. Say my Friendship wants him
To help me bring to light a Manly Birth;
Which to the wondring World I shall disclose,
Or if he fail me, perish in my Throwes.
Ex. Omnes.












THe King sent for me, say'st thou! and to Council!



And I was coming to you, on that Message,
Just when I met Pantheus.




Good Omen, Sir, of some intended good,
Your Fortune mends: she reconciles apace,
When Aegypt makes th'Advances.




For since his Fathers death, this Ptolomey,

Has minded me no more
Then Boys their last Years Gugaws.
Petition on Petition; Prayer on Prayer,
For Aid, or free Dismission, all Unanswer'd;

  11As Cleomenes were not worth his Thought,
Or He, that God, which Epicurus dreamt;
Disclaiming Care, and lolling on a Cloud.



At length, it seems it pleases him to wake.



Yes, for himself, not you; he's drench'd too deep,
To wake on any Call, but his own danger:
My Father, his wise Pilot, has observ'd
The Face of Heaven, and sees a gathering Storm,
I know not from what quarter, but it threatens.
And while it Threats, he wants such hands as yours;
But when 'tis o're, the Thoughtless King returns,
To Native sloth, shifts sides, and slumbers on.



Sure, he'll remember to reward those Hands,
That help'd him from the plunge.




Of former times, when Gratitude was Virtue;
Reward him! Yes, like Aesop's Snake, the wretch
That warm'd him in his Bosom: We are Tools,
Vile abject things created for his use,
As Beasts for Men; as Oxen draw the Yoke,
And then are sacrific'd.



I would not use him so.



You are not Ptolomy,

Nor is He Cleomenes.




I'll press him home,
To give me my dispatch; few Ships will serve
To bear my little Band and me to Greece;
I will not ask him one of his Aegyptians;
No, Let 'em keep 'em all for Slaves and Stallions,
Fit only to beget their Successors.



Excepting one Aegyptian, that's my self.



Thou need'st not be excepted; Thou art only,
Misplanted in a base degenerate Soil;
But Nature when she made thee, meant a Spartan.




Then if your Father will but second us. 



I dare not promise for him, but I'll try,
He loves me, Love and Interest sometimes
May make a Statesman honest.




I know he'l not refuse us, for he dares not;
A Coward is the kindest Animal,
'Tis the most giving Creature in a fright.



Say the most promising, and there you hit him.



Well, I'le attack him on the shaking side,
That next his fearful Heart.





I come to mind you of the late Request,
You would not hear: Be pleas'd t'engage this Lord
And then it may succeed.



What wouldst thou, Coenus?





Some Horses of the best Thessalian breed,
High spirited and strong, and made for War;
These I would sell the King.




Thou shouldst have brought him Whores and Catamites;
Such Merchandize is fit for such a Monarch.



Would'st thou bring Horses here to shame our Men?
Those very words of Spirited and War,
Are Treason in our Clime.



From the King downward, (if there be a downward,
From Ptolomy to any of his Slaves!)
No true Aegyptian ever knew in Horses
The Far Side from the Near.




Cleomenes told thee true: Thou should have brought
A soft pad Strumpet for our Monarch's use,
Tho' thank'd be Hell, we want not one at home!
Our Master's Mistriss, she that Governs all.
'Tis well ye Pow'rs, ye made us but Aegyptians,
You could not have impos'd
On any other People such a Load
As an Effeminate Tyrant and a Woman.



Sell me thy Horses, and at my return,
When I have got from Conquer'd Grecce the Pelf
That Noble Sparta scorns, I'll pay their value.



Just as you paid me for the fair Estate
I sold you there.
aside.




What's that you mutter?





Nothing: That's what his Hopes are worth 






I fear he's gone away dissatisfy'd.



I'll make it up: Those Horses I present you,
You'll put 'em to the use that Nature meant 'em.



I burden you too much!



If you refuse, you burden me much more:
A Trifle this,
A singing Eunuch's price; A Pandar's Fee
Exceeds this Sum at Court.
The King expects us



Come after us, Pantheus;
And bring my Boy Cleonidas along,
I'll shew his Youth this base Luxurious Court,
Just as in sober Sparta we expose
Our drunken Helotes: Only with design
To wean our Children from the vice of Wine.
Exeunt.










No more of Business.



Sir, the Council waits you!



Council! What's that? a pack of Bearded Slaves,
Grave Faces, Sawcy Tongues, and Knavish Hearts,
That never speak one word but Self's at bottom;
The Scavengers that sweep State-nusances,
And are themselves the greatest. I'll no Council.



Remember you appointed them, this day.



I had forgot, 'twas my Cassandra's Birth-day.



Your Brother Magas daily grows more dangerous,
And has the Soldiers Hearts.



I'll cut him off.



Not so soon done as said: The Spartan King
Was summon'd for Advice, and waits without.



His Business is to wait.



Be pleas'd to Sign these Papers: They are all
Of great concern!



My pleasure is of more.
How I! could curse my Name of Ptolomy:
For 'tis so long; it asks an Hour to write it;
By Heav'n, I'll change it into Iove or Mars!
Or any other civil Monosyllable,
That will not tire my Hand.



These are for Common Good.
Shewing Papers.




I am glad of that:
Those shall be sure to wait.



Orders to pay the Soldiers, ripe for Mutiny;
They may Revolt.







The Man you fear:
Your Brother, Magas.




That's indeed the danger:
Give me the Physick; Let me swallow quick 
There's Ptolomy for that; Now, not one more,
For every Minute I expect Cassandra

To call me to the Musick,
If she should find me at this rare Employment,
Of Signing out her Treasures?



The rest are only Grants to her you love,
And places for her Friends.



I'll Sign 'em all; were every one a Province:
Thou know'st her Humor, not to brook denial!
And then a Quarrel on her Birth-day too
Would be of ill presage.
Signs more Papers.







I heard you waired, but you'll pardon me,
I was not sooner Drest.



Thus I begin my Homage to the Day
Kisses her Hand.


  15That brought me forth a Mistriss, and am proud
To be your foremost Slave.



Our little Entertainment waits; not worth
A longer Ceremony, please to Grace it?







NO no, poor suff'ring Heart no Change endeavour,
Choose to sustain the smart, rather than leave her;
My ravish'd Eyes behold such Charms about her,
I can dye with her, but not live without her.
One tender Sigh of hers to see me Languish,
Will more than pay the price of my past Anquish:
Beware O cruel Fair, how you smile on me,
'Twas a kind Look of yours that has undone me.


Love has in store for me one happy Minute,
And She will end my pain who did begin it;
Then no day void of Bliss, or Pleasure leaving,
Ages shall slide away without perceiving:

Cupid shall guard the Door the more to please us,
And keep out Time and Death when they would seize us:
Time and Death shall depart, and say in flying,
Love has found out a way to Live by Dying.



After the Musick is over, Cleomenes speaks.






Is this the Council of th' Aegyptian King?
And am I call'd upon the Grave Debate,
To judge of trilling Notes and tripping Feet?



'Tis of a piece with all the rest of Ptolomey!
A Singing and a Dancing Government.
O Aegypt, Aegypt! Thou art grown the Lees
Of all the World; The slime of thy own Nyle.
Sure, we had neither Human Syres, nor Mothers;
The Sun and Nyle begot us; W'are so Cowardly,
And yet so proud; so many Gods we have,
And yet not One 



No more They seem to gaze on me with wonder.



And well they may to see a Man in Aegypt.



King, Cassand. Sosyb. rise and come forward.




Not only to my Court, but to my Bosom.



I heard you sent for me; but on what Business
Am yet to learn.



The greatest in the World: To see the Man,
Whom even his Foes extoll; His Friends adore,
And all Mankind admire.




A Man forsaken of his better Stars,
A banish'd Prince; The shadow of a King.







I must not think so vainly of my self.
To be what you have said, lest it upbraid you,
To let your Fathers Friend, for three long Months,
Thus Dance attendance for a word of Audience.



Now by my Soul, 'tis nobly urg'd: He speaks
As if he were in Sparta, on his Throne;
aside.

Not asking Aid; but granting:
How little looks our Pageant Prince to him!
This is the only King I ever saw.



By all the Gods; when I have stood repuls'd
Before your Gates, and could not gain admittance,
I have not Sigh'd so much for my own sorrows,
As I have blush'd for your ungenerous Usage.



Not a word, Ptolomey!
Asham'd by all that's good to be miscall'd
A King, when this is present.



Think you 'tis nothing
For me to beg; That I constrain my Temper
To sue for Aid, which you should first have offer'd.
Believe me, Ptolomey, a Noble Soul
Does much that asks: He gives you pow'r t'oblige him.
Know, Sir, There's a proud Modesty in merit,
Averse from begging; and resolv'd to pay
Ten times the Gift it asks.



I have been to blame;
And you have justly tax'd my long neglect.
I am Young, and am a Lover; and how far
Fair Eyes may make even Kings forgetful. Look,
And read my best Excuse.



O Miracle! He blushes!
Aside.

The first red Virtue I have ever seen
Upon that Face.



I am sorry, Sir, y'have made me your Excuse▪
As if I stood betwixt the Good you meant;
And intercepted every Royal Grace.
Now in my own Defence I must solicite
All his concerns as mine:
And if my Eyes have pow'r, He should not sue
In vain, nor linger with a long delay.







Say that word again;
And I'll consider too.



Prithee be satisfy'd, He shall be aided,
Or I'll no more be King.



When wert thou one? For shame, for shame ye Gods,


That e'er you put it in a Strumpets power,
To do so good a Deed!



I am a Spartan, Madam, scarce of Words;
We have but just enough to speak our Meaning.
Be thank'd; That's all I could have said to Iove,

Had Iove, like you, restor'd me to my Crown.



The Gods have giv'n you, Sir, the speedy means



To satisfie your Debt of Gratitude.



Oh make me happy: Tell me how this Sword

  18(This and my Heart are all that's left me now)
Can be Employ'd to serve the Crown of Aegypt.




Well said Father: Thou art a true Statesman.


So much for so much, is the way at Court.



My King has in the Camp a Younger Brother,
Valiant they say, but very Popular;
He gets too far into the Soldiers Grace;
And Inches out my Master.




Assur'd of this, by any Overt-Act;
Or any close Conspiracy reveal'd?



He has it in his pow'r to be a Traytor;
And that's enough.



He has it in his will too:
Else why this Ostentation of his Virtues,
His Bounty, Valour, and his Temperance?
Why are they thus expos'd to publick View?
But as a Venus set besides a Monster,
To make an Odious Comparison;
As if his Brother wanted what he boasts?



What's to be done with him?



There needs no more, I think, but to contrive,
With Secresy, and Safety, to Dispatch him.



I thank thee, that thou hast not Cozen'd me


In this Advice: For two good deeds together
Had been too much in Conscience for thy calling.



He Dies, that's out of doubt.







Why do you ask that Question?



Because I had a Brother;
(Oh grief to say I had, and have not now)
Wise, Valiant, Temperate; and in short a Spartan!
Had all the Virtues, which your Counsellor
Imputed to your Brother, as his Crimes:
He Lov'd me well; so well, he could but die,
To shew he Lov'd me better than his Life:
He lost it for me in Sellasia's Field;
And went the greatest Ghost of all our name,
That ever had a Brother or a King.



Wipe off the Tears, that stand upon your Eyes;
Good Nature works too far. Kings have no Brothers:
What Men call such are Rivalls of their Crowns;
Yours tim'd his Death, so as to Merit Grief.
Who knows, but he laid in, by that last Action,
The means to have betray'd you, had he Liv'd.



I would say something: but I curb my passion,
Because thou art the Father to my Friend.
To you, Sir, this; If you Condemn your Brother,



Only because he's Bounteous, Great, and Brave;
Know you Condemn those Virtues, own you want 'em.
Had you a Thousand Brothers, such as he,
You ought to shew you are above 'em all;
By daring to reward, and Cherish 'em,
As Bucklers of your Crown in time of War;
And in soft Peace, the Jewels that adorn it.



I stand Corrected, Sir, he ought to Live.



I think so too.



I do not wish his Death,
Howe're I seem'd to give that rugged Counsel.





Well said again Father! Comply, comply:
Follow the Sun, True Shadow.



I only wish my Master may be safe;
But there are Mercenaries in the Army,
Three thousand Greeks, the Flower of all our Troops,
Like Wolves indeed among Aegyptian Lambs;
If these Revolt (I do not say they will)
But if your Brother please to take the Crown:
And be not good enough to let you Reign,
Those Greeks where e'er they go, will turn the Scale.



What think you, Cleomenes?







Then Magas must not live.



That does not follow:
Fear not those Mercenaries: They are mine;
Devoted to my Interest; Commanded by my Nod:
They are my Limbs of War, and I their Soul:

  20Were they in Arms against you at your Gates;
High in their Rage, and fix'd upon the Spoil,
Should I say, Hold; Nay, should I only Frown,
They could not bear my Eyes, but Aw'd and Master'd,
Like Lions to their Keepers, would couch and fawn
And disobey their Hunger.






How I admire thy Virtue!




Some are born Kings,
Made up of three parts Fire, so full of Heaven,
It sparkles at their Eyes: Inferior Souls,
Know 'em as soon as seen, by sure instinct,
To be their Lords, and naturally Worship
The secret God within 'em.



Sir, I humbly beg
A word in private  
to Ptol.
















Ex. Ptol. Sosyb. Cleanthes.







Panthaeus brought me hither to attend you,



And thou art welcome, but thou com'st too late.



Your  of Honour!



The mistake is easie in such a Courts as this,
Where Princes look like Pages.







I must have leave to love you, Royal Youth;
Above all Nations I Adore a Greek,

And of all Greeks a Spartan.
Looking on Cleomenes.





And what I am, are owing to your Favour.






Shall I not be your Mistriss?






No, for I would not get Aegyptians.




For what, Sir, do you take us?



For what you are;
When the Gods moulded up the Paste of Man,
Some of their Dough was left upon their hands,
For want of Souls: And so they made Aegyptians:
They were intended for four Feet; And when
They come to run before our Noble Spartans,

They'l curse the Gods for the Two Legs they ow'd 'em.



Then since you will not let me be your Mistriss,
Would I had been your Mother.

Looking still on Cleom.




So would not I:
For then I had not been all Spartan.






He answers not my Glances, stupid Man!
My tender Looks; my languishing Regards,
Are like mis-aiming Arrows, lost in Air,
And miss the flying Prey.



She takes out a Pocket Glass and looks in it.
These Eyes I Thank the Gods
Are still the same: The Diamonds are not dimm'd:
Nor in their Lustre: lost in Ptolomy;
Small Boast: Alas! Ptolomy has no Soul,
'Tis what he wants, I love in Cleomenes;
Perhaps he dares not think I would be Lov'd,
Then must I make the advance; and making lose
The vast Prerogative our Sex enjoys,
Of being Courted first: Courted! To what?
To our own Wishes: There's the point; but still,
To speak our wishes first; Forbid it, pride,
Forbid it Modesty: True; They forbid it,
But Nature does not: When we are a Thirst,
Or Hungry, Will imperious Nature stay?
Not Eat nor Drink, before 'tis bid, Fall on:
Well Sex, if this must be,
That I must not invite: I may at least be suffer'd,

  22To lay some kind Occasion in his way,
That if he dare but speak; He may succeed.

She turns towards 'em, and observes what they're doing.
Cleom. turns and meets her; Cleonid. looks still on the Picture.



I durst not have presum'd to interrupt
Your private Thoughts.



They wholly were imploy'd in serving you;
But durst not, and presume, are words of Fear;
I thought they were not in your Spartan Tongue;
For my sake, banish 'em:
On what were you so earnestly employ'd?
You would not look this way.







View it agen, 'tis worth a second Sight,
Your Son observes it still; 'Twere well to help
My Lover's Understanding;
Goes with him to the Picture.

Know you this Piece, young Prince?



Some Battle, I believe; and in that Thought,
I gaze with such Delight.



Some Rape, I guess.



That's near the true Design, and yet mistaken;
'Tis Paris bearing from your Spartan Shore,
The Beauteous Hellen; How do you approve it?



Not in the least, for 'tis a scurvy piece.



And yet 'tis known to be Apelles Hand;
The Style is his, you grant he was a Master.



'Tis scurvy still, because it represents
A base dishonest Act; to violate
All Hospitable Rites, to force away,
His Benefactors Wife; Ungrateful Villain;
And so the Gods, Th' avenging Gods have judg'd.



Was he a Spartan King that suffer'd this?
Sure he reveng'd the Rape?



He did, my Boy,
And slew the Ravisher.



Look better, Sir; You'll find it was no Rape;
Mark well that Hellen in her Lovers Arms:

  23Can you not see, she but affects to strive;
She heaves not up her Hands to Heav'n for help,
But hugs the kind Companion of her Flight.
See how her tender Fingers strain his sides;
'Tis an Embrace; a Grasping of Desire;
A very Belt of Love, that Girds his Waste.
She looks as if she did not fear to fall,
But only lose her Lover if she fell:
Observe her Eyes; How slow they seem to rowl
Their Wishing Looks, and Languish on his Face:
Observe the whole Design, and you wou'd Swear,
She Ravish'd Paris, and not Paris, Her.




Sparta has not to Boast of such a Woman;
Nor Troy to thank her, for her ill-plac'd Love.



But Paris had; as for the War that follow'd,
'Twas but a Fable of a Graecian Wit,
To raise the Valour of his Countrymen:
For Menelaus was an Honest Wretch;
A Tame good Man, that never durst resent;
A meer Convenient Husband; Dull and Slavish;
By Nature meant the thing the Lovers made him.



His Goodness aggravates their Crime the more:
Had Menelaus us'd his Hellen ill,
Had he been Jealous, or distrusted both,
I would allow a grain or two, for Love;
And plead in their Excuse.



There was their safety that he was not Jealous:
What would you more of him? He was a Fool,
And put the happy means into their hands.



I cannot much commend my Countryman.



Indeed, my Lord, your Countryman was dull,
That did not understand so plain a Courtship.
Have Spartans Eyes for nothing? not to see
So manifest a Passion?






Madam, your Goodness interests you too much
In Hellens Cause. I have no more to urge,
But that she was a Wife: That Word, a Wife,
In spight of all your Eloquence condemns her.



You argue justly; Therefore 'twas a Crime:
But had she been a Mistris, not a Wife;
Her Love had been a Virtue, to forsake
The Nauseous Bed of a Loath'd fulsome King;
And fly into a sprightly Lovers Arms.
Her Love had been a Merit to her Paris,

To leave her Country, and what more her Kingdom:
With a Poor Fugitive Prince to Sail away,
And bear her Wealth along to make him happy.



You put your Picture in the fairest Light:
But both the Lovers broke their plighted Vows;
He to Oenone, She to Menelaus.




The Gods that made two Fools had done more justly
To have match'd Menelaus with Oenone:
Think better of my Picture, it deserves
A Second thought; it speaks; the Hellen speaks.



It speaks Aegyptian then; a base Dishonest Tongue.



You are too Young to understand her Language.


Do not thank me,



Till I have brought your business to perfection:
Doubt not my kindness; nothing shall be wanting
To make your Voyage happy.



I only fear th'Excess of your full Bounty!
To give me more then what my wants require.





Meaning, perhaps, my Person and my Love!
I would not think it so; and yet I fear,
And while I fear, his Voyage shall be hinder'd:
No breath of Wind
Can stir, to waft him hence, unless I please:
I am the Goddess that commands the Seas.
In Vain he Vows at any other Shrine,
My Heart is in his Hands; his Fate's in mine.










A Table set.  Ptolomey, Sosybius, Cassandra, sitting: Ptolomy at the Upper end; Cassandra on one side, Sosybius on the other.



I Must confess 'twas Obvious.



He said he could Command 'em with his Nod:
Can he do this with Mercenaries, rais'd
Not at his Charge, but yours? by you maintain'd:
What could he more, had they been Spartans born?



What would you hence infer?




Some are born Kings; and so is Cleomenes.




A great Soul dares not call himself a Villain:
He has that Interest, and will use it nobly;
To serve, and not to ruine his Protector,



Is Aegypt's safety, and the Kings, and Yours,
Fit to be trusted on a bare suppose,
That he is Honest? Honest, let him be;
But on his own Experiment, not ours!
Man is but Man; Unconstant still, and Various;
There's no to Morrow in him, like to Day.
Perhaps the Atoms rowling in his Brain,
Make him think Honestly this present Hour;
The next a Swarm of Base, Ungrateful Thoughts
May mount aloft: And where's our Aegypt then?
Who would trust Chance? since all Men have the Seeds
Of Good and Ill, which should work upward first.



All men! then you are one; and by that Rule,
Your wicked Atomes may be working now
To give bad Council; That you still may Govern.



I would the King would Govern.



Because you think I have too much Command.



Would you would rule me both by turns, in quiet,
And let me take my Ease!



Then my turns first.



Our Masters Safety in sound reason ought
To be prefer'd to both.



So thinks Cassandra too.



No; Court Sosybius, and cast Cassandra off.



What have I said, or done,
To merit this unkindness?
Tell me but what you think of Cleomenes,

And be my Oracle.



I know him Grateful.



To know him grateful, is enough for Iove.




And therefore not too much for me in Aegypt:
I say, I know him Honest.



Then I know it.
Now may Sosybius speak?



He may: but not to contradict my knowledge.



Then I concur, to let him go for Greece;
And wish our Aegypt fairly rid of him.
For, as our Apis, tho' in Temples fed,
And under Golden Roofs, yet loaths his food,
Because restrain'd; and longs to roam in Meads,
Among the Milky-Mothers of the Herd.
So, Cleomenes, kept by force in Aegypt,

Is sullen at our Feasts; abhors our Dainties;
And longs to change 'em for his Spartan Broth.
He may be dang'rous here; Then send him hence,
With aid enough to Conquer all he lost,
And make him formidable to Mankind.



He may be formidable then to us,
That thou wou'dst say.



No: for you know him grateful.



Would thou wouldst learn to speak without a double,
Thou Delphian Statesman.
Rises.




Would I could know your Wishes that I might:
I would but smooth their way and make em 'easy!
bowing.







A little over Zealous, but well-meaning.
My Wishes are the honour of my King.
That Ptolomy may keep his Royal word▪

  27And I my promise to procure this Aid;
If to be Mistriss, signifies Command,
Let this be done: If not, the King may find,
Another Beauty, worthier of his Bed;
And I another Lover, less ungrateful:



Let Aegypt sink before that fatal day;
No, we are one: Cassandra, we are one:
Or I am nothing? Thou art Ptolomy.




Now you deserve to be the first of Kings,
Because you rank your self the first of Lovers:
What can I do to show Cassandra grateful?
Nothing but this;
To be so nice in my Concerns for you:
To doubt where Doubts are not: To be too fearful:
To raise a Bug-bear Shadow of a Danger,
And then be frighted, tho' it cannot reach you.



Be pleas'd to name your apprehensions, Madam.



Plain Souls like mine, judge others by themselves:
Therefore I hold our Cleomenes honest:
But since 'tis possible: Tho' barely so,
That he may prove ungrateful,
I would have pledges given us of his Faith,
His Wife, his Mother, and his Son, be left
As Hostages in Aegypt.





Some God inspir'd you with this prudent Council.



I thought so too, but that I durst not speak.



Leave me to manage this.




But do it surely, by the easiest means,
Infuse it gently: Do not pour it down;
Let him not think he stands suspected here;
And least of all, by Me!



He shall not, Madam.
Now Sir, th' Illumination-Feast attends you:
For Apis has appear'd,



Why then I must be formal,
Go to the Temple.

  28Come my fair Cassandra,

That I may have an Object worth my Worship.
aisde.




The God that I Adore is in my Breast;
This is the Tomple: This is the Sacrifice:
But to the Pow'rs Divine we make Appeal,
with great Devotion; and with little Zeal.





Yes yes, it shall be done; but not her way:
Call in my Son Cleanthes: This Cassandra

Is our enchanting Syren: She that Sings
Our Ptolomy into secure Destruction:
In vain I Counsel him t'avoid his Ruine:
These Women-Charmers, Oh they have a Devil
Too strong to dispossess. Call in my Son.
Goes to the Door.




Cleanthes! Are you Cleomenes's Friend,
Or only seem you such?



To seem to be, and not to be what I seem,
Are things my honest Nature understands not.



But you must love your King and Country more.



Yes, when I have a King and Country
That can deserve my Love!

Aegypt, as Aegypt is, deserves it not:
A People, baser than the Beasts they worship:
Below their Pot-herb-gods that grow in Gardens:
The King 



Go to; Young Man, what e'er he be,
I must not hear my Master vilify'd.



Why did you name him then? Were I at Pray'rs,
And even for you, whom as my Soul I love,
If Ptolomy should come a Cross my Thoughts,
A Curse would follow where I meant a Blessing.



'Tis well, tis well, I am so fond a Father;
Those words were death in any other Mouth;
I know too much of you, you love the Spartan,

Beyond your King and Country▪




So Noble; I would own it to the Gods,
And they be proud to hear it,



Confess you love him better than your Father.



No; but I love him equal with my Father.



Say better, and say true:
If we were opposite, and one must fall,
Whom wouldst thou Save?



Neither; For both would dye:
Before I could resolve.



If I command thee,
To break thy Friendship with him? Wouldst thou?







Why then thou hast confess'd, thou lov'st him more.



Not so: For should he bid me disobey,
Or not love you: Thus, would I answer him,
As I have answer'd you.







You bid me tell you true, and this is my reward.



Go from my Sight.



I will; but would not go
Without your Blessing.



O, so well I love thee,
That I could Curse thee for not loving me:
Stay, I would send thee on a Message to him,
But that I fear thy Faith.



You wrong my Piety.



It much concerns my Interest, which is thine;
Would'st thou deliver what I have to say?
Would'st thou induce his Reason to comply?



Both; Granting your Proposals Honourable▪
If not, employ some Mercenary Tongue,
The Court affords you store: And spare my Virtue!



I would have Cleomenes sent away,
With Royal Aid.



You promis'd him he should.



And would have thee perswade him to this Voyage.



A welcome Errand: Oh my dear, dear Father.



But on my terms, mark that; my terms; Cleanthes.




I fear'd the Statesman in you.



I would have Aegypt safe: That's all my Interest;
And therefore he must leave behind for Pawns,
His Mother, Wife and Son.



'Tis clogging of a Gift: 'Tis base, mean Council;
I hope you gave it not.




But she would have that Odium cast on me,
I am her Beast of Burden and must bear it.



I never can belye so good a Father!
But this I'll do:
The Message shall be faithfully deliver'd,
And all the Strumpet stand expos'd to shame.



Thou hitst my meaning; but he must be secret;
Must seem to take the Favour as from Her:
And lay the hardship of the Terms on me.







And thou wilt Gild this bitter Pill:
For there's no other way to go from hence,
But leaving these behind.



A Beam of Thought comes glancing on my Soul.
aside.
I'll undertake it
To his Father.

The Pledges shall be left.






But haste, and lose no time!



I am all on fire to serve my Friend and Father.







This Cleomenes ought to be dispatch'd:
Dispatch'd the safest way: He ought to dye;
Not, that I hate his Virtue; but I fear it:
The Mistriss drives my Councils to the Leeward;
Now I must edge upon a point of Wind;
And make slow way, recovering more and more,
Till I can bring my Vessel safe ashore▪







SCENE of a Temple with Illuminations. An Altar, Apis painted above; Priests and Choristers. Ptolomy, Cassandra, Courtiers Men and Women, all decently plac'd. Musick Instrumental and Vocal. Then Ptolomy taking Cassandra by the Hand, ad∣vances to the Altar of Apis, bowing thrice, and gives the High Priest a Purse. Soft Musick all the while Ptolomy and Cassandra are Adoring and speaking.


Soul of the Universe, and source of Life,
Immortal Apis, thou thrice Holy Fire,
Hear Aegypt's Vows and mine: if as we dream,

Aegyptian Earth Impregnated with Flame,
Sprung the first man;
Preserve thy Primitive Plantation here.
Then for my self, thy Type, and thy Vicegerent,
Rowl from my Loins a long Descent of Kings:
Mix'd of Cassandra's kindly blood and mine.
Mine be she only, and I only hers.
And when I shall resolve again to thee,
May she survive me, and be Queen of Aegypt:

Hear this, and firm it with some happy Omen.


An Augury portending good Success arises from the Altar.




Apis be prais'd for this Auspicious Omen.

Ptolo. bowing retires and seems pleas'd.





Great pow'r of Love! who spreadst thy gentle fire:
Thro' humane Hearts, art every where Ador'd;
Accept these Vows, in shew to Apis paid,
And make his Altar thine: Hear not that wretch!
Because his Prayers were not address'd to thee;
Or only hear his last: that I may reign.
Make Cleomenes mine, and mine alone:
Give us a flight secure, a safe arrival;
And Crown our Wishes in each others Arms.
Hear this and firm it with some happy Omen.

A bad Omen arises from the Flames of the Altar.


Avert this Omen, Apis.






Accurs'd be thou, Grass-eating fodder'd God!
Accurs'd thy Temple! more accurs'd thy Priests!
The Gods are theirs, not ours; and when we pray
For happy Omens, We their price must pay:
In vain at Shrines, th'ungiving suppliant stands;
This 'tis to make a Vow with Empty hands:
Fat Offrings are the Priesthoods only care;
They take the Money, and Heaven hears the Prayer.
Without a Bribe their Oracles are mute,
And their Instructed Gods refuse the suit.













The Propositions are unjust and hard;
And if I swallow 'em, 'Tis as we take
The Wrath of Heaven.
We must have patience, for they will be Gods,
And give us no account of what we suffer.



My Father much abhors this middle way,
Betwixt a Gift and Sale of Courtesy:
But 'tis the Mistress; She that seem'd so kind,
'Tis she, that bears so hard a hand upon you:
She that would half Oblige, and half Affront.



Let her be what she is: That's Curse enough.
But such a Wife, a Mother, and a Son!
Oh sure, ye Gods! when ye made this vile Aegypt:
Ye little thought, they should be Mortgag'd here!
My only Comfort
Is, that I trust these precious Pawns with thee:
For thou art so religiously a Friend,
That I would sooner leave 'em in thy hands,
Than if I had security from Heav'n,
And all the Gods to answer for their safety.



Yes, yes; They shall be safe;
And thou shalt have a pledge,
As strong as Friendship can make over to thee:
Deny me not, for I must go with thee,
And share what Fate allots for thee in Greece.



Nay cast not on me that forbidding frown;
But let me be their pawn, as they are thine:
So I shall have thee wholly to my self.
And be thy Wife, thy Mother, and thy Son,
As thou art all to me.




Sighs and wipes his Eyes.




What wouldst thou say, my better part?



No more, but this; That thou art too unkind,
When even in kindness thou wouldst over-come.



Let me be proud; and pardon thou my Pride;
Base, Worthless Aegypt has no other Pawn,
To Counter-ballance these but only me.
'Twas on such terms alone, I durst propose it:
Shalt thou leave these?
And I not leave a Father, whom I love?
Come, come; It must be so.
We'll give each other all we have besides;
And then we shall be even. Here they are!
I leave thee. Break those tender Ties of Nature,
As gently as thou canst; they must be broken.
Going, returns.

But when thou seest Cassandra, curb thy Spleen;
Seem to receive the kindness as from her:
And if thou thinkst I love thee, for my sake,
Remembring me; strive to forget my Father.








But how can I sustain to tell 'em this,
Walking from 'em.

Even in the gentlest Terms.
There are not words in any Tongue so soft
As I would use: The Gods must make a new one,
If they would have me speak.



How King of Sparta! When your Fortune smiles,
A Glorious Sun-shine, and a Gloomy Soul.
The Gods love chearfullness, when they are kind;
They think their Gifts despis'd, and thrown away
On sullen thankless Hearts.



I hear my dearest Lord that we shall go.







What a mournful Eccho makes my Father!
By Mars, he stifles Go upon his Tongue;
And kills the joyful sound, he speaks so low,
That Heaven must Listen if it hear his thanks.



Yes, I shall go; but how?







With his own Soul and Sword, a Thousand strong;
And worth ten Aegypts, and their ten Thousand Gods.



There's something more in this, than what we guess!
Some Secret anguish rowls within his Breast,
That shakes him like an Earthquake, which he presses,
And will not give it vent. I know him well,
He Blushes, and would speak, and wants a Voice!
And stares and Gapes like a forbidden Ghost,
Till he be spoke to first. Tell me my Son!



Mother, I will,  And yet I cannot neither.
aside.

Mother! that word has struck me dumb again:
For, how can I say Mother, and propound
To leave her here behind, who gave me Life?
Mother! and Wife! and Son! the names that Nature
Most Loves to speak, are banish'd from my Mouth.



Tell us, My Love, the King has chang'd his mind,
And has refus'd us leave; for we can bear it:

Aegypt is Greece to me, while you are here.



Oh I would speak! But, Oh! you speak so kindly,
That you forbid my Speech: You call me, Love.



Was that too kind a Word?



It was to me; I am a meer Barbarian;
A Brute, a stock, for I have no Relations,
Or shortly shall have none.



Then we must die!



We must: and welcome Death.



To save his Life.



The Gods forbid that you should dye for me!
No: You may live; but I must dye thrice over:
For I must leave you here, or must not go:
These are the hard Conditions offer'd me.



Then Aegypt would have Pledges: Is this all?



Yes, and a mighty All: 'Tis all I have:
But I propose it not; Remember that.



I do: and therefore I propose it first,
To save this virtuous Shame, this good Confusion,
That would not let you speak.



Oh! I could almost think you love me not:
You Granted me so quick, so willingly:
What I bear witness Heaven, was slow to ask.
And would be loath to have.



I cannot leave you.



I was but wishing, thou wouldst draw me back,
And now I cannot go.



Are you turn'd Woman?
No more of this fond Stuff;



Shall I be left to gather Rust in Aegypt?
A Glue of Sloth to stick to my young Pinions;
And marr their flight; Habitual Cowardise:
No; I must learn my stubborn Trade of War,
From you alone, and envy you betimes.



But the Conditions! Oh these hard Conditions,
That such a Spirit must be left behind,
Untaught! unfashion'd by a Fathers hands!
A Spirit fit to start into an Empire,
And look the World to Law.



No more debating, for I see the pinch,
He must be left, and so must She and I:
For we are but your softnesses, My Son:
Th' Incumbrances and Luggage of the War:
Fight for us, and redeem us, if you please;
For there we are your clogs of Virtue: Here,
The Spurs of your return.



I Thank you, Mother,
Once more you have Erected me to Man,
And set me upright with my Face to Heaven!
The Woman and the Boy, be yours awhile:
The War be mine alone!



There spoke the Spartan King: Think not on us.











In Pray'rs! That's poor,
As if the Gods were Thoughtless of their work;
Think on us, when you fight: and when you make
A lusty stroke, Cry out, That's for my Boy.



Dispose this mouldring Carcass as you please,
E're lingring Age or Sickness wear it out;
Unprofitable then for Sparta's good:
Be cheerful, fight it well, and all the rest,
Leave to the Gods and Fortune.



If they fail me,
Theirs be the Fault, For Fate is theirs alone:
My Virtue, Fame, and Honour are my own.













SO so; it works: now Mistriss sit you fast 
aside




Humh, Whores and Catamites!
Wer those his words?



Upon my life they were.



Whom should he mean by those unmanner'd terms;











A foul mouth'd Villain.



So, I should have thought,
But that this Lady knows him good and grateful.



Madam! I stand suspected without cause,
And, but I fear Revenge from this great Man,
I could say more.



I thought he was concern'd.







Speak boldly, Graecian, I protect thee.




Cleanthes then was present, and he added.



But he appears in time to hear his Charge.



My dear! dear! Son!
aside.

I fear thy lavish Tongue has ruin'd Thee;
What can I do to save Thee?







Can you deny, my Lord? that you were present,
When Cleomenes Tax'd the Court, and King
With Brutal Vices?




Of certain Horses which he could not buy,
And saw thee go away dissatify'd,
Which to prevent, I meant to purchase 'em;
The rest I heard not, nor believe he spoke.




Cleanthes added farther; That thou saidst,



And we would know: E're Tortures force it from thee.





Now comes the fatal stroke.







No; thou add'st it all:
And I demand the Combat.







Think first, Cleanthes! Think before you hazard,
Your Life and Honour in this bold Appeal,
Somewhat, you might have said, nay more you ought,
Since I commanded you to be a Spy
On Cleomenes Acts, and close Designs.



The good old Lyer would preserve my Life
Aside.

And I must steer his course,
I think   I farther added
To the King.





So wholly pardon'd, that I will not hear it;
Good Spies are useful, and must be encourag'd;
But what must next be done with Cleomenes?




Dispatch him, as the source of all your fears;
Observe the Mounting Billows of the Main,
Blown by the Winds into a raging Storm:
Brush off those Winds, and the high waves return,
Into their quiet first created Calm:
Such is the rage of busie blustring Crowds:
Fomented by th' Ambition of the great:
Cut off the Causes and th' Effect will cease;
And all the moving madness fall to Peace.



Let him seiz'd in order to his Death;
I am in haste, you know it, for my progress,
A thousand pleasures wait me at Canopus;
And this poor trifling business of one life,
Encumbers all: Cassandra! Are you ready?
We will be seen like Isis and Osyris,

Drawn in one Chariot for admiring Eyes,
To worship as we pass.



A word in private: Coenus, attend without.
Exit.


Cassand. leads the King to a corner of the Stage; Sosyb. takes his Son to the other.





Now I am twice your Father, by preserving
The Life I gave you, which your Folly hazarded:
Break off all Friendship with that Spartan King,
Or never see me more: His Fate's resolv'd:
Nor can you stem the Tide: Avoid his ruines;
Reply not, but obey.



I know my Duty.
Bowing.




Thou overjoy'st me: Follow, we'll talk, farther.





What think you of Sosybius and his Son?



As of two Creatures zealous of my Service.



Oh Heavens! That I should love this King so well!
But that I dote: What can I see in him?
But dull good Nature and Simplicity!

  39Well, well! My little Dear, I find the Gods
Have given me here, no business of my own;
But made me just your Drudge to Love and save you.



'Protest I thought 'em honest; are they not?



Ye Gods! why did you make this Man your Image?
And made him but an Image: You'l forgive me?
I Love you so, that I am forc'd to rail.
You saw no close Conveyance of the Game
Betwixt the Crafty Sire, and Cunning Son.
How slily one invented an Excuse,
And t'other took it up as dext'rously?



Why sure Cleanthes was his Fathers Spy.



Yes, over you; but not on Cleomenes.

I fear you are betray'd, and the Gods blind you,
To make your ruine sure!







When you are absent 







'Tis in their Power 



To Murder Cleomenes 




Or else to set him free, and joyn with Magas.




I will not to Canopus.








But how shall I be safe, and take this Journey?



Leave that to me.



But you must go along.



No: I must stay here, in order to your safety,
To watch the growth of danger and prevent it.
This Cruel absence I must undergo;
Or else I Love you not.



Since I must go;
I'll cheat 'em of a Day, and come before
My time, for Love of thee.



To sum up all,
For we are both in haste;
Intrust your Royal Signet in my Hands.








Would you trust a Statesman
Before your own dear Heart. You love him better▪
You naughty Man, in faith you do; and now I think on't,
I will not have your Signet: By this Kiss,
And this, and this, I will not.



By all three, thou shalt.
Gives her the Signet from his Finger.

But kill this Cleomenes quickly, he's dangerous.



He's in safe hands with me.







There, take it, and now go:
Thus for your good, I thrust you from my Arms.










Farewell.  I hope for ever.
Now Cleomenes I will sound thy Soul:
For Life and Death depend upon thy Choice.
But for that easy Wretch, him I contemn.
Hard state of Lovers! Subject to our Laws!
Fools we must have, or else we cannot sway;
For none but Fools will Woman-kind Obey.
If they prove stubborn and resist our Will,
We Exercise our Pow'r, and use 'em ill.
The passive Slave that Whines, Adores and Dies,
Sometimes we pity: But we still despise.
But when we dote, the self same Fate we prove,
Fools at the best: But double Fools in Love.
We rage at first with ill dissembled scorn;
Then falling from our height, more basely mourn;
And Man, th'insulting Tyrant takes his turn.
Leaves us to Weep for our neglected Charms,
And hugs another Mistress in his Arms:
And that which humbles our proud Sex the most;
Of all our slighted favours makes his boast.







Her Words, Her every Look, confess she loves me,
And therefore she detains these Hostages:

  41As pawns of my return to her and Aegypt.

Thus far 'tis plain and obvious: But the Picture.
That Hellen. There's the Riddle of her Love.
For what I see, or only think I see,
Is like a Glimps of Moon-shine, streak'd with red;
A shuffled, sullen, and uncertain Light,
That Dances thro' the Clouds, and shuts again;
Than 'ware a rising Tempest on the Main.







I would, but cannot speak.
The shame that should to Woman-kind belong,
Flown from my Bosom, hovers on my Tongue.



'Tis rarely seen, that Gods from Heaven descend;
But for some kind, some Charitable end.
And yet your troubled looks ill News import,
Stops, or Delays; but that's no News at Court:
There's somewhat which your pity would disguise.



Would you could read that somewhat in my Eyes.
But as you are a Spartan and a King,
Undaunted hear whatever News I bring:
The Favourite hates you; Coenus has betray'd
The bitter truths, that our loose Court upbraid.
Your Friend was set upon you for a Spy;
And on his Witness, you are doom'd to die.



I have been plung'd already twice in Woes,
And the third time above the Waves I rose.
Still I have strength to Steer me into Port,
And shun the Secret Quick-Sands of the Court.
But when my Friend, who should expecting stand,
On the bare Beach, to lend his helping hand;
When He defends th' Unhospitable shore,
And drives me thence, I sink for ever more.
But 'tis impossible; his Faith is try'd;
The Man, who had defam'd him thus; had ly'd.



Well! I forgive your blunt Laconique way,
It shall be seen, it shall, this very Day,
Who would preserve your Life, and who betray.

  42The King incens'd; the Favourite your Foe,
Yet on the same Conditions you may go:
Your Wife, your Son, your Mother left behind.
What think you now?



'Tis to be wond'rous kind.



Suppose I add a farther bounty yet.



It could but make your Favours over weight.



What if I went my self to waft you o'er?
And left you, when I saw you safe a shore?
For I should leave you, if you thought it fit,
Not to do more than Honour would permit.
Can I do less to show you I am kind,
To Comfort you for those you left behind?



The World would think you kinder than you ought.



Why should I care what base Aegyptians thought?



Immoderate Gifts oppress me, not relieve;
Nor dare I take, what ruins you to give.



Leave me to judge of that. I could prescribe
An easy way of giving back my Bribe.
Why would you force me farther than my part;
Look on my Eyes; and you may read my Heart.
Looks on her as by stealth.

Oh there you met me with a guilty Glance!
Now 'tis too late to plead your Ignorance.



I am so much below, and you above.
What can I say?



But one kind word. I Love.



As far as Gratitude that Love can pay.



Oh stop not there; for that's but half the way:
Would you to one poor narrow word confine
Your passion? When I put no bounds to mine.







Now you speak too soon; Forbear.
Nothing can please me, that begins with her.



I must begin where Nature void of Art,
Directs my Tongue, with her who rules my Heart.



Let us together sail before the Wind,
And leave that dull Domestique Drudge behind.



What? to expose her helpless Innocence,
To the wild fury of an Injur'd Prince?



A vain surmise; their Talents would agree,
The Gods have made your Noble Mind for me:
And her insipid Soul for Ptolomey:
A heavy lump of Earth without desire,
A heap of Ashes that o're-lays your Fire.



Virtue, you must allow her, tho' a Foe.



No more, than what I would to Ice and Snow;
Yet those have Seeds of heat; her shivering Blood,
Makes her at best but impotently good.
But neither I can save you, if you stay,
Nor save my self unless I go away:
For if I stay behind, and set you free,
The Fury of the King would fall on me.



Then to prevent your Fate I must not go,
Death is my choice, since Heaven will have it so.



Heaven would preserve your Life, and so would I,
But you are obstinately bent to dye,



Some Men are made of such a leaky Mould▪
That their fill'd Vessels can no Fortune hold:
Pour'd in, it sinks away, and leaves 'em dry,
Of that unsusceptible Make am I:
Yet think not, Fair one, I your Charms despise,
My Heart's insensible, but not my Eyes.
Respect and Gratitude are all my store,
And those I give: My Love was giv'n before▪



Thus break false Merchants with an honest show:
Rich to themselves, but Bankrupts where they owe.



If at this awful distance I remain,
Better be too Devout, than too profane.



Flattery! Such Alms, the Priesthood gives the poor,
They Bless, and send 'em empty from the Door:
Know you, that Death stands ready at the Gate;
That I forbid him, and suspend your Fate;
The King's short absence leaves me absolute;
When he returns th'inevitable ill,
Is past my pow'r, and may be past my Will:
Unhappy Man! prevent thy Destiny;
Speak one kind word to save thy Life and me.



Be answer'd, and expect no more Reply.



Disdain has swell'd him up, and choak'd his Breath:
Sullen and Dumb, and obstinate to Death:
No signs of pity in his Face appear;
Look! If th'ungrateful Creature shed one Tear!
Cram'd with his Pride, he leaves no room within
For Sighs to issue out, or Love to enter in.
He turns away.

What! dost thou turn thy Face in my despight?
Am I a Toad? a Monster to thy Sight?
Farewel fond pity then: As thou from me,
So, thy good Fortune turns her Face from Thee?
Left, scorn'd, and loath'd, and all without Relief,
Revenge succeeds to Love, and Rage to Grief:
Tempests and Whirlwinds through my Bosom move,
Heave up, and madly mount my Soul above
The reach of Pity, or the bounds of Love.
Approach and seize the Traytor
Enter Guards.




Now I can speak; thy kindness kept me dumb:
For that I could not answer: The false Syren,
No longer hiding her uncomely parts,
Struts on the Waves, and shews the Brute below.



Stop that foul Mouth: Behold this Royal Signet;
The Warrant of his Death.
Guards go to seize him.




Stand back ye Slaves,
He Draws his Sword.

And put me not to stain a Spartan Sword:
With base Aegyptian Blood.
He advances upon 'em, they retire with signs of fear.




Fall on, behold a Noble Beast at Bay:
And the vile Huntsmen shrink More Aid: Who waits?


Now Sir, What brings you here?



My Zeal to serve you.



That shall be try'd; Disarm him▪




Deliver me your Sword.







It must be so!



Is this a Friends Advice,
To give me up defenceless to a Croud,
Whom Arm'd I could resist?



Must he dye, Madam!
Or be reserv'd for further punishment,
At Ptolomey's return?



Why ask you that?



Because his Destiny, for ought I find
Depends on you: Think first, and then Command.



Know then, that his last Thrid is on the Distaff,
And I can cut it now.







I only said I can, and I can Save,
Disarm, and hurt him not.



Once more your Sword.



Send off those Villains: Tho' I fear 'em not;
Yet Cowards are offensive to my sight:
Nor shall they see me do an Act that looks
Below the Courage of a Spartan King.




Cleanthes! May I trust your Faith?







Begone, and wait my Call.
Ex. Guards.





Cleanthes! Stil my Friend; for such I hold thee
Tho' this bad Woman says thou art my Spy;
I cannot give a greater proof than this,
That I believe her not:


If thou art false,
'Tis in thy power to show it safely, now:
And compass that by Treason, which in Arms
Nor Thou, nor any Man alive can force.
Remember still, I gave it to a Friend:
For Life and Death are equal in themselves;
That which would cast the Ballance, is thy falshood,
To make my Death more wretched.



Then you may think me that, which you call False▪
But Duty to my Father  




I would not curse thee, for thou wer't my Friend.

  46I think thee still as honest as thou couldst;
Impenetrably good; but like Achilles,

Thou hadst a soft Aegyptian Heel undipt,
And that has made thee Mortal.




Cleanthes, Thou hast well approv'd thy Faith:
And as this Palace is thy Government,
On utmost peril of thy Life secure him.
One farther word 
Whispers.



Ex Cleanth, looking concernedly on Cleomenes.


So guilty as thou art, and canst thou look
On him, thou hast betraid? Go, take thy hire,
Which thou hast dearly purchas'd, and be great



For you, brave Sir, as you have given my hopes
But Air to feed on; Air shall be your Food:
No Bread shall enter these forbidden Doors.
Thin, hungry Diet, I confess; but still
The liker Spartan Fare: Keen Appetites,
And quick Digestion wait on you and yours.



O mix not Innocence and Guilt together:
What Love have they refus'd, or how offended?
Be Just, tho' you are Cruel, or be Kind,
And punish me alone.




Then there I'll stab thee in thy tender part.
Shreeks of Wo∣men within.




What dismal Cries are those?



Nothing, a trifling sum of Misery,
New added to the foot of thy Account:
Thy Wife is seiz'd by Force and born away;
Farewel, I dare not trust thy Vengeance further.

Running to the Door, he is stopt by Guards with drawn Swords.



Cleora There stands Death, but no Cleora;
I would find both together.






Oh King of Sparta!




I have had news from Hell before you.

  47Cleora's gone to Death. Is there a Door,
A Casement, or a Rift within these Walls?
That can let loose my Body to her rescue?



All clos'd, nothing but Heaven above is open.



Nay, that's clos'd too: The Gods are deaf to Pray'rs!
Hush then; th' irrevocable Doom's gone forth,
And Pray'rs lagg after, but can ne'r o'er-take,
Let us talk forward of our woes to come.




Cleanthes! (Oh could you suspect his Faith?)
'Twas he, that headed those, who forc'd her hence.








A scratch, a feeble Dart,
At distance thrown by an Aegyptian hand.



You heard me not, Cleanthes is 



He was no more good Mother,
He tore a piece of me away, and still
The void place akes within me: O my Boy,
I have bad news to tell thee.




As that I am a Boy: Cleanthes scorn'd me,
And when I drove a Thrust, home as I could,
To reach his Traytor Heart, He put it by,
And cryed as in derision, Spare the Stripling;
Oh that insulting word: I wou'd have swopp'd
Youth for old Age, and all my Life behind,
To have been then a momentary Man.



Alas! Thy Manhood, like a forward Spring,
Before it comes to bear the promis'd Fruit
Is blighted in the Bud: Never, my Boy,
Canst thou fetch Manhood up, with thy short steps,
While with long strides the Giant stalks before thee.



Am I to dye before I am a Man?



Yes, thou must dye with me, and I with her
Who gave me life: and our poor Infant too within,
Must dye before it knows what dying means.
Three different Dates of Nature one would think;
But Fate has cramm'd us all into one Lease;
And that even now expiring.







No, even now we dye; Death is within us,
And keeps out Life, for nourishent is Life,
And we have fed our last; Hunger feeds Death.



A lingring Doom, but four days hence the same;
And we can shorten those, turn Days to Hours,
And Hours to Moments: Death is in our Call.



The sooner then the better.







While we have spirits left to meet him boldly.



I'le hold my Breath,
And keep my Soul a pris'ner in my Body;
There let it creep and wander in the dark,
Till tir'd to find no out-let, it Retreats
Into my Spartan Heart, and there lies pleas'd:
So, we two are provided. Sir, your choice?






Not this dispatch, for we may dye at leisure.
This Famine has a sharp and meager Face:
'Tis Death in an undress of Skin and Bone:
Where Age and Youth, their Land-mark tane away,
Look all one common furrow.



Yet you chuse it,
To please our Foes, that when they view our Skeletons,
And find 'em all alike, they may cry out,
Look how these dull obedient Spartans dy'd,
Just as we wish'd, as we prescrib'd their Death;
And durst not take a nobler, nearer way.



Not so, but that we durst not tempt the Gods,
To break their Images without their leave.
The moment e'r Cassandra came, I had
A Note without a Name, the Hand unknown,
That bad me not despair, but still hope well.
Then dye not yet;
For Heaven has means to free us; if not me,
Yet these and you: I am the hunted Stag,
Whose Life may may ransom yours.



No more of that:
I find your distant drift to die alone:
An unkind Accusation of us all,
As if we durst not die: I'll not survive you!











But hear my Reasons!



Ha! What Shadow's this! This that can glide through Walls!
Or pass its subtle Limbs through Bolts and Bars!
Black too! like what it represents, our Fate.



Too true a Shadow I, and you the Substance.

Lifts up her Veil.






Thus let me grow again to thee,
Too close for Fate to sever.!
Or let Death find me in these dear, dear Arms,
And looking on thee, spare my better part,
And take me willing hence.



What! are you dreaming, Son! with Eyes cast upwards
Like a mad Prophet in an Ecstasie?



Musing on what we saw.
Just such is Death,
With a black Veil, covering a beauteous Face!
Fear'd afar off
By erring Nature: a mistaken Phantom:
A harmless, lambent Fire. She kisses Cold;
But kind, and soft, and sweet, as my Cleora.

Oh could we know,
What Joys she brings; at least, what rest from Grief!
How should we press into her Friendly Arms,
And be pleas'd not to be, or to be happy?



Look! What we have forgot! The Joy to see

Cleora here, has kept us from enquiring,
By what strange means she enter'd.



Small Joy, Heaven knows, to be adopted here,

  50Into the meager Family of Famine!
The House of Hunger: therefore ask'd I not;
So am I pleased to have her Company,
And so displeas'd to have it but in Death 



I know not how or why, my surly Gaoler,
Hard as his Irons, and insolent as Pow'r,
When put in vulgar Hands, Cleanthes gone,
Put off the Brute; and with a gloomy Smile,
(That show'd a sullen loathness to be kind,)
Skreen'd me within this Veil, then led me forth;
And using to the Guards Cassandra's Name:
Made that my Pass-port: Every Door slew ope,
T' admit my Entrance; and then clapt behind me,
To barr my going back.





Cassandra plots, and then refines on Malice:
Plays with Revenge: with Rage she snatch'd you hence,
And renders you with Scorn: I thought to show you
How easie 'twas to die, by my Example,
And hansel Fate before you: But thy presence
Has chang'd my Mind, to drag this lingring life,
To share thy Sorrows, and assist thy Weakness.
Come in, my Friends, and let us practise Death,
Stroke the grim Lyon, till he grow familiar.

Cleora! Thou and I, as Lovers should,
Will hand in hand to the dark Mansions go,
Where Life no more can cheat us into Woe;
That sucking in each others latest Breath,
We may transfuse our Souls, and put the change on Death.





















A wholsome Resolution: Have you fix'd
The Time?



He daily dies, by Hours and Moments:
All vital Nourishment but Air is wanting!
Three rising Days and two descending Nights
Have chang'd the Face of Heav'n and Earth by turns;
But brought no kind Vicissitude to him:
His State is still the same: With hunger pinch'd:
Waiting the slow approaches of his Death;
Which halting on-wards, as his life goes back,
Still gains upon his Ground!



But e'er Fate reach him,
The Mercy of the King may interpose:
You have the Signet?



Yes! In your Despite!



Be not displeas'd suppose he shou'd escape?



Suppose he shou'd have Wings? Impossible.



Yet, Keepers have been brib'd: To whom can Ptolomy

Impute that Crime, but you?



He may: But let him if he dares:
Come, Statesman! Do not shuffle in your pace;
You wou'd expose me to the People's Hatred,
By hurrying on this Act of Violence:
You know a little thing provokes the Crowd
Against a Mistress: She's the Publick Mark:
Therefore content your self I will be safe:
Nor shall the Prisoner die a speedier Death,

  52Than what my Doom decreed: Unless the King
Reverse his Orders, by my Messenger.



May I presume to ask you, whom you sent?



Thy Son, unknown to thee; for so I charg'd him:
And this the promis'd hour of his Return. Nay wonder not,
I chose him with design: That whatsoe'er
The King ordains, you both shou'd share th' Event:
And stand or fall with me. Ponder on that, and leave me!





What can she mean? She neither kills nor saves 





Now tell me, Heart: Now answer for thy self:
What wilt thou do! and what dost thou desire!
His Life? No, he's ungrateful: Or, his Death?
I tremble at that Word. What then? His Love!
His Love! my Heart! What! by Restraint, and Famine?
Are these the means to compass thy Design?
Revenge! My Hands so soft, his Heart so hard,
The blow recoils, and hurts me while I strike!
Like the mad Viper, scourg'd into a Rage,
I shoot into my self my fatal Sting.




The Ship is ready, when you please to sail,
And waits but your Command: The Wind stands fair.



Be secret, and attend my farther pleasure 
Gives him a Purse, and exit Mariner.
So; this was time well manag'd: In three Days
To hire a Vessel Put my Wealth on board:
Send off th' observing Son, and Fool the Father:
See him I will, to sound his last Resolves,
If Love can soften him, or Fear can bow.
If both shou'd fail, th' ungrateful Wretch shall find,
Rage has no Bounds in slighted Woman-kind.










NO Food: And this the third arising Sun:
But what have I to do with telling Suns,
And measuring Time? That runs no more for me!
Yet sure the Gods are good: I wou'd think so,
If they wou'd give me leave;
But Virtue in Distress, and Vice in Triumph
Make Atheists of Mankind.






A Soul, not conscious to it self of Ill,
Undaunted Courage, and a Master-mind:
No Comfort else but Death,
Who like a lazie Master stands aloof,
And leaves his Work to the slow hands of Famine.



All I wou'd ask of Heav'n,
Is, but to die alone; a single Ruine;
But to die o'er and o'er, in each of you,
With my own hunger pinch'd, but pierc'd with yours!



Grieve not for me!



What! not for you, my Mother!
I am strangely tempted to blaspheme the Gods;
For giving me so good, so kind a Parent:
And this is my return, to cause her Death 



Peace! Your Misfortunes cause it, not your Fault.







  54I stretch'd my bounds as far as I could go,
To shun the sight of what I cannot help;
A Flow'r withering on the Stalk for want
Of nourishment from Earth and showers from Heaven:
All I can give thee is but Rain of Eyes 
Wiping his Eyes.




Alas! I have not wherewithal to weep:
My eyes grow dim, and stiffen'd up with drought,
Can hardly rowl and walk their feeble round:
Indeed  I am faint.



And so am I.  Heaven knows! However
aside.

In pity of 'em both, I keep it secret:
Nor shall he see me fall 






How does our helpless Infant?



It wants the Breast, its kindly nourishment:
And I have none to give, From these dry Cesterns
Which unsupply'd themselves, can yield no more:
It pull'd and pull'd but now, but nothing came.
At last it drew so hard, that the blood follow'd:
And that Red Milk I found upon its Lips,
Which made me swoon with fear.



Go in and rest thee,
And hush the Child asleep.



Look down ye Gods 
Look, Hercules, thou Author of my Race,
And Jog thy Father Iove, that he may look
On his neglected Work of Humane-kind:
Tell him  I do not Curse him: But Devotion
Will cool in after times, if none but good Men suffer. 
What! another increase of Grief?









Why dost thou call me by so kind a name?

〈◊〉! That implies presiding Care,

〈…〉 to give.  Willing himself to want!

〈…〉 thy needs require!




Have you none, Father? One poor Hungry Morsel:
Or give me leave to die  as I desir'd;
For without your consent, Heaven knows, I dare not.



I prithee stay a little: I am loath
To say hard things of Heaven!



But what if Heaven
Will do hard things, must not hard things be said?
Y'have often told me, That the Souls of Kings
Are made above the rest of Humane Race;
Have they not Fortunes fitted for those Souls?
Did ever King die Starv'd?



I know not that:
Yet still be firm in this: The Gods are good,
Tho' thou and I may perish.



Indeed I know not,
That ever I offended Heaven in thought:
I always said my Prayers.



Thou didst thy Duty.



And yet you lost the Battel when I Pray'd.



'Twas in the Fates I should: But hold thee there!
The rest is all unfathomable depth:
This we well know, That if there be a Bliss
Beyond this present Life, 'tis purchas'd here,
And Virtue is its price.



But are you sure
Our Souls shall be Immortal?







Because I find, that now my Body starves,
My Soul decays: I think not as I did:
My Head goes round: And now you swim before me▪
Methinks my Soul is like a Flame, unfed
With Oyl, that dances up and down the Lamp,
But must expire ere long.



I prithee try to hold it while thou canst.



I would obey you,
As I have always done, but I am faint;
And when you please to let me die, I'll thank you.



Thou shalt have Food: I promise thee, thou shalt.



Then you shall promise to have Food for your self too;
For if you have it not, I would refuse to eat:
Nay I would chuse to die, that you might seed on me.



Mark, Heaven, his Filial Love,
And if a Family of such as these
Must perish thus, your Model is destroy'd
By which you made good Men.






Be chearful, Sir, The Gods have sent us Food.



They try'd me of the longest: But by whom?



Go in and see.



Good Father, do not stay to ask, but go.



Go thou  thy Youth calls fiercer than my Age.



But then make haste: and come to take your part:
Hunger may make me impious to eat all,
And leave you last to starve 






Sir, will you go?



I know not: I am half seas o'er to Death!
And since I must die once, I wou'd be loth
To make a double work of what's half finish'd;
Unless I could be sure the Gods wou'd still
Renew these Miracles: Who brought this Food?



He's here that can resolve you!









How dar'st thou come again within my sight?
Thou art  but 'tis no matter what thou art, 
I'll not consider thee so far to think
Thee worth Reproach.  Away, away Egyptian!
That's all the Name that's left Thee.



Such I appear indeed:



Why then for once, that which thou seem'st thou art:
Be gone.



Oh I have been too long away!



Too soon thou art return'd,
To Triumph o'er my Fate.



Forgive me, that I seem'd your Foe.



Forgive me, Heaven, for thinking thee my Friend:
No more; 'tis loss of Time to talk.




When hunger calls so loud for Sustenance.
But whether Friend or Foe, 'tis Food I bring.



'Tis Poison; and my Mother, and my Wife,
And my poor famish'd Boy are eating Death:
Thou would'st not have me think that thou repent'st?



Heav'n knows, I do not!



Well said, Man! Go on  and be not bashful
To own the Merits of thy Wickedness.



What need has Innocence of a Repentance?



Shuffling again! Prithee be of a piece.
A little steddiness becomes a Villain.



Oh! Friend for yet I dare to call you so;
Which if I were a Villain; sure I durst not.
Hear me or kill me!



So, by Heav'n, I would,
For thy profaning Friendship's holy Name:
But for thou see'st no Justice hanging here
On this bare side, thou talk'st secure of Vengeance.



Then if you had a Sword, my Death's resolv'd!



Thy Conscience answers thee.



Without more Evidence than bare Surmise;
At most appearance of a Crime unprov'd;
And while unprov'd, uncertain?



Traitor, no more; 'tis fulsome!



Take the Sword 
Throws it to him.




I thank thee  Draw thy own.
Takes it up.




No  Take that too.
Draws his, and offers it.




Fool Would'st thou die without Defence?




But you forbad me to defend my self,
Then, when you would not hear me!



Can Falshood have a better Argument
Than Force for its Defence? Trust to that Topick,
And bear thee like a Man.



I think, I do.



What kind o' Man is that, who dares not fight?



The Man, who dares not when his Honour calls,
Is what you mean; but what I never was:
For Honour never summons without Reason.
Force is the Law of Brutes. The dumb Creation,
Where Words and Reason want, appeal to Might.
I thought a King, and what you boast, a Spartan,

Might have known this without th' Aegyptian's telling.



Come, Come; Thou dar'st not fight.



By Heav'n, I dare.
But first my Honour must be justify'd,
If you dare be my Judge:
For in this crude and indigested Quarrel,
If I should fall unheard, you kill your Friend,
The Man who lov'd you best, and holds you dearest.
And should you perish in th' unjust Attempt,
The Sword that slew you, shou'd revenge your Death:
For I should soon o'ertake you in the way,
To quit my self before you reach'd the Shades,
And told your Tale to Minos.




Then I must hear: But swear, swear first I charge thee,
That when I have pronounc'd, thou wilt no more
Prolong thy prattle with some new Excuse:
And prithee cut it short because I faint,
And long to kill thee first: Oh, I am going,
A rising Vapour rumbles in my Brains.
I hear my Words far off   stand, stand, thou Traytor,
And swim not thus before me 'tis too late,
Puts the point upon the ground once or twice, leans on't, and staggers.
And I fall unreveng'd 
Offers to run at him, and is falling.





Runs to him, and takes him in his Arms.

The best of Men is dying in my Arms,
And I want pow'r to save him.





Oh Heav'ns! what means this direful Object?



Ask not with unassisting pity; bow him forward;
Rub his numb'd Temples, while I wipe the Sweat
From his cold clammy Face.




Bounces against my hands, as if it would
Thrust off his manly Soul.



Wrench ope his mouth,
While I infuse these Sovereign Drops, whose Pow'r
Will soon recal his wander'd sense  
He instills somewhat out of a Vial into his Mouth.
He stirs!
And stretches now, and seems t' essay his Limbs.




Standing a while, they support him.




In his Arms, who dy'd with you;
And now you live, revives.







Believe your Eyes, I am.



Speak then, and truly, (for I trust not him,)
Who brought me back to Life?



Who, but he, who was left single with you,
Who caught you falling in his faithful Arms;
And not alone sufficient to restore you,
Call'd loud for my Assistance:
I found him propping you with trembling Hands;
His Eyes so haggard, I could scarce distinguish
Who was the living Friend, and who the dead.



All this Cleanthes! This, What this Cleanthes?









Much wrong'd, but ever faithful!




I live? Or am I in the Regions of the dead?
And hear the Fables there; my self a Fable?



Go in, and see your chearful Family
Eating his Bread, brought in their last Distress;
And with a good mistaking Piety,
First blessing him, then Heaven!



When I hear this, I have no need of Food:

  60I am restor'd without it.



Then, now hear me,
How I was forc'd into this seeming Falshood,
To save my self, the only means remaining
To save the Man I lov'd beyond my self;
And gain a needful Credit with Cassandra:
And yet even then deceiv'd, and sent far off
For three long Days, unknowing of your wants,
Not thinking she, who lov'd, could use you thus.
By Famishment to  



O no more! no more!
For now I understand e'er thou can'st speak it half:
To thee I ow'd the seizing of my Sword,
Lest I should fall by odds My Wife's return,
All, all to thee  And thou art more than all:
Can'st thou forgive me? Can'st thou, my Cleanthes?
Can I deserve thus to grow here once more?
Embracing him.

Let me embrace my self quite into thee.



Come, come as fiercely as thou wilt I meet thee 


I close within thee, and am thou again.



Why, this is as it should be.



I could not thus have taken to the Death
Anothers Falshood, but thine, only thine:
For infinitely, infinitely loving,
'Twas a wide gap thou mad'st within my Bosom,
And as my Soul rent from me.




This violent Transport of my Reconcilement,
Makes me forget thy Wants   When I embrac'd thee
Thy spungy Body dwindled in my Arms,
And like a Ghost fled from me.



I could eat 
Going in.

Now my first Appetite of Love is serv'd;
And that was much the keenest: Let us in;
For Life looks lovely now, and worth preserving.



Not that way, Friend  
It leads you to the Women, and the Boy.



And why must I avoid those tender Blessings?



Even such, because they are, you must avoid them.
For I must tell you, Friend, you have but time
To snatch a hasty Morsel, and away:
Nothing of Manhood must be clogg'd or soften'd
With Womanish Sighs and Tears, and kind Adieu's!
And those ill-tim'd Remorses of good Nature,
When your whole Soul is needful.



You tell us Wonders!



At the King's Return,
Which daily we expect, your Death's resolv'd:
This hour's your own! Take it, and tempt your Fortune;
Some few brave Friends I hope to add;
If not, all Aegypt's number'd in my self.



I am all on Fire; now for a lucky pull
At Fate's last Lottery:
I long to see the Colour, white or black;
That's the God's Work: And if I fall their shame,
Let 'em ne'er think of making Heroes more,
If Cowards must prevail.




The fewer Partners in the share of Honour.



Come, my Pantheus: Lead, my best Cleanthes!
We three to all the World.




Magas, and Liberty, let be the Word:

Magas is lov'd, and Liberty desir'd.
A short Refection waits at the Lieutenant's,
That honest Friend, who sent you back your Wife;
We'll drink a Bowl of Wine, and pour the rest,
Not to the Dog Anubis; but to Iove,

The Freer and Avenger.






Gone and without taking leave!




He bated me the Forms, and you the Fondness.




Pantheus too, and he who brought the Food,
The brave Aegyptian, vanish'd all together.



Oh, my fore-boding Soul! he's gone to Death!
And that Cleanthes, whom thou call'st the Brave,
Has basely train'd him out to his Destruction!



Suspect him not: When Fate was in his power,
And by a Method so secure as Famine;
To save us then, shows he had little need
To trick my Son to Death:
I have a better prospect of th' Event.



Dear Mother! Comfort me and tell your Thoughts;
For I see nothing but a gathering Tempest,
Horror on Horror to the end of Heaven!



No, no; you are not of a Soul to bear
The mighty Good and Ill that meet mid-way,
As from two Goals; and which comes first upon us,
Fate only knows.



Then speak to me; for I can stand the Shock,
Like a young Plant that fastens in a Storm,
And deeper drives the Root.



Thy Soul's too strong; thy Body yet too weak
To bear the Crush: Be still, and wait thy Doom.


A Cry within: Liberty, Liberty; Magas, Magas; To Arms for Magas, and for Liberty.



What noble sound was that? So smart and vigorous?
A Soul in every Word.



Why that was it,
I thought, was doing; but I durst not tell,
Till now it shows it self.
The Works begun, my Boy; the Works begun:
There was thy Father in that Warlike Shout,
Stemming the Tide of Aegypt.




O comfort me, my Husband's Mother; say,
My Lord may live and conquer.




But still make sure of Death: Trust we to that,
As to our last Reserve.



Alas, I dare not die.



Come, come, you dare:
Do not belie your Courage.



Heaven help me, I have none.



Then dare you be a Slave to base Aegyptians?

For that must be, if you outlive your Husband.



I think, I durst, to save my self from Death.



Then, as a Slave, you durst be ravish'd too?







The Gods cannot forbid it
By any way but Death.



Then I dare die.



I told you so: You did not know your Vertue.
Poor trembling thing; I'll warm thee in my Bosom,
And make thee take Death kindly.


Another Shout within: Liberty and Magas.


What must become of me?



More Trouble yet about this paltry Being?
For shame no more such Qualms!



No more such vile Mistakes! I would die warm,
And not in Women's Company but Men's.
Whether some God inspires me to this Act,
Or Fate inevitably calls me on,
I will not, cannot stay:
But as a generous, unflesh'd Hound, that hears
From far the Hunter's Horn and chearful Cry;
So will I haste; and by the Musick led,
Come up with Death or Honour 
Exit.




Stop him, dear Mother; he may comfort us,
But cannot help his Father.



The Hero's Blood is not to be controul'd;
Even in a Child 'tis madly Masterful:
But wait we patient with our petty Stakes,
Which on those greater Gamesters must depend;
For as they throw, our little Lots must follow,
Like sweepings of their heap.
Cratisiclaea and Cleora go in.





A Shout within: Liberty, Liberty, and Magas.




What? Is this populous City turn'd a Desart?
The Cry of Liberty runs on before us;
And yet not one appears!
By Hercules! we drive 'em through their Town:
They dare not stay to welcome their Deliverers.



The Cowards are afraid of what they wish:
And cou'd they be their own, they wou'd be ours.



They're gone! We talk to Houses and to Walls.



Not so: I see some peeping from their Doors.
What are you, Friends or Foes?


Four Aegyptians appear peeping at the opposite Entrances of the Stage.




Friends, Friends: All honest Men, and Hearty to the Cause.



Explain what Cause and give the general Cry.


1 & 2. Aegypt.










The Cowards whisper Liberty so softly,
As if they were afraid the Gods should hear it,
And take 'em at their Word.




No, Friend: We Vulgar never fear the Gods:
But we whisper, for fear our over-thwart Neighbours
Should hear us cry, Liberty, and betray us to the Government.



Of what side are you there?

to the opposite Egypt.





That's according as you succeed: Of your side hitherto.



If you are Men, come join with us.




You are too few for us to join with you; but get the greater Party of your side, and we'll be sure to help the Common Cry.



Dare you doe nothing to assert your Freedom?




Yes; We'll pray devoutly for you.



The Brave pray with their Swords; that's a Man's part.




Pray with our Swords, the Law calls Fighting;
And Fighting is Bloud-shed; And Bloud-shed is Hanging;
And Hanging is the part of a Dog, and not of a Man, in my opinion.




Every one shift for himself,
Egpytian Trumpets within.


The Government is a coming.

They shrink back in a fright, and clap the Doors.


Run; couch, ye Cowards, to your Tyrant Lords.
A Dog you worship, and partake his Nature:
A Race of speaking Spaniels.



Let 'em go; We'll doe our work without 'em.



The comfort is, our Foes are like our Friends 
Holy-day Hero's, drawn out once a month,
At publick Charge to Eat, and to be Drunk:
Mere Mouths of War.






'Twas what I always fear'd; e'en when I sav'd Thee,
To find thee thus engag'd among my Foes:
But, yet submit; And I can yet forgive Thee:
Consider; for 'tis all I have time to say,

  66Thou fight'st against thy Father.



Against my Father's Cause, but not my Father:
If you wou'd needs become your self a Slave,
And get me such, I must redeem us both,
And will, or perish in the brave Attempt.



Withdraw thy self from ruine: I command Thee.



Command I cannot: But, I beg you, Sir,
Engage not for an Arbitrary Power,
That odious Weight upon a Free-born-soul.



This is too much; fall on: But spare my Son.







Sosybius, hold! Withdraw your Men to distance:
You know this Signet: Obey your King in Me.




Never more gladly: Tho' my Son's a Rebell;
Yet Nature works to save him.



Then rather than he shou'd untimely fall,
Coenus draws off Sosybius's his Men.

I wou'd forgive the Rest: and offer Life,
Panth. Cleom. Men, Ex. Manent Cassan. Sosyb. Cleanth.
Even to that Fugitive, if he please to treat.



Be short: and, if you can, for once, sincere.



What can you hope from this unequal Fight,
Where numbers rise from every Foe you kill,
And grow from their defeat?




And to die killing is a kind of Conquest.



But are not Life and Freedom worth accepting,
When offer'd; and, with such Conditions too,
As make 'em both more pleasing? Your Friends safety,
Your Son, your Mother, and that only She,
Who loves you best, for your Companion home:
You know what She I mean.
Aside to him.




No private parley 
Stepping back.


Spartans doe all in publick.



We know your reasons for those secret whispers;

  67And to your Infamy 





Peace, Peace, my Friend.
No injuries from Women can provoke
A Man of Honour to expose their Fame.
Madam; We understand each other well:
My Son, my Mother, and my Wife restor'd,
'Tis Peace; if not, 'tis War.



A fair Proposal: Be it Peace.



No, Fool! 'tis War. Know, Heavy Hero, know,
I gain'd this time for my secure Revenge;
To seize thy Wife and Mother: And to stab Thee
On both sides of thy Heart, they're gone to die,
To make thy Death more painfull. Farewel, Traytor!
And thank thy self not me 

Ex. Cas. & Sosyb.





And speedy Death, or Conquest: Hold, Cleanthes!




By Heaven, I am pleas'd to see thee safe this moment,
Tho' I expect the next to lose thee. Guard him,

Cleanthes: Set him safe behind the Front.



Come, Sir: You are now my Charge!




That I should seek this danger, and not share it.


Forgive me, Sir, that once I disobey you,
To prove my self your Son; living, or dying,
I'll not be less than Man.



Oh! I could chide Thee.
But there's no time: for Love and Anger both
Fight by my side; and Heaven protect thy Courage.

Cleomenes, Cleanthes, Cleonidas, and their Party go off the Stage to fight the Egyptians.
Trumpets, Drums, Shouts and Clashings within.

  68Re-enter both Parties  The Egyptians first: Driven by Cleomenes Pantheus ready to kill Sosybius,  as having him down: Cleanthes runs to him, and interposes.




Pantheus, hold; or, turn thy Sword on me.






Rise, Sir; and, thank your Son.






Pursue the Foes: I have no Joy of Conquest
Till I have set my Father safe.



The Gods reward thy pious Care.

Cleanth. leads off his Father; while Pan∣theus follows Cleomenes: The Egypti∣ans are driven to the bottom of the Stage: They make a wheeling Fight; still retiring before the Spartans: Cle∣omenes advances eagerly after the Egy∣ptians, and, with Pantheus, drives 'em off: Cleonidas is left behind: So is Coenus who had skulk'd.



This was well watch'd: The Boy is left ungarded.


Thrusts at Cleonidas behind.



Oh! I am slain by Treason!
Revenge me, Royal Father.





'Twas sure his voice:
Sees him on the ground.

Too sure: Pity and Rage
Distract my Soul: but rage will first be serv'd.

Runs at Coe∣nus and kills him.


There's Justice for my self, and for my Son!
Look up, sweet Boy,
And tell me that thou liv'st.



Fain I would live
To Comfort you: I bleed and am asham'd
To say I faint, and call my self your Son;

  69O Traytor Coenus? What's become of him?



Look, there he lies.



I am glad on't,
Forgive me, Heaven: I hope 'tis no offence
To say I am glad, because he kill'd me basely.
Still, I grow fainter: Hold me, hold me, Father.



Cheer up, and thou shalt live.



No: I'm just dying.



What shall I lose?



A Boy: That's all. I might have liv'd to Manhood:
But once I must have dy'd.



But not before thy Father?



Nay: then you envy me, that I am first Happy:
I go; and when you come pray find me out
And own me for your Son. 
Dies.




There went his Soul: Fate thou hast done thy worst,
And all thou canst henceforth; is but mean Slaughter,
The gleanings of this Harvest. 





Sir, y're well found: our Enemies are fled:
I left our men pursuing, and made haste
To bring this joyfull News.



Look there, and if thou dar'st, now give me joy.



Enough! y' have stopp'd my mouth  what Coenus kill'd?
I ask no Questions then, of who kill'd who:
The Bodies tell their Story as they lie.
Haste, and revenge!



Where are our Enemies?



Sculking, disperst in Garrets, and in Cellars.





Not worth the seeking: Are these fit t'atone
For Cleomenes Mother, Son, and Wife?
But what the Gods have left us, we must take.



'Tis all in vain: we have no further work:
The People will not be dragg'd out to Freedom:
They bar their Doors against it: Nay, the Prisoners
Even guard their Chains, as their inheritance;
And Man their very Dungeons, for their Masters:
Lest Godlike Liberty, the Comon Foe,
Should enter in; and they be judg'd hereafter
Accomplices of Freedom.



Then, we may sheath our Swords.




But so as brave men should, each in his Bosome.
That onely way is left us to die free.



All's lost for which I once desir'd to live.



Come, to our business then: Be speedy Sir;
And give the word; I'll be the first; to charge
The Grim Foe, death.



Fortune, Thou hast reduc'd me very low,
To do the Drudgery of fate my self!
What! not one brave Egyptian! not one worthy
To do me manly Right, in single Combat!
To fall beneath my fury? For that's Justice:
But, then to drag me after: For to die,
And yet, in Death to Conquer, is my Wish!



Then have your Wish: The Gods at last are kind:
And have provided you a Sword that's worthy
To match your own: 'Tis an Egyptians too.



Is there that hidden Treasure in thy Countrey?
The Gods be prais'd  for such a Foe I want.



  Not such a Foe, but such a Friend am I.
I would fall first, for fear I should survive you,
And pull you after to make sure in Death,
To be your undivided Friend for ever.



Then enter We into each others Breasts.
'Tis a sharp passage; yet a kind one too.
But to prevent the blind mistake of Swords,
Lest one drop first, and leave his Friend behind,
Both thrust at once, and home, and at our Hearts:
Let neither stand on Guard, but let our Bosomes

  71Lie open to each other in our Death,
As in our Life they were 



I Seal it thus.
Kiss and embrace.




And where's my part? You shut me out like Churls,
While you devour the Feast of Death betwixt you.



Cheer up thy Soul, and thou shalt die Pantheus:
But in thy turn: There's Death enough for all:
But as I am thy Master, wait my leisure,
And honestly Compose my Limbs to Rest,
Then serve thy self.  Now are you ready, Friend?







Then this to our next happy meeting 

They both push together, then stagger backwards and fall together in each others Arms.


Speak, have I serv'd you to your Wish, my Friend?



Yes, Friend  thou hast  I have thee in my heart 
Say  art Thou sped?



I am, 'tis my last Breath.



And mine  Then both are Happy 
both Die.




So, this was well perform'd and soon dispatch'd:
Both sound asleep already,
And farewell both for one short moment.
Trumpets sound, Vi∣ctory within.

Those are the Foes, our little band is lost
For want of these Defenders: I must hasten,
Lest I be forc'd to live, and led in Triumph;
Defrauded of my Fate: I've earn'd it well,
And finish'd all my Task: This is my place:
Just at my Masters feet Guard him, yee Gods,
And save his sacred Corps from publick shame 


He falls on his Sword, and lies at the feet of Cleom.▪Dies.





'Tis what my Heart foreboded: There he lies,
Extended by the Man whom best he lov'd!
A better Friend than Son.



What's he, or Thou? or Ptolomy? or Aegypt?
Or all the world to Cleomenes lost?



Then I suspected right: If my revenge,
Can ease my sorrow; This, the King shall know;
That thou mayst reap the due reward of Treason,
And violated Love.



Thy worst old Dotard.
I wish to die: but if my mind should Change,
So well I know my Power, that Thou art lost.



The King's arrival shall decide our Fate.
Mean time to show how much I honour Virtue,
Take up that Hero's Body, bear it high,
Like the Procession of a Deity:
Let his arm'd Figure on his Tomb be set,
And We like Slaves lie grovling at his feet;
Whose Glories growing till his latest Breath,
Excell'd all others: And his own in Death. 
Ex. omnes.




