



IS't not a pleasant place?



As e're I saw;
but I can see no Wenches yet, and that
I long for.







What a question's that? why do
the hungry long for meat I pray?




perceive you are an Epicure in Love,
and onely wo'd feed your body.



I am no Platonick Philosopher,
who while they feed their mindes,

  2do starve themselves; give me a Love that ha's
some substance in it.



Well, this is no time
for to convert you; behold some coming here.




Come, and in this pleasant Grove,
Sacred to the Queen of Love,
Let our Voices and our Feet
In harmonious number meet;
Thus we sing the year throughout,
And merrily, merrily dance about.





O happy Land! of all the sun surveys,
where thus perpetually they pass their dayes;
and if onely a living death it be,
or dying life to live in misery;
seeing their joyful lives, we well may say,
in all the world there are none live but they.



They're dainty wenches Ile say that for them,
and I must needs follow them.







Never talk of it, I can hold no more
then a good Greyhound when he sees the Hare,
or Hawk the Quarry; it is all my sport
and inclination, and by their mirth and jollity
I know they're right, and of the Game.





  3errour and ignorance now, who do not know,
how true vertue is a chearful thing,
rendring its favourites and followers far
more chearful too, more vertuous they are.



Hang Vertue! I know no chearfulness
but laughing, and I'me sure all the Nymphs here
are as supple and pliant as Kids-leather gloves,
a gentle pluck or two will easily draw them on.



How know you that? who came
but yesternight a stranger hither.



And how know you the contrary? who came
but hither yesternight along with me? let it suffice
I know all women by instinct; and
is not this Love's Kingdom? answer me to that.







Why then I am in mine,
for I'me the loving'st creature
(thou doest not know me yet)
I tell thee I was such a forward Childe,
I fell in Love with my Nurse in the very Cradle;
and they were forc't to wean me,
for fear of spoiling her milk.



A great deflowrer of nurses it seems you are
but had you not better tarry till Diophantes comes,
who ha's promis'd to be our guide, and instruct us
in their manners and customs here?



Tarry you for him if
you please, my busines can best be dispatcht alone,
and I need no tutors nor conductors for't.

  4I thank you.



Well, thank your self if any harm
come of it.



No harm I'le warrant you,
but rather good, the good of posterity,
whose business I am going about; and methinks
I hear the Children yet unborn, crying out
unto me to make haste, and so I will
my little pretty sweet Babes.




what a wild fellow's this? I'm sorry & asham'd
(now I know him better)
that I came along with him to Cyprus here;
who knows no more of Love then beasts do▪ and's
so bravely impudent and vicious,
he puts vice & impudence to the extreamest proof
and shames not to be impudent enough:
but here comes Diophantes.





Noble Evander, I must demand your pardon
if I instead of waiting on you, have made
you wait for me; but I am Advocate in

Love's Court you know, where so many petty
quarrels of Lovers are daily to be reconcil'd.
W▪ave scarcely any vacancy at all,
nor had we dispatcht so soon to day, but for
the grand Solemnity i'th' Temple.



What's that I pray?



Why, 'tis the anniversary Feast of Venus,

our Sea-born Goddesses first arrival here
upon the Cyprian shore.



And with good reason
you Celebrate that with all Solemnity,
that renders you so famous through all the world.



And to add to th' general Solemnity oth' day
there's a particular Ceremony too
renders it more solemn.







Why, you must know
that all strangers by th' Laws of Cyprus here
are after three moneths residence to swear
they love some one ith' Isle, or else be banisht;
now Sir, three moneths to day are just expir'd,
since there arriv'd a Nymph the most admir'd,
and most deserving admiration,
as ever in Love's Kingdom yet was known;
and whether she'l take the solemn Oath or no,
onely her self and the Deity do know;
for to all else 'tis doubtful.



Can it be doubted that any here sho'd love,
where they are all born and bred Lovers; the very
air inspires it, and 'tis as natural
for them to love, as 'tis to live and breath.



True Sir, but for our admiration
the gods work miracles sometimes, and she is one;
but where's your friend Pamphilus?





I know not whither.



Of what humour, I pray,
and disposition is he?



Why, harmless and merry, only a little wilde



He thinks perhaps our Nymphs are wan∣ton here;
but Sir, I can assure you they are all
so chaste and pure, as Christal you wo'd say
is not more pure, nor Ice more clear then they;
And for the Land, know Sir, in all the spacious
world there's not a more religious place,
where Love with greater purity is profest,
nor serv'd and honour'd with more pious breast.



I've understood so much, and therefore come
expresly hither on devotion,
to render my vows & off'rings at his sacred shrine



I applaud you for't, and may the powers divine
for every prayer that you send up to them,
send you as many blessings down agen.



Soft! who are those come here?



Oh now you'l see
A noble Ceremony and Solemnity.




Far hence be all profane, whilst here
With Solemn Rites thus every year,
To render all our Lovers true,
We element Love's Kingdom new;
That no heart may too strongly beat,
We give its fires a temperate heat;

  7We give its waters vertuous force,
To swage them (taken in their Source)
Fogs of perjur'd vows and oaths,
Which spotless truth and candour loaths,
We purge the Air from, and the Earth
From every strange and monstrous birth:
For as some Lands their monsters fear,
Lust onely is our monster here;
As others pois'nous beasts molest,
So avarice is our pois'nous beast:
From which when once a Land is freed,
Then, thên Love's Kingdom 'tis indeed.


Manent Evander & Diophontes.


A Ceremony as religious as great!



Y'admire too soon, & have seen nothing yet,
if but compar'd to what you'l see anon,
worthy your sight and admiration.





You wo'nt be mad?



I will be nothing but for Love,
and for Love I will be any thing; 
pray unhand me: Shall Bellinda, the
divine Bellinda be banisht hence to day,
and shall Palemon see it, and shall he live?



And shall the gallant and the brave

Palemon dye onely for fear of death?
how low and poorly wo'd it shew!
and that's the worst; but I hope better still:

  8Venus the Goddess of this Isle
has oft done greater miracles then this,
to make one young and fair to love.



O Polydor! who has
miracles for hopes, has hopes too nigh despair.




but yours are far
from that; for ha's she not promis'd,
if any i'th' Isle she loves, it shall be you:
And is this no hope? no comfort?




as 'mong the numerous and unhappy throng
of her excluded Lovers to stand next the door,
first expos'd to the affront, and nighest concern'd
in the disgrace.



Nay, if you give your self despair,
'tis in vain to give you hope; suppose the worst:
If you love fair Bellinda, as you say,
and she perchance be banisht hence today,
what hinders you from following her? vainly and
ridiculously does he complain of Winter,
who by following the sun might still enjoy the Spring▪



I, but following an ecclipsed Sun,
what shu'd he gain by it, but onely by
that fatal light to have every thing appear
more sad and dismal then if it absent were?



Well, though it seem more to be wisht then hop'd,

  9that she shu'd love you; yet take this from me,
your Nymphs are bashful, and so cautious too,
they will not seem to love, although they do:
and 'twod appear a miracle to me,
she shu'd not feel love who makes so many feel it;
or that her heart shu'd resist that alone,
was never yet resisted by any one: 
But there's I fear some farther misery
in't, and the gods are highly offended w'ye,
or they'd ne're inflict on you as they do
so heavy a punishment to love one, who
neglects you; and the while, to neglect one
so dearly loves ye, and see where she does come.




Where shu'd this Nymph be? she's not at home,
nor in the sacred Grove; and 'tis too soon
to go to th' Temple yet.



Well, I'le leave you.



What, will you go
and leave me alone then?



How can I leave you better accompanied?



In company of one I hate!



In company of one
who dearly loves you, and for your hate to her
in these pretty skirmishes, there is no fear
of danger; for now y'are foes, and then
the peace is made, and you are friends agen,
and so I leave you.




What shall I do? she has

  10spy'd me, and there's no avoiding her; I'de best
dissemble then, and by one importunity
avoid another: Gentle Filena, well met.





that guild the sun-shine, as that guilds the day:
Kinde words,
whose ravishing sweetness melts into my heart
at sun-shine of those looks of his; how I'me
o'rejoyed with them!



I have a suit unto you.



And I another to you.



To me! fye, fye,
Nymphs sue to men!



Why, not Palemon here,
where Love's not onely Love, but Vertue too;
it no wayes misbeseems a Nymph to wooe: 
But what's your suit? you may be sure that I am too much yours (Palemon) to deny
you any thing.



You know Filena, how much
I love Bellinda, and how much I long to know
if she loves me, which you can tell me best,
are confident of all the secrets of her breast.



Some secrets she confides to me 'tis true,
but of her Love I know no more then you;
for that's a warfare where each one's a spy,
and every rival is an enemy:
She'd ne're trust me with't then, whom she does know
am both a Lover, and her Rival too.



Howe're Filena, you do know at least
those softer minuts, when Nymphs minds are best
dispos'd for the impressions of Love;
in one of those then prethee do but move
my Suit unto her, especially before she goes
to th' Temple, when she must needs be more
dispos'd then ever, and thou shu'dst infinitely
oblige me by so dear a courtesie.
D'ye hear?



I do, and will you hear me now?



If y'ave any new thing to say I will,
but of old businesses I pray no more.



That can't be old that's every day renew'd.



And how can that be new I pray,
that needs renovation every day?
But of this enough: prethee Filena go,
and if you love me as you say you do;
know now's best time to shew't, for Love's best shown,
by doing their wills we love before our own.



Well then, to shew
how much, how dearly I love you, I will go;
and though Love a burthen be,
which two hearts equally
shu'd bear, and then 'tis sweet and light:
But when once all the weight
lyes upon one alone,
a grievous and intollerable one:
my heart shall bear it yet, and ne're repine,
or else I'le not acknowledge it to be mine.



That's bravely and nobly resolv'd.



But is there no hope, no pitty for Filena?



To deal ingeniously w'ye,
and not abuse you with civility,
There's pitty, but no hope; for Bellinda has all
my stock of Love, and consequently
for loving any other has rendred me so poor,
as I can dye, but I can love no more.



Since you are so resolv'd, Palemon know,

Filena too can dye as well as you;
and be assur'd that the same messenger
brings news Palemon does Bellinda wed,
shall carry back the news, Filena's dead.



Soft, soft Filena, for I'de have you know,
to th' thing call'd dying there goes more then so;
and every Coward is valiant enough
to talk of death, but when it comes to th' proof,
their hearts do fail, as yours no doubt will too,
wherefore dear Filena I'le be gone,
and shall not fear to leave you here alone.




Cruel Palemon! is't not enough, that thou
refusest me, but thou must scorn me too?
This is not to be endur'd! one nobly born
can better suffer injury then scorn;
but what do I say wretch as I am, or how
com these high thoughts in one that's faln so low:
I'me now engag'd, what ever does befall, 
and those who are slaves to Love must suffer all.






Hey! whurr! there boults another wench,
the Warren's all full of them,
and I, like a good Tumbler,
am ready to throw my self after every one: 
and see here coms another! & alone too? Enter A∣marantha.

this opportunity is the shell that Love
is hatched of, and the Nymphs here just like
young Lapwings run away with't on their heads;
you shall see how I'le accoast her now. 
Fair Nymph, might I be so bold I pray,
to request the time o'th' day of you?



Oh Sir, with all my heart,
it shall be any time oth' day you please for me,
I'le not stick w'ye for half an hour or so.



Lo ye there now! there's ne're a sextons wife
in all Cyprus co'd answer ye more courteously:
a kinde Wench I'le warrant her; 
Let's see what's next now?
Pox on't, I better know what to do with wenches
then what to say to them; and we Complementers
of the first head, when w'are past our legs & faces
are past the greatest part of our discourse: 
It shall be so, and how have you done I faith,
since I saw you last?




how d'ye? and what's a clock? I'le wager now
next is, what news? or somewhat about the weather
the ordinary discourse of those who can

  14discourse of nothing, and when was't I pray
you saw me last?



Why, in Plato's great year,
don't you remember it? I do as perfectly
as if 'twere but to day; by the same token,
meeting you just as I do now, I took you by
the hand, and kissing it, led you just
into such another Grove as this.



Just no such matter:
pray stay a little, sure you don't remember well.



Most perfectly, by the same token I
saluted you too.

She puts him by.


I knew you were quite wide,
not me I'le assure you.



You can't deny't I'me sure.



Indeed Sir but I can.




I told you, that having so fair opportunity;
but lose it, you'd never have the like agen.







Nay, if you know not that,
we shal never have done; com leave dissembling
I know you Nymphs here are all so learned, as
your husbands can teach you nothing on the
marriage-night, but what you knew before.



Bless me! I never heard
man talk thus wildely!



And how first time you went abroad
after fifteen, when you return'd agen,

  15you found y'ad left your gloves, handkercher,
and maidenhead, with some such odd toyes
behinde you.



Wilder and wilder still! I begin to be,
afraid of him, pray let me go; is this
discourse for Maids?



I, as good a Milkmaid as my Nurse I'le
warrant you; but stay, she may be one perhaps,
and that 'tis makes her so shie and timerous,
for maids apprehend the loss of a maidenhead
as fearfully, as the loss of an arm or leg,
and imagine they shall be maim'd forever after. 
Come, come, ne're fear, I perswade you to nothing
but what I will do w'ye my self for company.



I'me more and more afeard of him, I wo'd
some body wo'd come to rid me of him, and see
in happy time here's some, and yonder's more:
now I may be Some pass over the Stage.

as merry with him,
as he ha's been with me: Cry mercy Sir,
now I remember this Plato's great year you talk of
as perfectly



Oh do you so! I knew
you could not forget it.



By the same token

Theotimus chief Governour of the Isle
past by with a numerous train just as we were
alone together.



Yonder I think he comes indeed.



When I made bold to ask you one questi∣on Sir,







Why, whether you lov'd dancing or no?







Right, so you told me; and thereupon I said
he'd help you then to a certain spritely instrument
to dance after call'd a whip, a whip;
d'ye hear Sir, worth a hundred of
your Kits and Violins, to make such gallants as
your self to frisk and caper.



Umh! I remember nothing of all this now,
but be shrew me next Plato's great year I fear▪
I shall indeed, 'less I get me gone the sooner.



Nay, hark ye, hark ye Sir,
Pray don't go yet; now I remember me
I can tell ye what time o'th' day 'tis too.




I know it now I thank you, it is time
for me to get me gone, as I take it.




Why then farewel my Platonick Philosopher,
and Anteplatonick Lover.


The Song sung by a Bass, Tenor, and Treble.



Prais'd be the Deities above!











And we shall love.



O ye blest immortal Powers!
Grant this happy Land of ours








And that our flames may ever dure.



Now Children, in a word to tell,
what noble Love is, (mark me well)
it is the counterpoise that mindes
to fair and vertuous things inclines;
it is the gust we have, and sence,
of every noble excellence;
it is the pulse, by which we know
whether our souls have life or no;
and such a soft and gentle fire,
as kindles and inflames desire,
until it all like Incense burns,
and unto melting sweetness turns.




melts not within his breast at hearing this?







A noble stranger come hither on
devotion unto Love's sacred Shrine.





Evan. kisses his hands.


Somewhat more then this to boo't,
by experience I can adde unto't;
Love is a union of all
we happy and unhappy call;
a mixture where together meet

  18both pleasing pain, and bitter sweet;
the greatest joy and greatest woe
a mortal breast can ever know,
to shew its great disparity
in fair Bellinda and in me;
in her face 'tis a paradice,
where all delicious pleasure lies,
and in my heart it is a hell,
where all your worst of torments dwell.



Once more y'are welcom now set forwards
and with all the pomp and ceremony you may
proceed to Celebration of the day.


Manent Theotimus and Polydor.



Polydor, stay you, you're Loves Inquisitor;
look well unto your charge, we hear there are
(besides Atheists, who impious deny
Love's sacred Power and Authority;
and Libertines, whose vicious lives are such,
as they profane the Deity as much)
new Heresies in Love sprung up of late,

Platonicks, Scepticks, dangerous to the State;
e're they take deeper root, and farther spread,
be it your care to see 'um extirpated.



It shall, most reverend Sir.



Other abuses there are beside,
'gainst which we must most carefully provide;
as talking of Cupid so familiarly,
as if he were some vulgar Deity;

  19and making Love the business and employ
of every idle Girle, and wanton Boy;
taking of every fond desire for it,
whilst difference 'twixt them is as infinite,
as 'twixt folly and wisdom, vertue and vice,
or deep abyss, and highest Paradice. 
This must be lookt unto.



As 'tis most fit.



Is the Nymph summon'd to the temple yet?



'Tis not time yet till the sixth hour be past




be it your care to summon her, and see
that all be ready for the Solemnity: 
This day peculiarly Love is thine,
work miracles, and shew thy self divine.






The Scene, a Wood or Boscage.


YE aged Oaks, the semi-gods abodes,
and who your selves in ancient times were Gods▪
and solitary Woods, whose walks and shade
Lovers so oft their confidents have made,
whilst never did your walks nor shades disclose
either a Lovers joyes, or Lovers woes:

  20You I dare trust with secrets, which I ne're
durst trust with any since my coming here:

I love, but Oh! if any list'ning ear
shu'd have o'reheard me now, as 'tis my fear!
And see where this inquisitive Nymph do's come?
Wo'd she were deaf, or else that I'de been dumb.




I faith, I faith.
I'me glad I've found you.







For now 'tis clear you love.



How so? 'tis as I fear'd,
she has o'reheard me.




These very trees and woods declare it.




Ay me! this 'tis to trust ones minde
with trees, whose leaves whisper with every wind;
with woods, whose very walks & shades have ears,
and babbling Eccho that tells all it hears.



She fears, 'tis a good sign, Ile urge her further 
your solitude and retirement too confirms it;
for no Nymph here
retir'd from company ever walks alone;
but Love is still gentle companion of
her solitary thoughts.



If that be all, 'tis well.




And why shu'd you with so much caution now
conceal this from me? as I did not know
how Love did all things out of chaos make,
and all to chaos wo'd agen turn back:
If all things did not love, from Gods and men

  21to senseless and inanimate things agen;
and what a monster shu'd Bellinda prove,
if onely she of all things did not love?



Of all the Nymphs that ever spoke with tongue,
this Nymph has Magick I must bless me from!



Where is the friendship y've so long profest
to make me such a stranger to your breast?



Trust me dear friend, if what you say be true,
I am more stranger to my breast then you.



See how you blush now when you tell me so!



Ay me! mine own blushes betray me too!
What is it can be secret in a Lover,
when even their blushes do their Loves discover?



What and sigh too! nay then you love, 'tis clear;
for, but for Love, none ever sighed here.



my sighs betray me too! how many traytors
have Lovers about them?




But why shu'd yÃ´u sigh! you live happily;
and sighs are for the miserable, such as I: 

Palemon loves yÃ´u, and so loves you too,
as he even pines away for Love of you;
consumes with grief, languishes with despair,
melts into tears, and sighs himself to air;
faith, give him some comfort e're you go
unto the Temple, sweet Bellinda do;
poor Youth, he's in so desperate estate,
I fear, lest after it may come too late.



What greater comfort can he expect of me,
then that, if any i'th' Isle I love, 'tis he?



Poor comfort, that it shall be him alone,
if any i'th' Isle you love, if you love none;
this is to mock his hopes; and they deny
rather then grant, who promise doubtfully.



More (Filena) I neither will nor can
give him, until I go to th' Temple anon,
and there consult the Gods what I shu'd do.



Consult your own thoughts rather,
and your minde.



'Tis not easie as you think to finde
the source and origin of our thoughts and minde;
of which t'one is so deep, t'other so high,
as there are Opticks made to pierce the sky,
plummets to sound the bottom o'th' ocean;
but for to pierce and sound a heart there's none.















what news from th' Temple w'ye?



Nothing, but onely all's prepared there
for th' grand solemnity, and onely fair










Soft, 'tis not time to go this hour yet.



And that a day will seem to be
a moneth, a year, a very age to me.




D'ye think she knows?



I know not, let's divine,
and joyn your observations to mine: 
D'ye mark with how great joy away she went?
none goes so chearfully to banishment.



But if her body's here, and mind elsewhere,
'tis she does banish us, and not we her.



Well, if she love, I wonder at her art
can carry fire so smother'd in her heart,
as none nor by the flame nor smoak can know
whether sh'ave any in her breast or no.



And if she do not love agen, then she
of all the Nymphs I yet did ever see,
the most my admiration does move,
t' have so much beauty, and so little love.



I'le follow and observe her better.




and I'le but stay awhile and follow you.





that wench wo'd I give a limb for now,
though I halted to an Hospital for it, (and there
are many have ventur'd as far for wenches as that
comes to) I must needs have her, and hê here
shall be my Agent in the business. 
D'ye hear, d'ye hear Sir, a word with you I pray.



With me! your pleasure Sir?



D'ye know that Nymph there?



Very well, what then?



Why then I shu'd desire

  24your better acquaintance;
for look ye, suppose a man
shu'd have a minde unto her.



A minde, what minde?



Why, a moneths minde or so.



Why then, after a moneth you may be rid of't



I hope Sir you do not mock me?



Indeed Sir, but I do, 
you must pardon me.



'Tis well you confess it, and ask my pardon,
I shu'd be very angry else, I can tell you



This is some simple stranger, ignorant of
our manners and customs, rather meriting
pitty then anger.





He understands nothing but plain
down-right language I see, that calls every thing
by its right name: Well Sir, since I perceive
you are a little dull, in plainer terms
I'de fain  you understood me.












D'ye know where you are?



Why, in Love's Kingdom, where shu'd I be?




in Lusts remember that.



Pox a these nice
distinctions! that onely serve to break
Dunces heads, and keep Maidenheads so long,
till they are quite marr'd: Come, come, I know

  25no other love but what I've told you.



Then you must be taught,
and learn other language too, or else this Isle
(I can tell you) will prove too hot for you.



Wo'd the Nymphs were not so cold,
and let the Isle be what it will.




And now to instruct you a little better, know
that for all lewd and lascivious speeches we
have a gentle punishment here, called whipping.



Gentle d'ye call it?



And for fowl libidinousness,
an other excellent remedy call'd castrating
that takes it clear away.



Clear with a witness,
bless me and all mine from it:
why this is cruel sir 
have you no regard then to peoples infirmities?



O yes, a special one, for your wild and unruly
heats of youth, w'ave an admirable way
of cooling 'um, by marrying 'um unto
old women of fourscore, there's a cooler for you.



A cooler with a vengeance! ah ha!
it makes my teeth chatter in my head to think of it
but sure sir y'are not in earnest all this while?



It seems sir you love to jest, but look to't, and
say y'ad fair warning; and so farewel.





marry 'tis time to bid farewel indeed
if this be so, whipping, castrating, and

  26marrying to old women of fourscore!
a great consolation for a man that loves
a wench; but he said all this sure
onely to fright me;
yet let him say what he will,
woo'd I had that wench say I.
Enter Amaranthe, Cloria, Lydia, Melissa, &c.
Whow? here comes a whole ocean of them!
now am I in my element, and I shall wallow
like a Porposs amongst them.



What my Platonick Philosopher,
and Anteplatonick Lover agen?



'Slid is she there? I'd best be gon then, I'm
as feard of her as a dog is of a whip.



What is he going? I must needs have
some sport with him before he goes. 
Hark ye, hark ye sir, pray stay a little.



Now will she trappan me
into a whipping, I'm sure;
yet I am such a fool I must needs tarry.



These nymphs here wo'd be glad
of your better acquaintance:



With all my heart.







Come nearer, nearer yet; now nymphs
look on him (I pray) and mark him well.



This goes well hitherto 
I must prepare my self to court um now.



And now be't known unto you all,
he's one whom y'are to bless your selves from, as
from some ghost or goblin. 







For he'l haunt you,
haunt you worse then they,
and stick t'ye faster then burrs, or rather pitch
that defiles all it touches: there is no
purifying your selvs a month after h'as once been
in your company.



Bless us from him!



The devil's in her:
in what a fair way of courtship was I, and how
sh'as put me out of it?



Yet (wo'd ye think it?)
he imagins all the nymphs are in love with him,
nay will swear it, if they look but on him once,
and then talk so lewdly, as shews him all
groom and foot-boy within,
however without he appears a Gentleman.



She'l make me all groom
and foot-boy presently, she'as half
transformed me already.



Nay, hold up your head sir,
and ben't asham'd of your commendations.



Commendations d'ye call it? I wonder what
are your reproaches, if these be your commenda∣tions.




Sure Amaranthe you wrong him.




does she sweet heart,



Forbear, and know your distance Sir.




a Spannel, hold him at arms end, or he'l
be in your bosom presently.



Nay, now y'are too cruel.



If he wo'd either spare
his own or others modesty, I wo'd be
content to spare him yet?



I must suffer I see.



But see Theotimus coming, cultivating
our youth, and sowing in their tender mindes
the seeds of all our future happiness, for
'tis not the culter o'th' Land, but of the minde
makes people happy;
and as that's done well or ill,
so they are happy or unhappy still.




Now tender Virgins all draw near,
And Loves diviner doctrine hear;
First, Nymphs be modest as you go,
For just as by the pulse we know
The bodies state, so we as well
By th' eyes, the state o'th' minde may tell;
And rowling eyes do but betray
A heart that rowls as well as they.



O fly then far
Glances that are
But outward signs, by which we finde
The inward temper of the minde;
And rowling eyes do but betray
A heart that rowls as well as they.



Hei day, now will these wenches wear
their eyes like spectacles on their noses, and
look as demurely as Cows in bon-graces.



Then for your kisses, oh, be sure
No Virgins ever those endure;
For you are flowers and blooming Trees,
And men are such deflowring Bees:
Let once their kisses light upon ye,
They soon will suck all sweetness from ye,
And womens lips with kissing us'd
Will look but just like Cherries bruis'd.



O fly then far
Kisses that are
Like Bees that suck all sweetness from ye;
Let 'um once but light upon you:
And womens lips with kissing us'd,
Will look but just like Cherries bruis'd.



Now will these wenches lips grow
as cold as dogs noses, if they leave off kissing once.



But above all take heed agen
You fly and shun the touch of men;
For there's no canker more devours,
Nor mildew more blasts tender flowers,

  30Then men will you, whose lightest touch
Will soon your fresher beauties smutch;
And once but tainted in your hue,
You well may bid the world adieu.



O fly then far
Touches that are
So blasting, as the lightest touch
Will soon your fresher beauties smutch;
And once but tainted in your hue,
You well may bid the world adieu.



'Tis time to bid the world adieu indeed,
if there be no touching 'um.



Now that we ben't expected there,
'tis time to th' Temple to repair: 
set forwards there before.


Manent Diophantes, Evander, Pamphilus, Ama∣ranthe, Cloria, Lydia, Melissa.


Oh! Pamphilus well met;
and how d'ye finde the nymphs here, ha?



As I co'd wish, the kindest lovingst souls
as e're I met withal.



How's this! let's stand close,
and over hear him.



You need not multiply the Phenix to sum up
the number of all the maidenheads I shall leave
in Cyprus here, before I've done with'um.











No, no, I knew not the humor

  31and disposition of the nymps here, I.



Troth, and so I think still.




I hope now you'l believe me another time?



It may be so, but now I swear I do not.




Yet let us sooth and humour him to have
some sport with him; 
you know all the Nimphs here then?







Amaranthe, Cloria, Lydia, Melissa?




and have had favours from every one of them,
this Ring from one, this Ribband from a second,
this Jewel from a third.



What a lying fellow's this!



And what think you of Cloria?




I've gone no farther with her yet, but there
is hope I may in time.



Shall I indure this?











With her I must confess
I've had a little more samiliarity.



There's no induring this!



Yet this was he
you thought I wrong'd.



Hang him, none can, but onely
by reporting too well of him.



For Amarinthe she's the coyest of 'um all▪







And was so angry with me for
a kiss I stole from her, but I soon pacified her:







Why, I told her that rather
then that shud make a war betwixt us,
which was wont to be the signe of peace with others,
I'd make her double satisfaction;
and for one kiss I took from her, wo'd give
her two.



So then (as you imagin'd 'um) you finde
all the Nymphs here as supple and plyant as
kids leather Gloves, a gentle pluck or two
will easily draw 'um om.



Draw 'um on! wou'd some body wou'd draw 'um off for me:
I fear I shall be ravisht by 'um.



Out upon him, I'le hear no more,
let's go, and as we pass, shew him all
the neglect and scorn we can possible.




D'ye mark how they frown upon him?



Favours, meer favours, believe it Gentlemen,
and onely invitations to follow 'um;
you see how I am courted, and must pardon me.




The man's as impudent as vain I see,
and though this hitherto be but in jest

  33you whom he counts his friend may tell him best,
If he imagines with injurious lyes
To get him honour by their injuries:
Our Nymphs are all of such unquestion'd Fame,
He'l sooner punishment, then credit gain.





This way the fair Bellinda is to pass
Unto the Temple, and although she has
Forbid me speaking to her on pain of her
Displeasure, I may see her howsoe're;
And as she goes to th' Temple, feast mine eyes,
Which happiness she to my tongue denyes. 
Enter Bellinda, Filena, Polydor.
See where she comes, and now it fares with me
As with those sick, who whilst they long to see
The cup they may not taste, become but more
Thirsty with sight of't then they were before.



Behold Palemon, as I've appointed him
ith way, can we invent no stratagem
to make her now with favourable eye
regard him? think, I'le second you.










but let's go on and think not on him.








Ben't deceiv'd Palemon, for
'twas said to make her think of you the more▪

  34For just as winde or fanning does the fire
So prohibition more inflames desire.




I fain wo'd follow her, but I know that she
Wo'd be offended with it; and for me
To offend her now, were to undo my self,
And in the Haven shipwrack all my wealth.










THis is Loves Temple, here who e're repairs,
Findes Love propitious to their vows and Prayers:
Regard not then the proud materials,
Or outward structure of the Vaults and Walls;
But mark the Altar, and the sacred Shrine,
Then which the world has nothing more divine.



Methinks there's somewhat more then hu∣mane here
Fills me with reverence and holy fear!



Peace, the Ceremony begins.




the Nymphs begin it?





For of that Sex, Vertues and Graces are
Of thât, all that is beautiful and fair;
And as the care of Cupids is to men,
So that of Venus's rites is due to them.



I understand, and every thing I see
Is ordered here with rare oeconomy.



Thou fairest, brightest Star in heaven,
And most benigne of all the seven;
If on this day (when every year
We celebrate thy coming here:)
Thou dost not hear our prayers; 'tis we
Are rather wanting unto thee
Then thou to us; for thou wod'st grant
(We know) what ever we do want,
If we (on our parts) did but crave
What e're is fit for us to have;
Grant then to celebrate thy feast
A holy and religious Breast,
Vertue, high honour, beauty, health,
And minde above all other wealth;
Let others ask what boon they please,
All that we crave of thee are these:



Oh hear our vows and prayers as we
do purely love and honour thee.




Thou doest confirm us by this Harmony,
O Love our Vows are pleasing unto thee.



Now I perceive it is our faults, not theirs,
If when we pray, the gods don't hear our prayers.



Peace now, the other Ceremony begins.



Let us retire then, and give place to them.






Divinest Love does all command,
In fire and water, air and land;
And all with his commands inspire
In land and water, air and fire.



Where is the Nymph?



Great Sir, behold her here; 
bear back, bear back, room for the Nymph there.



Now will he break my head,
onely to shew his authority, (you'l see)
'less I get me out of the way the sooner.



Then fair and gentle Nymph draw near,
And all our Ceremonies hear,
Which to Religion do dispence
Both Mystery and Reverence:
We first must charm you silent, then
Must vail and blinde your eyes agen;

  37That you may see and speak with none,
Untill the Ceremony's done:
Then y'are to go to th' sacred Cell,
Where a full hour you are to dwell,
Before you are produc't to swear,
You love some one in Cyprus here;
Or else (refusing it) be sent
Into perpetual banishment. 
If then y'ave any thing to say,
Now speak it freely whilst you may.



Prudence assist me, thou that best canst tell, Aside.

What I shu'd say, and what I shu'd conceal; 
Knowing great sir, how w'ar the gods chief care,
More dear to them, then to our selves we are:
Behold Bellinda here resigned stands
To obey your Laws, and their divine commands.



A wise and pious Resignation!
Most pleasing unto Heaven, and such an one
As even necessitates the Gods to grant
All that we mortals crave, and all we want. 
Reach us the sacred Wand
to charm her silent then.


Still-born Silence, thou that art
Flood-gate of the deeper heart,
Off-spring of a heavenly kinde,
Frost o'th' mouth, and thaw oth' minde;

  38Admirations chiefest tongue,
Leave thy desart Shades, among
Ancient Hermits hallowed Cells,
Where retyr'd Devotion dwells,
With thy Enthusiasmes come
Ceize this Maid, and strike her dumb.




If every man that's troubled with
a shrew'd wife had but this Charm,
how happy shud he be?



Now, reach us the sacred veil 
Where such a cloud of mysteries lyes,
As whilst we with it blinde your eyes,
If onely you convert your sight,
From th' outward to the inward light,
Illuminates your soul and minde
Sent from above, you soon will finde
The Sun here in its brightest Sphere,
Will darker then a shade appear.




Now were she and I
to play at blinde-man-buff together, ah!
what dainty sport shu'd we two make? she shu'd
catch me, or I'de catch her, 'tshu'd cost
one of us a fall else.



Now to the sacred Cell set on,
Where w're to leave her all alone,
Until the hour's expir'd, and then
To th' Temple all repair agen.





Wo'd I were in the sacred Cell

  39with her now,
what holy work shu'd she and I make together?
if these holy whorsons did not hinder us;
as most commonly they hinder all good sport. 
Well, here will I spread my nets to catch
some of the Nymphs in their return;
'tis hard if they all 'scape me: Enter 1 Nymph.

And see here's one already. Fair Nymph,
might I desire the honor to wait upon you home?











Because 'tis not the custom
for Nimphs in this Country to go alone with men



But 'tis the custom for men in our Country
when they're alone with women, to offer them
the courtesie of you know what.



I know not what you mean!



The more's the pitty
you shu'd live to these years, and be so ignorant;
the Nymphs in our Countrey
wo'd have understood me presently:




what belongs to men perhaps; but we Sir, better
what belongs to women.




Goodly, goodly! how say ye by that?
I was deceiv'd in her; but here comes another,
if I understand any thing in women,
will be more kinde. Fair Nymph,




Pray keep your way Sir, and trouble me not.



This is worse then to'ther!
Did you but know how much I love you,
you'd never refuse my courtesie.



And did you but know how little I care for it,
you'd never offer it.



Hei ho! have ye the heart to hear me
sigh thus, and never pitty me?



Yes indeed, and to laugh at you for it too,
to hear you sigh thus
like a broken-winded bellows,
or a dry pump and spend so much breath in vain,
as we shall never wonder hereafter
at Lapland Witches selling winde so cheap.



But I shall alwayes wonder,
that hêre in Venus School the Nymphs shu'd learn
no more compassion.



Now ye talk of Schools,
I must to the Graces Grove,
where all the Nymphs are gone
to learn their lessons.




And I will follow them;
strange that all shu'd be honest!
I have heard of one or two in a Countrey, or so,
but all, âll, was never heard of before!
I don't despair yet.
Well.







Now Nymphs, here in the Graces Grove,
A place which Beauty most does love,
And gentle Love most highly prize,
Let's fall unto our exercise
Of studying all those gracious parts,
Which most do take and conquer hearts.




Now will I stand here conceal'd,
and observe them; they say, all women when
they are alone, put off their modesties;
I shu'd be glad to see it.



First Nymphs, in honour of the Graces
Let us compose our looks and faces
To gentle smiles, for no frowns here
In any face shu'd e're appear.



If I thought they would not frown,
I shu'd soon be amongst them.



And next, as we our faces do,
We must compose our garments too
With such a decency, as best
Becomes the modest to be drest.



Wo'd they'd put off their garments once,
that's it I look for.



But since the graces of the minde
Are those which most adorn our kinde,
It ought to be our chiefest care
To render our interiours fair;
Counting th' exterior nothing else,
But outward garments of our selves.



Give me the out-side,
and take the inside who's list.



Other Graces there are beside,
Which Nymphs shu'd carefully provide,
As dancing, singing, and such arts,
Which through the Sences strike their hearts;
And give (where ever they are found)
That dangerous yet gentle wound,
Which never can be cur'd again,
Till Hymen ease their amorous pain.



I co'd ease and cure it a great deal better,
if they would but let me alone with them.



Then let us sing, that Eccho may
The sound unto the Woods conveigh;
And after raising it more high,
The Woods conveigh it to the Sky;
That heaven and earth may both partake
The Harmony your Voices make.

Here the Nymphs sing.


I co'd make othergess musick with them,
if I were but master of the Quire amongst them.



Now let's have a dance, to shew,
How that which does enchant men so,

  43Is not the Magick of the face,
The red and white, nor bodies grace;
But 'tis the Magick of the feet,
Where all harmonious numbers meet.

Here the Nymphs dance.


I think there's witchcraft in't indeed,
for I can as well be hang'd as hold now,
but I must have a frisk amongst them;
Hei for our Town!

He comes out dancing.


A man amongst us!
what insolence is this?




Nay, never look so strange on it, 
there are those can dance too, you
shall see else.

he dances 'em about one after another.


Was ever seen the like?



Yes twenty times, How say you?



Away, are you not asham'd?



No indeed, I was never asham'd in my life 
nay, you must have your turn too.



Let me go, or I'le cry out else.



'Tis yet too soon,
I'le give you more cause presently.


















Away all of you,
this is a rudeness must be complained of.




Look ye! is not this a lamentable case?

  44that all the Nymphs shu'd flye me as chickens do
a Kite, or birds some strange Owl; yet I protest,
I mean them no more harm, then their fathers did
their mothers, as they shu'd soon perceive, if they
wo'd but try me once; I fear I shall never do
any good on them, yet I must follow them still:
For the devil's in't, when once we begin
to follow wenches, we can never give over.






Hail happy Island! Natures chiefest care,
Where all things love, and all things fruitful are;
Where Spring-tide makes perpetual Residence,
And rigid Winter's ever banisht hence;
In you, (O blest and happy Land) in you
I shall finde her, (if the Oracle be true)
Through all the Islands of th' Egean Main,
These three moneths I have sought, and sought in vain;
Till here arriving now at last, I see
So vaste a solitude, as amazes me!
Nor on the barren Mauritanean Shore,
Or Lybian Desart, scarcely co'd be more!




I'le hide me no longer from my fears, nor fly
The danger, 'tis childish and cowardly,
And (well considered) rather does increase
Our dangers and our fears, then make them less;

  45For looking through that false optick fear,
Danger does still more terrible appear,
And terrors in the dark far more afright
(Th' imagination of't) then in the light:
I'le then to the Temple, and whate're befal
By help of this, I am prepar'd for all.

Pointing to his Sword.


Sir, might a stranger here desire to know
Why all your houses are deserted so,
As if some plague had swept 'um; and the Land
Depopulated, as if some enemies hand
Had mow'd it with the sword! to me it does
Appear to wonder strange, that love shu'd thus
Leave his own Land unpeopled, whilst he
Peoples all others so abundantly!



Know Sir, 'tis not for want of people here,

Loves Kingdom does so desolate appear,
But just as we perceive from every part,
The blood does all retire unto the heart,
In any great commotion or dismay;
So all the people, in no less, to day
Are gone to th' Temple, in expectancy
O'th' issue of our great solemnity.







Why, by the Laws of Cyprus, here
All strangers after three moneths are to swear
They love some one i'th Island, or be sent
Away into perpetual banishment:
Now Sir, this oath a Nymph to day must take,



And why shu'd that
so great commotion make?



'Cause she's the joy or grief of every one;
Joy if she stay, and grief if she be gone.



What is this Nymph so much exacts your care,



One who some three moneths since arri∣ved here,
Wrack't on the Coast, (the rest all drown'd but she)
In whom appear'd so great divinity;
It was another Venus you'd have swore,
Born of the Sea, and landing on the shore.



Just so long 'tis since she was stoln away
from Crete, to barbarous pyrates made a prey;
and her name, Sir,




Bellinda, Sir, they call
this admirable Nymph:



Her name and all?
and where is she?



I'th sacred Cell inclos'd,
ready to take the oath.








That as yet, there's none can tell
But this (unto my grief) I can full well,
That less she does, you here behold in me
The wretchedst Lover ever eye did see,
Or ever liv'd in memory of men;



Heavens! what do I hear? are you her Lover then?



Shu'd I deny it, these Trees wou'd tell you I am,
Upon whose Barks so oft I've carv'd her name;
This shore so oft my lamentations hears 
And Sea that I've augmented with my tears;
As with my sighs the air; these Sir, all these
Will tell you I am, though I shu'd hold my peace.



O Heaven! in vain why did you valor give,
If I can hear this now, and let him live?
But stay, if seeing and loving her be a crime,
I must kill all mankinde as well as him;
For all wo'd guilty be, and you shou'd finde
None innocent, but the senseless, and the blinde:
I'le then suspend my anger, till I know
Whether Bellinda does love him or no;
For there, thêre onely the offence does lie,
Else hê's the person offended, and not I;
For never Tyrant invented greater pain,
Then 'tis to love, and not be lov'd again. 
It shall be so and pray Sir, mayn't one see
This Nymph you speak of?



Please you go with me
Unto the Temple Sir, there you may both
See her, and hear her take the sacred Oath.







I've a promise Sir from her
makes me hope so.



Then I may well despair  Aside.

yet will I not be jealous, for that,
Though it begins in love, does end in hate,
And I hêr love to mine so far prefer,
As I may hate my self, but never her 
Yet it is strange, if what he sayes be true!



But has she any relation unto you,
you seem so much concern'd for her, Sir?




But what a Sister has unto a Brother;
If she be th' same as I imagine her:



Then I beseech you Sir,
till some more near
relation and bond may binde me t'ye,
you wo'd be pleas'd for to accept of me
for your most humble Servant.




may not; but please you do me the courtesie
to shew me th' way unto the Temple, and you
shou'd much oblige me.



That Sir I shall do
to shew my obedience, or any thing I may.




I'le follow you then,
please you to lead the way. 
Now dearest Love, in this thy kingdom be
As kinde and as propitious unto me.
As through thy grace and favour I hope to finde
Ease for my wearied limbs and troubled minde;

  49And a calm port and sure retreat at last
After so many storms and dangers past.











NOw hêre Love at thy sacred shine
I offer up these vows of mine, 
Father of dear and tender thoughts,
Thou who the hardest bosom softs;
Soften Bellinda's heart, and make
Her but thy dear impressions take;
So shall I burn Arabian Gums,
And offer up whole Hecatombs
Upon thy Altar, whilst thy fires
Shall shine as bright as my desires.



Whilst he the Deity does invoke
The flame ascends in troubled smoke:



What sort of offering mine shall be,
Divinest Love's best known to thee;
Nor spices, nor Arabian Gums,
Nor yet of beasts whole Hecatombs:

  50These are too low and earthly, mine
Are far more heavenly and divine;
An Adamantine faith, and such
As jealousie can never touch:
A constant heart, and loyal breast,
These are the offerings thou lov'st best.



Loves fires ne're brighter yet appear'd,
Who e're thou art, thy vows are heard.




Now see here where she comes.




habit, and stature tells me 'tis the same?



Why comes she not away?



What ails she there?



Help, help, she swounds:



Give her, give her more air?



Hold, hold, I charge you, and let none
presume to touch the consecrated veil.




to her self again;








Now I clearly see 'tis she.



Now on this Book here lay your hands,
Cover'd with skins of Doves and Swans;
And Love so help you as you swear,
Unfeignedly you love one here.



Now Philander thou shalt know
whether she be true or no:



And I know my destiny,
Whether I'me to live or dye.



Thus I uncharm your tongue, now speak
And to our joyes your silence break.



Then by Loves sacred deity I swear,
I love one in the Isle.



What do I hear!



Enough, the charm agen, I thus apply.



O me, most happy!



And most unhappy I!



Now bear her to the Cell again,
Where yet an hour she's to remain;
Suffer'd to see nor speak with none
Untill the hour be past and gone.



Praised be Love does all command
In fire and water, air, and land,
And all with his commands inspire
In land and water, air and fire.






Bellinda Love! nay then my fears I see
Were not in vain, and nothing's left for me,
But onely death; when nothing else prevails,
That's the last remedy, and never fails.
Enter Palemon, and seeing her, returns.
Stay, stay Palemon;


  52This is the last time we shall ever meet;
Stay then and hear me, it is nobler yet
To kill me like the basilisk with your sight,
Then like the Parthians, kill me with your flight 
But he is gone (alas) and does deny
Me the last office of humanity
Of closing of my dying eyes in death,
And when I expire, receive my latest breath. 
The many wayes that lead to death do make
Me yet irresolute which way to take;
But some way I must take, and speedily
Resolve upon it too, what e're it be.






Strange! that I can finde no way
to fasten on these Nymphs?
here comes one now, Enter first Nymph.

and I'le try a way with her
that seldom fails they say. Fair Nymph
please you to accept these Jewels here?







Onely to buy your love, nothing else



Bless me! Throws them away and exit.





This is the first wench
as ever I met withal,
that refus'd presents when they were offer'd her,
and I think will be the last. 

  53This is a strange Countrey,
where a man can't get a wench
neither for love nor money? well, I perceive
this handling 'um with so much ceremony
is that which spoils 'um,
and makes 'um so nice and ticklish
there is no touching 'um:
women shu'd be handled like nettles,
but press them hard
and you may do any thing with them,
and I'le try that way with the next I meet.




I have bethought me of a way to dye
and must go seek out Amaranthe's help.



Stay Lady, a word with you I pray
before you go.

Layes hold on her.


Was ever such a rudeness? unhand me sir,
and know that Virgins are like sacred Reliques
beheld with reverence; but let men come
to touch 'um once, their reverence is gone, 
what wou'd you with me?



What a question's that?
when a man's alone with a woman, you
may easily guess what he wou'd have with her.



Hence and avoid my sight, for now I see,
How all that we call vicious is in thee;
Foul corrupter of honour, as cankers of fairest flowers,
Shame of thy Sex, dishonourer of ours▪



Whow, whow! is the woman mad?



Avoid my sight I say, thy glowing eyes
like Basilisks will kill me else; go and repent
thee of thy crying sins.





I know no crying sins I have,
but mine own Bastards: Well, go thy wayes,
if e're thou marriest, I'le give thy husband this
comÌ"fort, he shall have no other issue of thee
but nails and teeth, if thou be'st such a Vixen.




Now Pamphilus, what's the matter,
that the Nymph is gone in such a rage away?



Nothing, nothing, onely I offer'd her
the courtesie oth' Countrey, and she refus'd it,
that is all.



Why then, I see you need not multiply
the Phenix, to sum up all the Maidenheads
you'l leave in Cyprus,

before you have done with them.



Well, well, you do not know yet.



Yes, but we do Sir, more then you imagine 
of a certain Nymph, you met in Plato's great year,
and how she entertain'd you.



'Slid! how comes he to know of that?



And of divers other encounters
with them since, when you could not desire to be
better mockt and laught at then you were.



And now Sir, pray

  55as you finde our Nymphs here, so report of them;
and know 'tis not the way
for men to gain them reputation here,
to make themselves more vicious then they are.



Nay, if he chide once I'me gone.



Y'are deceiv'd, he chides you not,
but rather gives you good counsel.



That is as 'tis taken, 'tis good councel
to those who mean to follow it; 
but to me 'tis flat chiding,
and I'le hear no more of it.







Not I I swear, 
Chide me! who have liv'd like a Saint here, and
not toucht a Wench to day!




But tarry a little.



No, let him go, I see
he's forfeited to vice and debauchery
beyond redemption; and such as he,
when vice is once turn'd nature, ne're repent,
till they find their shame, or feel their punishment








I've sought you all about,
And co'd not rest until I'de found you out;
You know, whilst you and I the other day

  56In yonder Mead, beheld our young Lambs play,
One of them stragling from the rest) we spy'd
Fell down, stretcht forth its tender limbs, and dy'd
In as short time as I've been telling t'ye,
And wondring what the reason of't shu'd be,
You said 'twas with eating
a venomous herb grew there.



'Tis true, what then?



You know besides how here,
where Love is even the vital air we breath,
and its privation consequently death;
depriv'd once of our Love, 'tis lawful for us to
despair and dye.



Whither tends this discourse I wonder?





I must entreat of thee one courtesie.



What need you with so many circumstances
intreat her whom you may command?
What is't?



'Tis, that thou'dst shew me this same slye
And subtle Thief, that so insensibly
Does steal us from our selves, the lookers on
Do scarce perceive w'are going, till w'are gone.




wo'd you know this?







Take heed, take heed Filena, it is no
Good curiosity to desire to know
Such dangerous secrets, as we well may say,

  57Their ignorance does no harm, their knowledge may.



See Amaranthe how unkinde th'art grown!
Wo'dst all my secrets know, but tell me none:
But now to satisfie your curiosity,
In plainer terms, know I'm resolv'd to dye;
And having heard how death's a bitter cup,
To tell thee true, before I drink it up,
I'de sweeten it so, as though the Fates do please,
That I shu'd live in pain, I'de dye with ease.



How, you dye! now the Gods forbid!




Thou art deceiv'd; for Amaranthe know,
They are so good, as when 'tis misery
For us to live, I'me sure they'd have us dye.



But think, think what death is.



What is it more,
then going to rest when we are weary, or
sleep when we'd rest.



I grant you, when w'are dead
Death is like rest, and th' grave but like our bed;
But if we chance to finde unrest there, thên
As we lye down, can we rise up agen?



What is in t'other life, I cannot tell;
But what there is in this, I know so well,
As I'me resolv'd to dye; spare then your pain
To seek to hinder me, for 'tis in vain: 
There's but one way to live, but nature ha's
Provided us to dye a thousand wayes;

  58And hinder us from living every one
Can do, but hinder us from dying none.



I must take some other way to hinder her, Aside▪

For this but makes her long for death the more.
And for the way that she ha's chose to dye,
Unknown to her, I know a remedy: 
Well then, since you are so resolv'd, I'le shew
You this venomous herb, upon condition you
Let me ha'th' tempering it, to make't so sweet,
You even shall be enamour'd with taste of it.



On any condition Amaranthe I'le dye,
But on no condition live in misery;
Life is not worth it, and
For noble spirits 'tis brave necessity,
When they can't honourably live, to dye;
Whilst to ignoble ones the Gods do give
For punishment, dishonourably to live.





Since no where we a constant woman finde,
But all light and wavering as the winde;
And there is no woman in all this wide
Circumference true, but she was never try'd!
Why shu'd I grieve as 'twere my fate alone,
What's common I perceive to every one?
But these are thoughts unworthy her and me,
For 'tis not hers, but my inconstancy;
If I can think her false, when I do know
Falshood wo'd even be truth, if she were so:

  59And nature of things quite change, rather then she
What she has been, shu'd ever cease to be.




Oh fortunate Palemon! and the more,
The more unfortunate thou wert before!
And happy pains, happy affliction!
From which such pleasure and such joys do come!
Now I perceive there's none can better tell
What heaven is, then who first have past through hell. 
Methinks great conquerors who in triumph come
charg'd with the spoils of conquerd nations home
Are but the Types of me, who in triumph go
To th' Temple to enjoy Bellinda now.




Death! If I can suffer this,
I shall deserve it: Pray stay Sir,
for you have another victory to gain,
and enemy (I'de have you know)
to overcome, before you triumph so!



What victory d'ye mean, what enemy?



Why, I my self and the victory over me;
for know, Bellinda's mine, and I her Lover.



You! did you not say you were her brother?



I, but that was onely a disguise put on,
to hide what thên was fit shu'd not be known.



Why this does take all faith away from you;
For eith'r 'twas true or false you said before;
If true, why then 'tis false you tell me now;
If false, there's no believing of you more.



This fine Dilemma wo'd serve prettily
Ith' School, but not ith' Field; where it must be
Somewhat of finer temper then your words
Must make Bellinda yours, I mean our Swords.

Layes hand on's Sword.


I pray Sir hold, and e're you go so far,
consider but a little where we are,
here in Love's Kingdom, in a peaceful place,
where never any strife or quarrel was,
but onely loving ones.



And is not ours for Love too?



If it be, let Love decide it, are you content
to put it to his Tribunal and Arbitrement?



That's a way poor, and low spirits findes,
This is the Tribunal and Arbitrement of mighty mindes; Draws.

'Twere folly in me to refer my Cause
Unto my enemies Tribunal and Laws.



Fortune as well as Love's your enemy,
Of her as well as Love you fear'd shu'd be.



For Love already he's declar'd my foe,
What Fortune yet may do, I do not know;
I'le try at least, my comfort is I can
Not be in worse condition then I am;
Cast down so low, it is not in the power
Of Love, or Fortune, e're to cast me lower.




What's here? a quarrel tow'rds!
Our peace disturb'd, and their offensive Swords

  61Th' uncivil Arbitrers of civil strife,
Already drawn, threatning each others life:
Our guards, where are they there?





Before they come, our quarrel let's decide.



Do, and you'l see how they but bluntly fight,
Who first consider not their Causes right;
Whilst those who well consider it before,
Have but their courages whetted by't the more,



And unto me considering is but like
The weak opposing of some bank or dike
Unto some torrents rage, which more y'oppose,
more raging and impetuous it grows.


Enter Polydor with Guards, and parts them.


Hold, hold, I charge you in Loves name, or else
We are to seize your weapons and your selves.



What violence is this?



Your self's the cause,
who first have violate Loves peaceful Laws.



Then in Loves Kingdom here shall Lo∣vers be
Depriv'd both of their Loves and Liberty?



What Love d'ye mean?



Bellinda, who is my betroathed.



How! she your betroathed!



I, all Crete can witness it.



If this be so,

  62y'ave too much witness here already, and you
've discovered a secret, which now 'tis known,
May prove Bellinda's ruine and your own.



O heavens! now I remember me
by another Law; who e're doth falsifie
the sacred Oath; are instantly to dye,
sacrific'd to th' offended Deity:
But e're it comes to that, my life shall pay
the forfeiture of hers.





Palemon, you've your cliâmber for prison;
you Sir, must along with me unto

Theotimus to be examin'd.







And I obey necessity.





VVell Fortune, thou giddy Goddess,
if Bellinda be to dye,
And thou hast onely rais'd me up so high,
To cast me down with greater force, I'le fall
So gallantly and bravely, yet as all
Shall say at least, how e're unfortunate

Palemon yet deserv'd a better fate.




Run, run, and seek her all about,
or she's but dead; and when y'ave found her out,
bring me word presently, as you love her life. 
VVas never a more unfortunate maid and wife?




What busie haste is this.



What are you there?
flye, flye Palemon, or the Nymphs will tear
you in pieces.







For killing the gentlest maid
eye ever saw, or Cyprus ever had;



What maid d'ye mean?







Why! is she dead?



Dead, dead, kill'd by your cruelty
And see poor soul what she does write to me,
She reads.




for having taken the poison unknown unto you,
and deceiv'd you once in my life,
rather then you shu'd deceive me in my death.
Commend me to Palemon, and tell him,
that as I liv'd in hope of his love,
so now I dye for despair of it:
and let him aster I am dead but wish me rest,
and I shall rest in peace. 
FILENA.




And so I hope thou do'st
fair gentle maid, or th' Gods shu'd else be most
unkinde and cruel, shu'd they not to thee grant
that rest in death, which thou in life didst want. 
Now you who for cruelty surpass

  64The cruel'st savage Beast that ever was;
Some Tyger bore thee sure, or thou wert bred
With Tygers milk at least, and nourished:
If thou who art the cause of all canst hear
This, and not vent a sigh, nor shed a tear.



As for my sighing and my weeping, that
Is an expression too effeminate;
Onely for single losses: such as mine
Requires expressions far more masculine:
Where grief and sorrows are redoubled,
For dying Bellinda, and Filena dead.




What's that? Bellinda dying does he say?
Sure Love and death have chang'd their darts to day,
and there's some Planet reigns will kill us all,
but I forget Filena.


Oh now I shall
hear news of her well have you found her?




but Lydia sayes sh'ave trac't her footsteps to
the sacred Grove.



Take a cruise presently
Of purest water then, and follow me;
Yet there is hope I may retard her fate,
And save her life, which Love does make her hate.






The Scene, a Wood or Boscage.


THe poison now's arriv'd unto my heart,
The place assign'd where life and I must part;
And where I must resign my latest breath,
Then farewel life, and welcome sweetest death;
To prisoners freedom, to the weary rest,
Comfort to th' sad, and ease to the opprest:
Who'd then indure such worlds of miseries,
When life's but pain, and death no more but this!
Now, now I dye, yet Love lives in me still, Falls:

As if what Love does wound, Death durst not kill.
Who doubt then whether thou immortal art,
(O mighty Love) could they but see my heart,
And bosom here, where thou canst never dye,
It would assert thy immortality.





amongst what a generation of Nymphs
am I fallen here, who are all so precise and pure;
as when they come but where men are, they take
the wind of 'um, for fear of being got with child;
as Spanish Ginnets are, and when they go away

  66brush themselves carefully from the dust, for fear
of a spice of fornication, ever since
they understood that man's but made of dust.
Ha! what have we here? a Nymph a sleep:
ah pretty rogue, have I caught you napping?
she sleeps as snug and soundly
as a young sucking pig,
you can scarce perceive her breath;
what a great blessing is a sleeping woman?
for they'l lie quietly yet 
methinks I shud know her.




No news of her yet? 'tis strange?
but who is here? my goblin agen?
what's that he looks so wistly at
I wonder? a Nymph asleep?
for modesties sake I'le wake her out alas
'tis she? and dead? help, help the glory of
Our Hamlets here, the pride of all our plains,
Grace of the Nymphs, delight of, all the Swains,
Our Isles chief ornament; Filena's dead!
The gentlest Nymph as Cyprus ever bread.




How, is she dead? what a beast was I then
to let her go, for I'me sure she was alive.




A Nymph dead in our wood! it cannot be,
here are no Savage Beasts, and much less men
so barbarous and savage to kill and murther 'um 
where is she?







Alas, 'tis she indeed,
how came she dead, d'ye know?



Not I, onely in this
posture I found her, and that stranger by her there.



Oh, I know him,
and have cause to suspect,
considering his former misdemeanors here;
that he's the likeliest man to have murther'd her,
seize on him, and let him be examined.



So, now am I finely serv'd
for hunting after wenches, to be catcht
my self, instead of catching them, and like
to be hang'd for it, for ought I see:
well, if I be, my comfort is
I'm not the first man that wenching has brought
unto the Gallows, nor am like to be the last.




Where is she? where is she?
stand from about her there. 



So wou'd I with all my heart,
if I cu'd get away.



She is not dead, but onely intranc't. 



Marry and I'm but little better.




with this cool water she'l strait revive again.



And hot water will scarce
bring me to my self again.



Take my tears too if water can only do't,











And all of ours to boot.




O Palemon welcome, I sent for you
by order of Theotimus, to let you know
strange news of Bellinda.




I fear I am but too
familiar with it already.




See, she begins to stir,
And opens her eyes; I told you their fair light
Was but ecclipst and not extinguisht quite.



Then you may let him go;




and I'le be gone then as fast as I can,
and flye the land too, before I'le be put in such
a fright again.




Where am I? in what Region of the dead!
not in hell sure, for there
are far more horrid visions then are here;
nor yet in heaven, for there agen
are far more glorious ones; where am I then?



She thinks she's dead still.



Ha, Palemon here! nay then I see
Love takes delight still in tormenting me,
And there's some middle place 'twixt Heaven and Hell,
Where wretched Lovers, such as I, do dwell;
Where sh'ud I go to flye the sight of men,
And where to flye Loves fires and arrows, when
Where e're I go, just like the wounded Dear,
I flye in vain, that which I carry here.





and look carefully unto her,
Her wandring minde you'l see will come anon
unto its self, when her amazement's gone.



Whate're it be, methinks there's some∣what here
Whispers remorse, and chides me (as it were)
For my unkindness, and stern cruelty
Unto this Nymph, who thus wo'd dye for me;
But as loud windes won't let us hear the soft
And gentle voice of others; so the thought
Of dying for Bellinda, will not let
Me hear its voice nor hearken to it yet.




O noble youth! whose famous memory
Shall never be forgot, or ever be
remembred without praise.



What news brings Diophantes,

he's so transported with it?



Thât, which had I a thousand tongues to tell,
Or you a thousand ears to hear, wou'd well
Deserve them all. Soon as 'twas rumored,

Bellinda must dye for having falsified
The sacred Oath: but this stranger instantly
Offered himself with such alacrity
to dye for her; as Love
ne're gain'd so glorious a victory, nor
ever so triumpht over death before.



Oh me! if this be so, I shall become
th' derision and the scorn of every one;
and was his offer accepted?




by th' Laws here co'd not be refus'd him.




Ha's he prevented me? but do I stand
Senseless and stupid, as I were dead here, and
Had not a life to lose as well as he?
No generous stranger whosoe're thou be,
Since thou wert born my Rival, thou shalt prove
I'le rival thee in Death as well as Love.




I fear the event of this!



And so do I;
But wherefore is Bellinda doom'd to dye?



For perjury and falshood, whilst she swore,
She lov'd one here, being betroath'd before
unto that stranger there.



All thât may be
Without forswearing yet and perjury;
For what if he she swore she lov'd be he
she was betroath'd unto?




For she was in the sacred Cell 'tis clear,
Long time before he e're arrived here;
In Sequestration, separated from
Society of all, mean time her tongue
Charm'd silent, and eyes blinded as they were,
How co'd she see or know that he was here?



Are you convinced yet?



No, not alwayes they
Convinced are, who know not what to say;
For my part until farther proof shall shew
Her guilty, I shall ne're believe her so:
For just as Images in Tapestry
Do all appear distorted and awry,
Until they're fully explicate, and then
We see they appear all right and streight agen;
So shê we now think guilty, we may finde
Innocent perhaps, when she explains her minde.



Pray heaven she may! mean time let us go see
This stranger, who shall ever honour'd be
Alive and dead; and be all Lovers boast,
and honour to Love's Kingdom.




deservedly, for never any yet
For truly loving did more honour get;
Nor ever any whilst the world lasts, or
There's Lovers in the world shall e're get more.





Go noble youth, who does in dying prove
Death, who has power o're all, has none o're Love
And shews to th' world, that who refuse to give

  72Their lives for honour ne're deserv'd to live▪
Go take with thee this consolation,
You lose a life that easily wo'd be gone;
But gain one by't, when thousand years are past,
And thousand other lives, shall alwayes last;
And though you might have longer liv'd, yet know,
You ne're could dye more gloriously then now;
To have all our Youths and Virgins strew
With flowers all the way you go,
With Roses and with Mirtle Boughs
Adorning your victorious browes;
And singing with triumphant Song
Your praises as you go along.




Thus shall he ever honour'd be,
Who dyes for Love and Constancy;
And thus be ever prais'd, who dyes
Love's Martyr, and his Sacrifice.



And if alive you thus are honoured,
Much more you shall be after you are dead;
If such as you can e're be said to dye,
By whose noble example and memory,
A thousand Lovers when y'are dead and gone,
Shall spring up in the world instead of one;
Who every year on pilgrimage shall come
To honour your dead ashes in their tomb;
Seeing whose votive gifts and offerings,
The greatest and the mightiest of Kings,

  73In envying you, and wishing them their own,
Shall for your tomb gladly exchange their throne




Thus shall he ever honour'd be,
Who dyes for Love and Constancy;
And thus be ever prais'd, who dyes
Love's Martyr, and his Sacrifice.








For what? or against whom?



Against that stranger there,
who'd rob me of the honour and happiness
of dying for Bellinda.




He's more unjust then I,
who 'as rob'd me of the honour and happiness
of living for her, and now won't let me dye.



As if no rocks nor seas, nor flames there were
Nor other wayes of dying, but for her?
Chuse any of them you please, your choice is free,
Onely dying for her belongs to me.



You may live for her, what wo'd you more? were I
So happy as you, who's list for me shu'd dye.



You talk as if there were no life to come,
No blessed Shades nor no Elizium;

Where those who have been Lovers here possess
Eternity of joyes and happiness.



Heaven is my witness I ne're think upon
The joyes and pleasures of Elizium,

Nor any joyes or pleasures whatsoe're
But that of dying and suffering for her.



How like two towering Hawks they mount and soar,
Love never flew so high a flight before!



There'l be no end of this.



Peace, let them alone,
Greater example of Love was never shown!



Then let Bellinda come, and sentence give
Whether of them shu'd dye, and whether live;
Are you content?







And so am I
ready for her either to live or dye.



Bring her forth thên, with all the ceremonies
requisite in so dire a Sacrifice,
All the Nymphs in mourning accompaning her,
The fatal Axe and Executioner
Before her, and (the whilst they go along)
The Chorus singing of her Funeral Song.

The Song, sung whilst the Nymphs put on their mourning Veils.
Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh!
Never was there greater woe,
Let us all the habits borrow,
And the face of grief and sorrow;

  75Who'd not spare a sigh nor tear
From all mishaps to spend it here!
Enter Bellinda veil'd, brought in by Polydor, the Popa, or sacred Executioner before her, all the Nymphs weeping, &c.


Wherefore this ceremony, since she's not to dye?



Onely for terrour and formality.



Come, thus I unveil thy eyes, that thou mayest see
Unto what misery and calamity
T'hast brought thy self and us, and thus uncharm
Thy tongue, the fatal cause of all this harm.



What means these sable weeds and mourn∣ing chear?
Whilst not a face but wears death's Livery here!



'Tis all for thee, (unhappy Nymph) put on,
That thou shud'st dye so untimely, and so young.



I understand you not, nor can I fear
Death, whilst my dearest life, Philander's here.





She goes to embrace Philander, and he turns away


This is more strange then t'other!





Philander prove unkinde! nay, then away
With the fatal Axe and Executioner,
And all these deadly preparations here,
They need not now; one unkinde look or two
Of his, can kill me sooner then they can do.



It is thy falshood and perfidity,
(Unfortunate Nymph) that kills thee, and not he;
Whilst falsly and perfidiously you swore,
You lov'd one here, being betroath'd before
unto another.



How! I ne're did swear,
That I lov'd any but Philander here!








For as for him, all Cyprus knows that he
Arriv'd not here, till after you were inclos'd
Ith' facred Cell, and separated from
All conversation; ith' mean time your tongue
Charm'd silent, and Eyes blinded as they were,
How could you see or know that he was here?



Love is a fire, and there needs no eye,
But onely heat to tell when fire is nigh;
And Lovers by their glowing bosoms know
When those are near they love: but lest this now
Might seem too mystical, to make't more clear,
As in the Temple I came forth to swear,
I heard his voice, and swounding instantly
For joy to hear it, whilst officiously
They lifted up my Veil to give me air,
I glanc'd my eyes aside, and saw him there,



Can any thing be more clear?




Deceiv'd in judgement, then we were before?



Did I not tell you she was innocent, I?



Yet can you doubt my faith and constancy?



No, but I doubt whet'r yet I wake or dream,
My extasie and joy is so extream.




See how they stand so ravisht with delight,
And so transported each in t'others sight,
'T can scarcely be conceiv'd by humane breast,
Much less by humane tongue can be exprest.



Disturb them not, & now a word with you
Palemon.



Now Love grant my hopes be true.



Co'd you be jealous of me?




I shu'd not love so dearly as I do,
Were I not jealous; for jealousie
'S but scorching of Loves fire, and he shu'd be
But a cold Lover, who sometimes at least
Felt not a little of it in his breast.



Come, come, I here command you to restore
That heart unto her, you took from her before;
For all the Isle knows 'twas Filena, who
Enkindled the first sparks of Love in you;
Till (haplesly for both) Bellinda came,
And after rais'd those sparks unto a flame,
And holy Vestals ne're with greater care
Preserve their fires, then we Loves fire's air,
Enkindling one straight in anothers room.



In tepid hearths fires kindle not so soon.



Call not that tepid, where late such a fire
Did burn, ne're any in Cyprus flamed higher.



But Loves fires once extinguisht, leave hearts more
Tepid, and cold then e're they were before.



Come, don't dispute, for I'm to be obey'd,
And now but look upon this gentle maid,
And tell me truly, did you ever see
A fairer, or a sweeter Nymph then she!
One for whose love there's not a gentle Swain
In all the Land, but sighs, and sighs in vain;
And she to love you, and to love you so,
She willingly would dye for love of you:
What cleansing water, or what purging flame
Can expiate your not loving her again?



Fall all the fault on this devoted head,
Rather then blame him for't, wou'd I were dead;
'Tis my unworthiness, and no fault of his,
He does not love, if any fault there is.



Yet (obstinate as you are) are you not mov'd
To love again where y'are so dearly lov'd?



These vaults and walls built for eternity,
Love's Temple shall be sooner mov'd then I:



Nay then 'tis needful we apply I see
Our utmost and extreamest remedy,
Lest the contagion o'th' example shu'd
Nourish bad humors, and corrupt the good:)
Let him to th' desart Island straight be led
Whither all Loves Rebels are banished.



Unto what place so e're I am confin'd,
I may change place, but cannot change my mind:

  79But stay! what sudden earthquakes this I feel,
Makes the walls totter, and foundations reel
o'th' Temple here!



'Tis well, 'tis a good sign,
Love who moves stones will move that heart of thine,
More hard then they and see O wondrous sight!
The Temples fill'd with unaccustom'd light;
And love with flaming brand amidst it flyes,
Illuminating with it all the skies:
Now (rebel as thou art) thou soon shalt know
Whether Love's God have any power or no.



Just as some gentle gale does fan the fire,
There's somewhat here within that does inspire
My breast, and now't increases more and more,
Till that which onely was a spark before
Does by degrees so mighty a flame become,
As I am all but one incendium!
O Love, to whom all bosoms must submit,
I feel thy mighty hand, and reverence it!



Just so Phaebus, the Delphick God inspires,
The Pythonesses breast with sacred fires,
Onely the God of Love more mildly burns,
And 'stead of raging unto sweetness turns.




So gentle Love does all command
In fire and water, air and land,
And all with his commands inspire
In Land and water, aire and fire.



And can you pardon me?



I can pardon any thing
in my Palemon, but onely his doubting
whether I can or no. And for the rest,
Account my self by Love most highly blest,
(Who payes debts best the longer he forbears)
T'have all my morning sighs and evening tears,
My daily griefs and nightly sorrows past,
Rewarded thus abundantly at last.








My dearest, dearest Palemon.



Enough, enough, leave your embraces till
At fitter season you may take your fill
Of such delicious pleasures and contents,
Such sweet delights, such joyes and ravishments,
No heart can e're conceive, no tongue express
The thousandth part of their deliciousness. 
To Phi. and Bel.
Now see and wonder, these are Lovers too,
This is the least of miracles Love can do.



Noble Palemon, I congratulate
Your and the fair Filena's happy fate:



And I, noble Philander, rejoyce no less
At your and fair Bellinda's happiness.



Never was more abundant joy, and now
To th' paradice of happy Lovers go,
Where with redoubled flames Love's God does prove
Whose hearts are most capacious of love:
And then with all becoming rites and state,

  81When once your marriages are celebrate;

Philander you, and fair Bellinda may
At your best pleasure either go or stay.


Manet Evander, to whom Pamphilus enters:


And what shall we do?



I for my part, since
there's so much joy and happiness
in marriage, resolve first to go home
and dispose of all I have, and after come
and marry here.



Promise you so won't I,
if there be no wenches
nor wenching businesses here,
it is no place for me; wherefore my word is,
Come here no more.



And mine is, Come agen.



I'm sure I shall have the greatest part
of my opinion.



And I all the nobler and the better 
And now let's see which number is the greater.


