





HOw dearely welcome you are!




And my best sister, you as deer to my sight.
And pray let this confirm it, how you have govern'd
My poore state in my absence, how my servants,
I dare and must beleeve, else I should wrong ye,
The best and worthiest.



As my womans wit Sir,
Which is but weake and crazie.





Tell me how fares the gentle Cellide,

The life of my affection, since my travell,
My long, and lazie travell? is her love still
Vpon the growing hand? do's it not stop
And wither at my yeares? has she not view'd
And entertain'd some yonger smooth behaviour

  Some youth but in his blossome, as her selfe is?
There lyes my feares.



They need not, for beleeve me
So well you have manag'd her, and won her minde,
Even from her houres of childehood, to this ripenesse,
And in your absence, that by me inforc•d stil,
So well distill'd your gentlenesse into her,
Observ'd her, fed her fancy, liv'd still in her,
And though Love be a boy, and ever youthfull,
And young, and beauteous object• ever aym'd at,
Yet here yee have gone beyond love, better'd nature,
Made him appeare in yeares, in gray yeares fiery,
His bow at full bent ever: feare not brother,
For though your body has been farre off from her,
Yet every houre your heart, which is your goodnesse,
I have forc'd into her, won a place prepar'd too,
And willingly to give it ever harbour:
Beleeve she is so much yours, and won by miracle,
(Which is by age) so deep a stamp set on her
By your observances, she cannot alter,
Were the childe living now ye lost at sea
Among the Genoway Gallies, what a happinesse,
What a maine blessing?



O no more good sister,
Touch no more that string, 'tis too harsh and jarring.
With that childe all my hopes went, and you know
The root of all those hopes, the mother too
Within few dayes.



'Tis too true, and too fatall,
But peace be with their soules.




I hope, the beauteous Cellide.





For all she is, is yours.



For the poore boyes losse,
I have brought a noble friend, I found in travell
A worthier minde, and a more temperate spirit
If I have so much judgement to discerne 'em,

  Man yet was never master of.







A Gentleman, I doe assure my selfe,
And of a worthy breeding, though he hide it:

I found him at Valentia, poore and needy,
Onely his minde the master of a treasure.

I sought his friendship, wonne him by much violence,
His honesty and modesty still fearing
To thrust a charge upon me; how I love him,
He shall now know, where want and he hereafter
Shall be no more companions: use him nobly,
It is my will, good sister, all I have

I make him free companion in, and part•er,
But onely




I observe ye, hold your right there,
Love and high rule allowes no rivals, brother•

He shall have faire regard, and all observance.




Ye are welcome noble Sir.






I'me glad to see your merry body well yet.



Yf'aith y'are welcome home; what news beyond •eas?



None, but new men expected, such as you are
To breed new admirations: 'tis my sister,
Pray ye know her sir.



With all my heart, your leave Lady.



Ye have it sir.



A shrewd smart touch, which do's prognosticate
A body k•ene and active, somewhat old,
But that's all one: age brings experience
And knowledge to dispatch. I must be better
And neerer in my service, with your leave sir,
To this faire L•dy.



What, the old squire of dame• still•




Still the admire• of their goodnesse with all my heart now

  I love a woman of her yeares, a pacer
That lay the bridle in her neck will travell
Forty, and some what fulsome is a fine dish,
These yong colts; are too sketish.





In all her joy Si• to congratulate
Your faire returne.



My loving, and kind cosin,
A thousand welcomes.



A thousand thanks to heaven Sir
For your safe, voyage, and returne.




But wher's my blessed Cellide? her slacknesse
In visitation.



Thinke not so deere Vncle,
I left her on her knees, thanking the gods
With teares and prayers.



Ye have given me too much comfort.



She will not be long from ye.







It is so, and a bait you cannot balke sir,
If your old rule raigne in you, ye may know her.
A happy stocke ye have, right worthy Lady,
The poorest of your servants, vowes his duty
And obliged faith.



O 'tis a kisse you would sir,
Take it, and tye your tongue up.



I am an asse
I doe perceive now: a blinde asse, a blockhead:
For this is handsomnesse, this that that drawes us,
Body and bones: oh what a mounted forehead,
What eyes and lips, what every thing about her?
How like a Swan she swims her pace, and beares
Her silver breasts? this is the woman, she,
And onely she, that I will so much honour

  As to thinke worthy of my love, all older Idol•

I heartily abhorre, and give to gunpowder,
And all complexions besides he•s, to Gypsies.




O my deere life, my better heart, all danger•,
Distresses in my travell, all misfortune•,
Had they been endlesse like the houses upon me,
In this kisse, had been buried in oblivion•

How happy have ye made me, truely happy?



My joy has so much overm•ste•ed me,
That in my teares for your returne.




My noble friend too: what a blessednesse
Have I about me now? how full my wish••

Are come agen, a thousand hearty welcome•

I once more lay upon ye: all I have,
The faire and liberall use of all my servant•

To be at your command, and all the use•

Of al within my power.



Ye are too munificent,
Nor am I able to conceive those thanks sir.



Ye wrong my tender love now, even my service,
Nothing accepted, nothing stuck between us
And our intire affections, but this woman,
This I beseech ye friend.



It is a jewell
I doe confesse would make a thiefe, but never
Of him that's so much yours, and bound your servant,
That were a base ingratitude.




Pray be acquainted with her, keep your way sir,
My cosin and my sister.



Ye are most welcome:



If any thing in our poore powers fair• sir
To render ye content, and liberall welcome
May but appeare, command it.



Ye shall find u•

Happy in our performance.




Of both your goodnesses presents his service.



Come no more complement: custome has made it
Dull, old, and tedious: ye are once more welcome,
As your own• thought• can make ye, and the same ev•r.
And so wee'l in to ratifie i•.




Is wild oates yet come over?



Yes: with me Sir.



How do'• he b••re himself?



A great deale better:
Why doe you blush? the Gentleman will doe well.



I should be glad on't Sir.



How do's his Father?



As mad a worme 〈◊〉 ere he w••.




Shall we enjoy your companie?



Ile wayt on ye•

Only a thought, or two.



We bar all prayers.
Exeunt all but Hylas.




This last wench, I this last wench was a faire one:

A dainty wench, a right one: a devill take it,
What doe I ayle; to have fi•teene now in liking
Enough a man would thinke to stay my stomack,
But what's fifteene, or fifteene score to my thoughts?
And wherefore are mine eyes made, and have lights,
But to encrease my object•? this last wenc•

Stick• plagny close unto me: a hundred po••d
I were as close to her: if I lov'd now
As many foolish men doe•I should run mad.




Enter old Sebastian, and L•••celot.


SIrha, no more of your Fr•nch shrugs I advise you,
If you be lowzie, shift your selfe.



May it pleas• your worship•




Onely to see my sonne, my sonne good L•uncelot:

Your Master, and my sonnes body O me si•,
No money, no more money Monsieur Launcelot•

Not a dene•re, sweet Signior: b•ing the person,
The person of my boy, my boy Tom: Monsieur Thomas,

O• get you gone ag•n, du gata wh•••ir,

Bassa mi cu, good Launcelot, valet•t•.

My boy, or nothing.



Then to answer punctually.




I say to 'th purpose.



Then I say to'th purpose,
Because your Worships vulgar understanding
May meet me at the ne•rest• your sonne, my master,
Or Monsieur Thomas, (for so his travell stiles him)
Through many forraigne plots that vertue meets with,
And dangers (I beseech ye give attention)
I• at the last ariv'd
To aske your (as the French man cals it swee•ly)
Benediction, as jo•r 〈◊〉 jo•r.




Sirha, do not conjure me with your French •uries.




Che ditt'a v•n, Monsieur.




Che d•g• v•n, Rascall:
Leave me your rott•n lang••ge, and tell me plainely
And quickly si•ha, 〈◊〉I cr•ck your French crown•,
What your good Master meanes: I have maintain'd
You and your Monsieur, as I take it La••celo•

These two yeeres •t your ditty 〈◊〉, your 〈◊〉:


  Iour me no more, for not another penny
Shall passe my purse.



Your Worship i• erroneous,
For as I told you, your Sonne Tom, or Thomas,

My Master, and your sonne is now arriv'd
To aske ye, as our language beares it neerest
Your quotidian blessing, and here he is in person.




What Tom, boy, welcome with all my heart boy,
Welcome ••ith, thou hast gladded me at soule boy,
Infinite glad I am, I have pra•ed too, Thomas

For you wilde Thomas, Tom, I thank th•e hartily
For comming home.



Sir, I doe finde your prayers
Have much much prevail'd above my sins.







Else certaine I had perish'd with my rudeness•,
Ere I had won my selfe to that discretion

I hope you shall hereafter finde.




Di•cretion? is it come to that? the boy's spoild.



Sirah, you rogu•, look •or't, for I will make thee
Ten times more miserable then thou thoughtst thy selfe
Before thou travelledst: thou hast told my father
I know it, and I finde it, all my rogueries
By meere way of prevention to undoe me.



Sir• as I spe•ke eight language•, I onely
Told him you came to aske his benediction,
De jour •njour.



But that I must be civill.
I would beat thee like a dog: sir, howsoever
The time I have mispent may make you doubtfull,
Nay, hard•n your beliefe 'gainst my co•ver•ion,



A po• o' travell, I say.





Your owne ••perience in my a•ter cour•e•.






Prethee no more; t'is scurvy; ther'• thy sister
Vndon without redemption: he •ates with pick•

Vtterly spoyld, his spirit ba•fell'd in him.
How have I sind that this affliction
Should light so heavie on me. I have no more sonnes;
And this no more mine owne, no spark of nature
Allows him mine now, h•'• growne t•me: my grand curse
Hang ore his head that thus transform'd thee: travell?
Ile send my horse to travell next: we monsieur,
Now will my most canonicall d•ere neighbours
Say I have found my sonne, and rejoyce with me
Because he has mew'd his mad tricks off. I know not,
But I am sure• this Monsieur, this fine gentleman
Will n•ver be in my books like m•d Thomas,

I must go• s••k• an heire, for my inheritance
Must not turne s•cretary: my name and q•ality
Has kept my land three hundred yeers in madnesse,
And it slip now, may it sinke.
Exit.





I am glad to see thee well: but wher's my father?



Gone discontent, it seeme•.



He did ill in it
As he dos all: for I was uttering
A handsome speech or two, I have been •tudying
Ere since I came from Paris: how glad to see thee?



I am gladder to see you, with more love too
I dare maintaine it, then my fathers sorry
To see (as he supposes) your conversion:
And I am sure he is vext, nay more I know it,
He has prai'd against it mainely: but it appear•• sir
Ye had rather blinde him with that poore opinion•

Then in your selfe correct it, deerest brother,
Since there is in our uniforme resemblance,
No more to make us two, but our bare sexes:
And since one happy birth pro•uced us hither,

  Let one more happy minde.




For I can doe it when I list: a•d yet wench
Be mad too when I please: I have the trick on't.
Beware a traveller.



Leave tha• trick too,



Not for the world: bu• whe•'s my Mistres•e
And p••thee say how do's she? I melt to see her,
And pre•e••ly: I must a way.





For o' my •ath she will not see your brother•




Not s•e me? I'le.



Now y•u play your true self•

How would my father love this! I'le assure ye
She will not see you: she has heard, (and lowdly)
The gambolls that you plaid since your departure,
In every Towne ye came, your severall mischeifes•

Your rowses, and your wenches: all your quarrel•s,
And the no causes of 'em: these • take it
Although she love ye well, to modest eares,
To one that waited for your reform•tion,
To which end travell was propounded b• her Vncle,
Must needs, and reason for it, be examined,
And by her modesty, and fear'd too light too
To fyle with her affections: ye have l•st her
For any thing I see, exil'd your selfe.



No more of that sweet Dol•, I wi•l be civill.







Wouldst thou have me lose my birth-right•

For yond old thing will disinherit me
If I grow too demure: good sweet Doll, prethee:
Prethee deere sister, let me see her.







Nay, I beseech thee: by this light.







Kis•e me, and be my friend, we two were •wins.
And shall w• now grow strangers?



'Ti• not my fault,



Well, there be other women, and remember
You, you were the cause of thi•: there be more lands too,
And better people in 'em: fare ye well,
And other loves: what shall become of me
And of my vanities, because they grieve ye.



Come hi•her, come, do you see that clowd that flyes there?
So light are you, and blown with every fancy:
Will ye but make me hope ye may be civill?
I know your nature's sweet enough, and tender,
Not grated on, nor curb'd: doe you love your Mi•tresse?



He lyes, that sayes I doe not.



Would ye see her?



If you please: for it must be so.



And appeare to her
A thing to be belov'd?








A little of your wildenesse into wisedome,
And put on a more smoothnes•e:
I'le doe the best I can to helpe ye, yet
I doe protest she swore, and swore it deeply,
She would never see you more: where's your man• heart now?
What doe you faint at this?



She is a woman:
But he she entertaines next for a s•rvant,
I shall be bold to quarter.



No thought of fighting:
Goe in, and •here wee'l talke more: be but rul'd,
And what lyes in my power, ye shall be sure of.





Enter Alic• and Mary.


HEe cannot be so wilde still.




I have now heard all, and all the truth.




Is he the first, that h'as bin giv'n a lost man,
And yet come fairely home? he is yong, and tender
And fit for that impression; your affections
Shall stamp upon him, age brings on discretion,
A yeere hence, these mad toyes that now possesse him
Will shew like bugbeares to him, shapes to •right him;
Marriage dissolves all these like mists.




Hereditary in him, from his father
And to his grave they will haunt him.




Which is a wise part in you; yet your love
However you may seeme to lessen it
with these dislikes, and choake it with these errors,
Do what you can will break out to excuse him,
Ye have him in your hart, and planted, Cosin,
From whence the power of reason, nor discretion
Can ever roote him.



Planted in my heart Aunt?
Beleeve it no, I never was so liberall:
What though he shew a so so comely fellow
Which we call pretty? or say it may be hansom?
What though his promises may stumble at
The power of goodnesse in him, sometimes use too?



How willingly thy heart betrayes thee cosin?
Cozen thy selfe no more: thou has• no more power
To leave off loving him, then he that's thirsty

  Ha• to abst•ine from drinke standing before him.
His mind is not so monstrous for his shape
If I have eye•; I have not seene hi• better.
A hansom browne complexion




Inclining to a tawney.



Had I said so
You would have wish'd my tongue out• then his making.



Which may be mended: I have s•ene legg• straiter.
And cleaner made.








And better set together.




For against thy conscience thou lyest stubbornely.



I grant 'tis neat enough.




And where the outward parts are faire and lovely,
(Which are but molds o'th minde) what must the soule be?
Put case youth has his swinge, and fyery nature
Flames to mad uses many times.




You onely use, to make me say I love him:
I doe confesse I doe, but that my fondnesse
Should fling it selfe upon his desperate follies.



I doe not counsell that, see him reclaim'd first,
Which will not prove a miracle, yet Mary

I am afraid 'twill vexe thee horribly
To stay so long.



No, no Aunt, no beleeve me.



What was your dreame to night? for I observ'd ye
Hugging of me; with good, deere, sweet Tom.









On my word 'tis true wench:
And then ye kis•'d me Mary, more then once too,
And sigh'd, and O sw•et Tom againe: nay, doe not blush,
Ye have it at the heart wench.



I'le be hang'd first,
But you must have your way.
Enter Dorothea.




And so will you too,
Or breake down hedges for it: Dorothea,

The welcom'st woman living: how do's thy brother?
I heare he's turn'd a wondrous civill gentleman
Since his short travell.



Pray heaven he make it good Alice.




How doe ye friend, I have a quarrell to ye,
Ye stole away, and left my company.



O pardon me, deere friend, it was to welcome
A brother, that I have some cause to love well.



Prethee how is he? thou speakst truth.




I hope he will be.



Never: ha's forgot me,
I heare wench, and his hot love too:



Thou wouldst •owle then.



And I am glad it should be so; his travels
Have yeelded him variety of Mistresses,
Fairer in his eye farre.







I was a fool•, but better thoughts I thank heaven.



Pray do not think so, for he loves you deerely,
Vpon my troth most •••mely: would faine see you.



S•e m• friend• doe you thinke it fit?




Without the losse of credit too: he's not
Such a prodigious thing, so monstrous,
To fling from all society.



His so much contrary
To my desires, such an antipathy
That I must sooner see my grave.




He was not so before he went.




For then I daily hop'd his fa•re convers•on.



Com•, do not maske your selfe, but see him freely,

  Ye have a minde.



That minde I'le master then.



And is your hate so mortall?



Not to his person,
But to his qualities, his mad-cap follies,
Which still like Hydras heads grow thicker on him.
I have a credit friend, and maids of my sort,
Love where their modesties may live untainted.



I give up that hope then: pray, for your friends sake,
If I have any interest within ye,
Doe but this courtesie, accept this Letter.







The same: 'tis but a minutes reading,
And as we looke on shapes of painted divels,
Which for the present may disturb our fancy,
But with the next new object loose 'em so
If this be foule, ye may forget it, 'pray:



Have ye seene it friend?




I will not lye: I have not,
But I presume, so much he honours you,
The worst part of himselfe was cast away
When to his best part he writ this.




Not that I any way shall like his scribling.



A shrewd dissembling queane.




I thanke ye deere friend,

I know she loves him.



Yes, and will not loose him,
Vnlesse he leap into the Moone, beleeve that,
And then shee'l scramble too: yong wenches loves
Are like the course of quarterns, they may shift
And seeme to cease sometimes, and yet we see
The least distemper puls 'em backe againe,
And seats 'em in their old course: feare her not,
Vnlesse he be a devill.



Now heaven blesse me.



What has he writ?



Out, out upon him.



Ha, what has the mad man done?



Worse, worse, and wor•e still,



Some northerne toy, a little broad.




Hay, hay boyes: goodnesse keep me: oh:







Here, take your spell againe, it burnes my fingers,
Was ever Lover writ so sweet a Letter,
So elega•t a stile? pray looke upon't:
The rarest inventory of ranke oathes
That ever cut-purse cast.



What a mad boy is this?




A little julip gently sprinckled over
To coole his mouth, lest it breake out in blister•,
Indeed law. Yours for ever.







You shall be welcome to me, come when you please•

And ever may command me vertuously,
But for your brother, you must pardon m•,
Till I am of his nature, no accesse friend,
No word of visitation, as ye love me,
And so for now Ile leave ye.
Exit.





Has this thing written, how it roares like thunder?
With what a s•ate he enters into stile.
Deere Mistresse.



Out upon him bedlam.



Well, there be waies to reach her yet: such likenesse
As you two carry me thinkes.



I am mad too,
And yet can apprehend ye: fare ye w•ll,
The foole shall now fish for himselfe.




His tewgh be tith and strong: and next no swearing,
He'l catch no fish else. Farewell Doll.











Enter Valentine, Alice, an• Cellide.


INdeed he's much chang'd, extreamely alter'd,
His colour faded strangely too.




The sharpe and nipping ayre of our new clymat
I hope is all, which will as well restore
To health againe th'affected body by it,
And make it stronger far, as leave it dangerous;
How do's my sw•et, our blessed houre comes on now
Apace my Cellide, (it knocks at dore)
In which our loves, and long desires like rivers
Rising asunder far, shall fall together,
Within these too daies deere.



When heaven, and you sir
Shall thinke it fit: for by your wil• I am govern'd,



'Twere good some preparation.




All that may be:
It shall be no blinde wedding: and all the joy
Of all our friends I hope: he lookes worse hourely:
How do's my friend, my selfe? he sweats too coldly.
His pulse, like the slow dropping of a spowt,
Scarce gives his function: how i'st man, alas sir,
You looke extreme ill: is it any old griefe,
The weight of which?



None, gentle sir, that I feele
Your love is too too tender.
Nay beleeve sir,



You cannot be the master of your health,
Either some feaver lyes in wait to catch ye,
Whose harbinger's already in your face

  We see preparing: or some discontent,
Which if it lye in this house, I dare say
Both for this noble Gentleman, and all
That live within it, shall as readily
Be purg'd away, an••ith as much care •o•ten'd,
And where the cause is.



'Tis a joy to be ill,
Where such a vertuous faire Physitian
Is ready to releeve: your noble •ares
I must, and ever shall be thankfull for,
And would my service (I dare not looke upon her)
But be not fearefull, I feele nothing dangerous,
A grudging caus'd by th' alteration
Of ayre, may h•ng upon me: my heart's whole,
(I would it were)



I knew the cause to be so.



No, you shall never know it.




To purge the bloud, and keep your bed a day Sir,
And sweat it out.



I have such cordials,
That if you will but promise me to take 'em,
Indeed you shall be well, and very quickly,
I'le be your Doctor, you shall see how finely
I'le fetch ye up againe.




Hot, very hot: his pulse beats like a drum now,
Feele sister, feele, feele sweet.



How that touch stung me?







And those julips in the window.



Some see his bed made.



This is most unhappy,
Take courage man, 'tis nothing but an ague.



And this shall be the last fit.




Now what 'tis to be truely miserable,
I feele at •ull experience.







Come, leade him in, he shall to bed: a vomit,
I'le have a vomit for him.




And i• he breath'd a veyne.



No, no, no bleeding,
A Clyster will coole all.



Be of good cheere Sir.



He'• loth to speake.



How hard he holds my hand Aunt?



I doe not like that signe.




Softly, he's full of paine, be diligent
With all the care ye have: would I had •cus'd him.
Exeunt





Enter Dorothea and Thomas.


VVHy do you raile at me? do I dwell in her
To force her to do this or that? your Letter•

A wilde-fire on your Letter; our sweet Letter;
You are so learned in your writs: ye stand now
As if ye had worried sheepe: you must turne tippet,
And suddenly, and truely, and discreetly
Put on the shape of order and humanity,
Or you must marry Malkyn the May Lady:
You must, deere b•other: doe you make me carrier
Of your confound-mee's, and your culverings?
Am I a seemely agent for your othes?
Who would have writ such a debosh'd?




May not a man prof•sse his Love?




Rack a maids tender eares, with dam's and div•ls?



Out, out upon thee.
how would you have me write?
Begin with my love premised? su•ely,
And by my truly Mistresse



Take your owne course
For I see all perswasion's lost upon ye:
Humanitie, all drownd: from this howre fayrely



Ile wash my hands of all ye do: farewell Sir•

Thou art not mad?



No, if I were, deere brother
I would keep you company: get a new Mistres•e
Som suburb Sant, that •ix pence, and som others
Will draw to parley: carowse her health in Cans
And candles ends, aud quarrell for her beauty,
Such a sweet hart must serve your turne: your old love
Releases ye of all your tyes; disclaimes ye
And utterly abjures your memory
Till time has better mannag'd ye, will ye comand me



What bobd of all sides?




Vnto my father sir, that I may tell him
Even to his peace of heart, and much rejoycing
Ye are his true son Thom still? will it please ye
To beat some halfe a dozen of his servants presently
That I may testifie you have brought the same faith
Vnblemishd home, ye car•ied out? or if it like you
There be two chambermaids within, yong wenches,
Handsom and apt for exercise: you have bin good, sir,
And charitable though I say it Signiour
To such poore orphans: and now, by th' way I think on't
Your yong reare Admirall, I meane your last bastard

Don Iohn, ye had by Lady Blanch the Dairy Maid,
Is by an Academy of learned Gypsies,
Foreseeing some strange wonder in the infant
Stolne from the Nurse, and wanders with those Prophets.
There is plate in the parlour, and good store sir,
When your wants shall supply it. So most humbly
(First rendring my due service) I take leave sir.
Exit.




Why Doll, why Doll I say: my letter •ubd too,
And no accesse without I mend my manners?
All my designes in Limbo? I will have her,
Yes, I will have her, though the divell rore,
I am resolv'd that, if she live above ground,
I'le not be bobd i'th nose with every bobta•le:
I will be civill too: now I thinke better,
Exceeding civill, wondrous finely carried:
And yet be mad upon occasion,
And starke mad too, and save my land: my father:
I'le have my will of him, how ere my wench goes.
Exit.





Sirha, I say still you have spoild your Master: leave your •tiches:
I say thou hast spoild thy master.



I say how sir?



Marry thou hast taught him like an arrant rascall,
First to reade perfectly: which on my blessing
I warn'd him from: for I knew if he read once,
He was a lost man. Secondly, sir Launcelot,

Sir lowsie Launcelot, ye have suffer'd him
Against my power first, then against my precept.
To keepe that simp•ing sort o• people company,
That sober men call civill: marke ye that Sir?



And't please your worship.



It does not please my worship,
Nor shall not please my wo•ship: third and lastly,
Which i• the law were here, I would hang thee for,
(However I will lame thee) like a villaine,
Tho• hast wrought him
Cleane to forget what 'tis to do• a mischiefe,
A handsome mischie•e, such as thou knew'st I lov'd well.
My servants all are sound now, my drink sowrd,
Not a horse pawnd, nor plaid away: no warrants
Come for the breach of peace.
Men travell with their money, and nothing meets 'em:
I was accurs'd to send thee, thou wert ever
Leaning to lazinesse, and losse of spirit,

  Thou slept'st still like a corke upon the water,
Your worship knowes, I ever was accounted
The most debosh'd, and please you to remember,
Every day drunke too, for your worships credit,

I broke the Butlers head too.





I doe remember yet that anslaight, thou wast beaten,
And fledst before the Butler: a blacke jacke
Playing vpon thee furiously, I saw it:

I saw thee scatter'd rogue, behold thy Master.




What sweet content dwels here?



Put up your booke sir,
We are all undone else.




Tom, when is the horse-race?




I know not sir.



You will be there?





I have forgot those journeyes.




The cocking holds at D•rby, and there will be

Iacke Wild-oats, and Will Purser.




I am sorry sir,
They should employ their time so •lenderly,
Their understandings will beare better courses.



Yes, I will marry agen: but Monsieur Thomas,

What say ye to the gentleman that challenged ye
Before he went, and the fellow ye fell out with?




Remember not those follies: where I have wronged sir,
(So much I have now learn'd to discern my selfe)
My meanes, and my repentance shall make even,
Nor doe I thinke it any imputation
To let the law p•rswade me.




I care not of what colour, or complexion,

  Any that can beare children: rest ye merry.
Exit.




Ye have utterly undone: cleane discharg'd me,
I am for the ragged regiment.




And wither at an old mans words?




I know him but too well: eight score I take it
Will not keepe me from beating, if not killing:
I'le give him leave to breake a leg, and thank him:
You might have sav'd all this, and sworn a little.
What had an oath or two bin? or a head broke,
Though t'had been mine, to have satisfied the old man?



I'le breake it yet.



Now 'tis too late, I take it:
Will ye be drunk to night, (a lesse intreaty
Has serv'd your turn•) and save all yet? not mad drunk,
For then ye are the divell, yet the drunker,
The better for your father still: your state is desperate,
And with a desperate cure ye must recover it:
Doe something, doe si•• doe some drunken thing,
Some mad thing, or some any thing to help us.



Goe for a Fidler then: the poore old Fidler
That sayes his songs: but first where lyes my Mistresse,
Did ye enquire out that?



I'th Lodge, alone sir,
None but her owne attend••t•.




Away then, finde this Fidler, and doe not misse me
By nine • clocke.








My father's mad now,
And ten to one will disinherite me:
I'le put him to his plunge, and yet be merry.
What Rybabald•?











I doe embrace your body:
How do'st thou Sam.




The same Sam still: your friend sir.



And how is't bouncing boyes?



Thou art not alter'd,
They said thou wert all Monsieur.




I am much alter'd, much another way:
The civil'st Gentleman in all your Country:
Doe not ye see me alter'd? ye, and nay Gentlemen,
A much converted man: wher's the best wine boyes?







What hast thou made up twenty yet?




I have giv'n a shrewd push at it, for as I take it,
The last I fell in love with, scor'd sixteene.



Look to your skin, Rambaldo the sleeping Gyant
Will rowze, and rent thee piece-meale.



He nev'r perceives 'em
Longer then looking on.



Thou never meanest then
To marry any that thou lov'st?




Nor any wise man I thinke; marriage?
Would you have me now begin to be prentize,
And learne to cobble other mens old boots?



Why you may take a Maid.



Where? can you tell me?
Or if 'twere possible I might get a Maid,
To what use should I put her? looke upon her,
Dandle her upon my knee, and give her suger sops?
All the new gowns i'th parish will not please her,
If she be high bred, for ther's the sport she aymes at,

  Nor all the feathers in the Fryar•.



Then take a widow,
A good stanch wench, that tit•,



And begin a new order,
Live in a dead mans monument, not I sir,
I'le keep mine old road, a true mendicant:
What pleasure this day yeelds me, I never covet
To lay up for the morrow: and me thinks ever
Another mans cooke dresses my dyet neatest•




Tho• wast wont to love old women, fat, and flat nosed,
And thou wouldst say they kist like Flounders, flat
All the face over.




I have had such damsels





Thou hast been a pretious rogue.



Onely his eyes: and O my conscience
They lye with half the kingdome.





Whither goe all these men-menders, these Physitians?
Whose dog lyes sicke o'th mulligrubs?




The yong smug Signiour, Master Valentine,

Brought out of travell with him, as I heare
Is falne sick o'th sudden, desperate sicke,
And likely they goe thither.




The onely temper'd spirit, Scholler, Souldier,
Courtier: and all in one piece? 'tis not possible.




Ther's one can better satisfie you.





I joy to see you Lady:





You'r welcome from your travell: I am hasty,
A Gentleman lies sicke sir.



And how do'st thou?

  I must know, and I will know.




As well as may be, th•nk ye.



I am glad on't,
And prethee ha•ke.












Never looke so narrowly, the mark's in her mouth still,



I am looking at her legs, prethee be quiet.













And that I love a life: I did not marke
This woman halfe so well before, how quicke
And ni•ble like a shadow, there her leg shew'd:
By th' mas a neat one, the colour of her stocking,
A much inviting colour.




I have no time to talke now














I can assure you that, and so







I cannot, nor I will not• good Lord.
Exit.




Well you shall heare more from me.




'Tis charity: besides I know she is there:
And under visitation I shall see hir
Will ye along?









I be a civill man: I have •port in hand boy••

Shall make mirth for a marriage day.










Enter three Physitians with an Vrinall.



A Plurisie. I see it.




I rather hold it
For treinor cordi•.




Doe you marke the Pheses?
'Tis a most pestilent contagious feaver,
A surfet, a plaguy surfet: he must bleed.












I say 'tis dangerous:
The person being spent so much before hand,
And nature drawne so low, cly•ters, coole clysters.



Now with your favour•, I should think a vomi•:
For take away the cause, the effect must follow,
The stomack's foule and fur'd, the pot's unflam'd yet.



No, no, wee'l rectifie that part by milde meane•,
Nature so sunke, must finde no violence.




Wilt please ye draw neere? the weake gentleman
Growes worse and worse still.



Come, we will att•nd him.



He shall doe well my friend.



My master• love ••r.



Excellent well I warrant thee, right and straight friend.



Ther's no doubt in him, non• at all, nev'r f••t• him.





Enter Valentine and Michael.


THat he is desperate si•k, I do beleeve well,
And that without a sp•edy cure, it kils him,
But that it lyes within the helpe of physicke,
Now to restore his health, or art to cure him:
Beleeve it you are co•ened: cleane beside it.
I would tell ye the true cause too, but 'twould vexe ye,
Nay, run ye mad.



May all I have restor• him?
So deerely and so tenderly I love him,
I doe not know the cause why, yea my li•e too.



Now I perceive ye so well set, I'le tell you,
Hei mihi quod nullis amor, est medicabilis herbis.



'Twa• that I onely fear'd: good friend go from me,
I finde my heart too full •or further conference:
You are assur'd of this?



'Twill prove too certaine,
But beare it nobly sir, youth hath his errors.



I shall do, and I thank ye• pray ye no word• on't,
I doe not use to t•lk• sir.
Exit.





Is there no constancy in earthly things:
No happinesse in us, but what must alter,
No life without the heavy load of fortune•

What miseries we are, and to our selves,
Even then wh•n full content seemes to •it by us•

What daily sores, and sorrowes?





The Gentleman if ev•r you will see him
Alive as I think.






O h••aint•, for heaven sake,
For heaven sake sir.



Go• com•ort him deere •i•ter.
Exit Alic•

And one word sweet, with you• then we'l go to him.
What think you of this Gentleman?



My pity thinks sir,
'Tis great misfortune, that he should thus perish.



It is indeed: but C•llide, he •ust dye.



That were a cruelty, when •ar• may cur••im•

Why doe you weep so sir, he may recover•




He may, but with much d•nger••y •weet Cellid•

You hav• a powerfull tongue.



To doe you service.




I will betray his griefe: he loves a gentlewoman,
A friend of yours, whose heart anoth•r •old•.
He knowes it too: yet such a sway blinde •an•••

And his not daring to deliver it,
Have won upon him, that they must undoe him:
Never so hopefull and so sweet a spir•••

Misfortune fell •o 〈◊〉 on•




Sure she's hard 〈◊〉

That can looke on, ••d not relent, and deeply
At such a misery• she is not ma•ried•

















Do's he deserve her truely, that she loves so•




His love may merit much: his person little,
For there the match lyes mangled.



Is he your friend?



He should be, for he i• neere me.



Will not h• dy• then?
When th'other shall recover•









Me thinks he should goe neere it, if he love her;
If she love him



She do's, and would doe equall:



'Tis A hard taske you put •e: yet for your sake

I will speake to her: all the art I have:
My best end•vors: all hi••outh and p•••on•

His mind more full of ••auti•: all his hopes•

The memory of s•ch a sad example•

Ill spoken of, and never old: the curs••

Of loving maids, and what may be •lleag'd
Ile lay before her• what's h••••me•I am ready



But will you d••l• effectually?





Nay, were it m• self•, at your entreaty•




And could ye be so pittifull?




Because you urge i• si•.





It is your self•




It is in deed, I know it•

And now know how y• lov• me•






Let but your goodnesse judge: your own•〈◊〉 piti••

Set but your eyes on his afflictions:
He is mine, and so b•comes your charge: but •hink•

What ruine nature suffe•• in this yo•ng man•

What losse humanity, and noble manhood•

Take to your better judgement my 〈◊〉

My age, hung •ull of impotence, and 〈◊〉

My body budding now no more: seere wi•t•r
Hath seal'd tha• sa• up••t the b•st and happiest
I can but b• your infant: you my nurse•

And how unequall deerest• where his yeere••

His sweetnesse, and his ever spring of goodnesse•

My fortunes growing in •im• and my selfe too•

Which makes him all your old lo••• miscon•ei•e not,
I say not this, as weary of my bondage•

Or ready to infring• my faith: bear•〈◊〉


  Those eyes that I adore still, those lamp• that light me
To all the joy I have•




You have •aid enough si•,
And more then ere I thought that tongue could utter,
But ye are a 〈◊〉• a f•ls• m•• to•.








And now, to shew you that I am a woman
Rob'd of her rest, and fool'd out of her •ond•esse,
The Gentleman shall live: and if •e love me•

Ye shall be both my triumph•• I ••ll to him•

And as you carelesly fling off your fortune•

And now grow weary of my easie winning•

So will I lose the name of Valentin•,

From hence•orth all his flatteries• and beleeve it,
Since ye have so •o slightly parted with affection,
And that affection you have nawn'd your faith for•

From this houre, no repentance, vowe•, nor prayers
Shall pl•cke m• backe agen• what I shall doe,
Yet I will under•ake hi• cure• expect it•

Shall minister no comfort, no cont•nt
To either of ye, but hourely more ••xations•




Why let him dye then.



No• so much I have loved
To be commanded by you, that even now•

Even in my hate I will obey your wishes•




What shall I doe?



Dye like a foole unsorrow'd•

A bankrupt fool•• that fli•gs away his treasure?
I must begin my cure•




And I my crosses•Ex•••t.






Enter Franck sick, Physitians, and a Poth•e••y.



CLap on the Cataplasme.








And see those brothe• there,
Ready within this houre, pray keep your armes in,
The ayre is raw, and ministers much evill.



Pray leave me: I beseech ye leave me gentlemen,
I have no other sicknesse but your presence,
Convey your Catapla•mes to those that need '•m,
Your Vomit•, and your Clyst•rs.



Pray be rul'd sir.



Bring in the Lettice cap• you must be shaved sir,
And then how suddenly wee•l make you sleep.



Till doomes-day: what unnecessary nothing•

Are these about a wounded minde?







What questions they propound too• how do you sir•

I am glad to •e• you well?



A great distemper, it growes hotter still.



Open your mouth I pray sir.



And can you tell me
How old I am then? there's my hand, pray shew me
How many broken shin• within this two yeare.
Who would be thus •n •etters, good master Doctor,
And you de•re Doctor, and the third sweet Doctor
And pretious master Apothecary, I doe pray ye
To give me leave to live a little longer,
Ye stand before me like my blacks.





For now his fancy turnes too.






By your leave Gentlemen:
And pray ye your leave a while too, I have something
Of secret to impart unto the patient.







I mary such a Physicke
May chance to find the humour: be not long Lady
For we must minister within this halfe houre.
Exit. Plus.




You shall not stay for me.



Would you were all rotten
That ye might only intend one anothers itches:
Or would the Gentlemen with one consent
Would drinke small Beere but seven yeare, and abolish
That wild fire of the bloud, unsatiate wenching
That your too Indies, spring• and fals might faile ye
What torments these intruders into bodies.



How do you worthy Sir?



Blesse me, what beames
Flew from these angell eyes: O what a misery
What a most studdied torment tis to me now
To be an honest man: dare ye sit by me?



Yes; and do more then that too: comfort ye
I see ye have need.



You are a faire Physitian:
You bring no bitternesse gilt ore, to gull us
No danger in your lookes, yet there my death lyes.



I would be sorry sir, my charity
And my good wishes for your health should merit
So stubborne a construction: will it please ye
To taste a little of this Cordiall
Enter Valentine•

For this I thinke must cure ye.




Sure she has found my griefe? why do you blush so?



Do you not understand? of this• this Cordiall.



Of my afflicted heart: she is gon for ever.



What heaven ye have brought m• Lad•?




For tis not impudence, nor want of honour
Makes me do this: but love to save your life sir
Your life, too excellent to loose in wishes
Love, virtuous love.



A vertuous blessing crowne ye
O goodly sweet, can there be so much charity
So noble a compassion in that heart
That's filled up with anothers faire affections?
Can mercy drop from those eyes.
Can miracles be wrought upon a dead man,
When all the power ye have, and perfect object
Lyes in anothers light: and his deserves it?



Do not dispaire: nor do not thinke to boldly
I dare abuse my promise, t'was your friends
And so fast tyde, I thought no time could ruine:
But so much has your danger, and that spell
The powerfull name of friend, prevail'd above him.
To whom I ever owe obedience,
That here I am, by his command to cure ye,
Nay more for ever, by his full resignement
And willingly I ratefie it.



Hold for heaven sake,
Must my friends misery make me a triumph?
Beare I that noble name, to be a Traitor?
O vertuous goodnes, keepe thy selfe untainted:
You have no power to yeeld, nor he to render
Nor I to take: I am resolv'd to die first.



Ha; saist thou so? nay then thou shalt not perish.



And though I love ye above the light shines on me,
Beyond the wealth of Kingdomes, free content,
Sooner would snatch at such a blessing offer'd
Then at my pardon'd life by the law forfeited,
Yet, yet O noble beauty, yet O paradise
For you are all the wonder reveal'd of it,
Yet is a gratitude to be preserv'd
A worthy gratitude to one most worthy
The name, and noblenes of friends.




If I had never know•e that gentleman
Would you not willingly embrace my off•r?



Do you make a doubt?



And can ye be unwilling
He being old and impot•nt: his aime too
Levell'd at you, for your good? no• constrain'd,
But out of cure, and councell? alas consider
Play but the woman with me, and consider
As he himselfe do's, and I now dare see it
Truly consider sir, what misery.



For vertues sake take heed.



What losse of youth,
What everlasting banishment from that
Our yeares doe only covet to arive at
Equall affections and shot together:
What living name can dead age leave behind him
What art of memory but fruitlesse do•ting?







To you unlesse ye apply it
With more and firmer faith, and •o digest it
I speake but of things possible, not done
Nor like to be, a posset cures your sicknesse
And yet I know ye grieve this; and howsoever
The worthines of Friend may make ye stagger
Which is a faire thing in ye, yet my Pa•ient,
My gentle Pati•nt, I would •ain• say more
If you would understa•d.







Yet sure your sicknesse is not so forgetfull
Nor you so willing to be lost.




Me thinks you ar• no• faire now• me think• more
That modest, vertu•, men d•li•ered of you
Shewe• b•t like sh•dow to me, thi•, and fad•ng.







Y• have no share in goodnesse•

Ye are belyde; you are not Cellide,


  The modest, unaculate: who are ye?
For I will know: what devill to do mischiefe
Vnto my vertuous Friend, hath shifted shape•

With that unblemished b•auty.



Do not rave Sir,
Nor let the violence of thoughts distract ye,
You shall enjoy me: I am yours: I pitty•

By those faire eyes I do.




O woman, perfect woman: what distraction
Was meant to mankind when th•u was't made a devill,
What an invyting hell invented? tell me,
And if you yet remember what i• goodnesse,
Tell me by that, and truth, can one so cherish'd
So sainted in the soule of him, whose service
Is almost turn'd to supperstition,
Whose every day endeavours, and desires
Offer themselves like incense on your altar,
Wose heart holds no intelligence, but holy
And most religious with his love: whose life
(And let it ever be remembred Lady)

•s drawne out only for your ends.







Whose all, and every part of man: pray make me
Like ready Pages wait upon y•ur pleasures;
Whose breath is but your bubble. Can ye, dare ye,
Must ye cast of this man, though he were willing,
Though in a noblenes, so cro••e my danger
His friendship durst confirme it, without basenesse,
Without the staine of honour? shall not people
Say liberally hereafter, ther's the Lady
That lost her Father, Friend, herselfe, her faith too,
To •awne upon a stranger, for ought you know
As faithlesse as your selfe, in love as fruitlesse?



Take her withall my heart, thou art so honest
That tis most n•cessary I be undone.



With all my soule possesse her.
Exit, Val.



  I scorn'd, and hated ye, and came to cosen ye:
Vtter'd those things might draw a wonder on me,
To make ye mad.



Good heaven, what is this woman?



Nor did your danger, but in charity.
Move me a whit: nor you appeare unto me
More then a common object, yet, now truely,
Truely, and nobly I doe love ye deerely,
And from this houre, ye are the man I honour,
You are the man, the excellence, the honesty,
The onely friend, and I am glad your sicknes•e
Fell so most happily at this time on ye,
To make this truth the worlds.



Whether doe you drive me?



Backe to your honesty, make that good ever,
'Tis like a strong built Castle, •eated high,
That drawes on all ambitions, still repaire it,
Still fortifie it: there are thousand foes
Besides the tyrant beauty, will ass•ile it:
Looke to your Centin•ls that watch it hourely,
Your eyes, let them not wand•r.







Or do'• she play still with me?
Keep your eares,
The two maine ports that may betray ye strongly
From light beliefe first, then from flattery,
Especially where woman beat• the parley:
The body of your •trength, your noble heart
From ever yeelding •o dishonest ends,
Rigd round about with vertue, that no breaches•

No subtle mynes may meet ye.



How like the Sun
Labouring in his eclipse, darke, and prodigious,
She shew'd till now? when having won her way,
How full of wonder he breakes out againe,
And sh•ds his vertuous beame•: excellent Angell,

  For no lesse can that heavenly minde proclaime thee,
Honour of all thy s•xe, l•• it be •awfull,
And like a pilg•im thus I kneele to beg it,
Not with proph•n• lips now, nor burnt affection•,
But, reconcil'd to faith, with holy wish••,
To kisse that virgin h•nd.



Take your des••e sir,
And in a nobler way, for I dare trust ye,
No other fruit my love must ever yeeld yee,
I feare no more: yet your most constant memory
(So much I am wedd•d to that worthinesse)
Shall ever be my friend, companion, husband,
Farewell, and fairely governe your affections,
Stand, and deceive me not: O noble yong man,
I love thee with my soule, but dare not say it•

Once more farewell, and prosper.
Exit.





My wonder like to fear•full shapes in dreames,
Has wakened me out o• my fit o• folly,
But not to shake it off• a spell dwel• in me,
A hidden charme shot from thi• b••ut•ou• woman,
That •ate can ne'r avoid, nor physicke finde,
And by her counsell strengthen'd: onely thi•

Is all the ••lpe I have, I love faire vertue•

Well, somet•i•g I must doe, to be a friend,
Yet I am poore, and •ardy: something •or her too,
Though I can never r••ch her excellenc••

Yet but to give an offer at a grea••esse.




Be not uncivill Tom, and take your pl•a••re.



Do• you think I am mad• you'l give me l••ve
To try her fairely?








But wher's the sicke man?



Where are the gentlewomen

  That should attend him, ther's the patent
Me thinks these women.



Thou thinkst nothing else.



Goe to him friend, and com•ort him: Ile leade ye:
O my best joy, my worthiest friend, p•ay pardon me•

I am so over-joy'd I want expression:
I may live to be thankfull: bid your friends welcome.




How do'st thou Frank• how do'st thou boy, beare up man:
What, shrink i'th sin•we• for a little sicknesse?
Deavolo morte.



I am o'th mending hand.



How like a F•ute thou speak'st: o'th mending hand man•

Gogs bores, I am well, speake like a man of worship.



Thou art a mad companion: never staid Tom?



Let rogues be staid that have no habitation,
A gentleman may wander: sit thee down Frank,

And see what I have brought thee: come discover,
Open the s•e•ne, and let the work appeare,
A friend at need you rogue is worth a million.



What hast thou there, a julip?



He must not touch it,
'Tis present death.



Ye are an Asse, a twir•pipe,
A Ieffrey Iohn bo peepe, thou mimister,
Thou mend a left-handed pack-saddle, out puppey,
My friend Frank, but a very foolish fellow:
Do'st thou see that bottle? view it well.








There be as many lives in't, as a Ca• carrie•,
'Tis everlasting liquor.








Old reverend Sack, which for ought that I can reade yet,
Was that Philosophers Stone the wise King Ptolomeus

Did all his wonders by.



I see no harme Tom,

Drinke with a moderation.




Which I have ready here, and here a glasse boy,
Take me without my tooles.



Pray sir be temperate,
You know your owne state best.



Sir, I much thanke ye,
And shall be carefull: yet a glasse or two
So fit I finde my body, and that so needfull.



Fill it, and l•ave your fooling: thou say'st true Frank.




Where are these women I say?




Hang up your •ulips, and your portugall possets,
Your barly brothes, and sorrell sops, they are mangy,
And breed the scratches onely: give me Sa•k:
I wonder where this wench is though: have at thee:



So long, and yet no bolting.



Do•, I'le pledge thee.



Take it off thrice, and then cry heigh like a Hunts∣man
With a cleere heart, and no more fits I warrant thee.
The onely Cordiall Frank.Phis. within, & Serv.





Are the things ready?
And is the Barber come?



An houre agoe sir.




Bring out the oyles then.



Now or never gentlemen,
Doe me a kindenesse and deliver me.







From these things, that talke within there,
Physitians, Tom, Physitians, scowring-sticks,
They meane to reade upon me.








And be thou confident, we will deliver thee:
For looke ye Doctor, say the divell were sicke now,
His hornes saw'd off and his head bound with a Biggin,
Sicke of a calenture tak•n by a surfet

  Of stinking soules at his nephews, and S. Dunstans,

What would you minister upon the sudden?
Your judgement short and sound.










It must be a Physitians for three causes,
The first because it is a bald head likely,
Which will down easily without apple-pap.








So it is, and well consider'd,
The second, for 'tis fil'd with broken Greek sir,
Which will so tumble in his stomacke, Doctor,
And worke upon the crudities, conceive me
The feares, and the fidle strings within it,
That those damn'd soules must disembogue againe.



Or meeting with the stygian humour.







Forc'd with a cataplasme of crackers.







Scowre all before him, like a Scavenger.




Satis fecisti domine: my last cause,
My last is, and not least, most learned Doctors,
Because in most Physitians heads (I meane those
That are most excellent, and old withall,
And angry, though a patient say his prayers,
And Paracelsians that doe trade with poysons,
We have it by tradition of great writers)
There is a kinde of toad-stone bread, whose vertue
The Doctor being dri'd.




We are abus'd •irs.



I take it so, or shall be, for say the belly-ake
Caus'd by an inundation of Pease-porridge,
Are we therefore to open the port veyne,
Or the port Esquiline?




Or grant the di•phragma by a rupture,
The signe being then in the head of Capricorne.




Meet with the passion Hupercondriaca,

  And so cause a •arnositie in the kidneyes.



Must not the brains being butter'd with this humou•










The next fit you will have, my most fine scholl•

Bedlam shall finde ia salve for: fare ye well sir,
We came to doe you good, but these yong Doctors
It seemes have boar'd our noses.




And get unwholesome drabs: 'tis ten to one then
We shall heare further from ye, your note alter'd.
E••




And wilt thou be gone, saies one?



And wilt thou be gone saies to'ther?



Then take the odde crowne
To mend thy old gowne.



And we'l be gone all together.









Sir, the yong Gentlewomen
Sent me to see what company ye had with ye,
They much desire to vis•te ye.



Pray ye thanke 'em,
And tell 'em my most sicknes•e is their absence:
Ye see my company.




What gentlewomen are these? my Mistresse?





















No word of my being here, unlesse she know it.



I doe not thinke she do's.



Take that, and mum, then



You have ty'd my tongue up.
Exit.




Sit you downe good Francis•


  And not a word of me till ye heare from me,
And as you finde my humour, follow it:
You two come hither, and stand close, unseen boye••

And doe as I shall tutor ye.







Prethee no more, but helpe me now,




Talke with the gentlewomen.



Talke with the gentlewomen?
Of what forsooth? whose maiden-head the last maske
Suffer'd impression, or whose clyster wrought best:
Take me as I shall tell thee.




What other end came we along?







Your we•z•ll face must needs be ferretting
About the farthing-ale,
Doe as I bid ye,
Or by this light.







Stand close and marke me,



All this forc'd foolery will never doe it.




I hope we bring ye health sir: how is't with ye?



You look far better trust me, the fresh colour
Creeps now againe into his cheeks.




I see has done his worst. Come, we must have ye
Lusty againe, and frolicke man; leave thinking



Indeed it do'• ye harme sir.




I shall be govern'd by ye.



You shall be well then,
And suddenly, and soundly well.




Having now season'd ye: will keep ye ever.



No, no, I have no hope, nor is it fit friend•,

  My life has bin so lewd, my loose condition,
Which I repent too late, so lamentabl•,
That any thing but curses light upon me,
Exorbitant in all my waies.








Sure, I know that voyce well.



In all my courses, cureles•e disobedience.



What a str•nge fellow's this?




No looke before I leapt.



Doe yo' know the voyce sir?



Yes, 'tis a gentlemans that's much afflicted
In's minde: great pitty Ladie•.



Now heaven help him.



He came to me, to ask• free pardon of me,
For some things done long since, which hi• distemper
Made to appeare like wrong, but 'twas not so.



O that this could be truth.







To what end gentlemen, when all is perish'd
Vpon a wrack, is there a hope remaining?
The sea, that nev'r knew sorrow, may be pittifull,
My credit's spilt, and sunke, nor is it possible,
Were my life lengthened out as long as.



I like this well.



Your minde is too mistrustfull.



I have a vertuous sister, but I scorn'd her,
A Mistres•e too, a noble gentlewoman,
For goodnesse all out-going.



Now I know him.



With these eyes friends, my eyes must nev'r see more•




This is for your sake Mary: take heed cosen,
A man is not so soone made.




But it is just, I be despis'd and hated.



Despaire not, 'tis not manly: one houres goodnesse
Strikes off an infinite of ils•





And with compassion Cosin.




This cunning yong thee•e plaies hi• part.





My Tom againe, if thi• be ••uth.







O I shall die.











Come lead me to my Friend to take his farewell,
And then what fortune sh•ll b•••ll me, welcome.
How do's it show?







S•y you so Sir•




O ye grand Asse.



And are ye •here my Iuggl••

Away we are abus'd Alice.




Foole be with thee.
Exit. Ma• and Al.








Gon; she found you out, and finely•

In your own nooze she halter'd ye: you must be whispering
To know how things showd: not conte•t to fare well
But you must roare out rost meate; till that suspition
You carried it most neately, she beleeved too
And wept most tenderly• had you continew'd,
Without doubt you had brought her off.



This was thy Rouging,
For thou wert ever whispering: fye upon thee
Now could I breeks thy head.



You spoke to m• first.



Do not anger me,
For by this hand ile beate the buzard blind then
She shall not scape me thus: farewell for this time,



Good night, tis almost bed time: yet no sleepe
Must enter these eyes, till I work• a wonder.
Exit.




Thou shalt along too, for I meane to plague thee
For this nights sins, I will nev'r leave walking of thee

  Till I have worne thee out.



Yonr will be done Sir.



You will not leave me Sam.








Away then: ile be your guid now, if my ma• be trusty
My spightfull Dame, ile pipe ye such a hun••up
Shall make ye daunce a tipvac•: keepe clos• to me.
Exeunt.





Enter Sebasti••, and Dorothy.


NEver perswade m•, I will marry againe
What should I leave my state to, pin• & poaking stick•

To Farthingal•, and frownce•, to •ore-horse•

And a old leather bawdy house behind 〈◊〉





You have a sonne Sir•




Where, what is he?
Who is he like•








Thou lyest, thou hast mard him,
Thou• and thy praier bookes: I do disclaime him:
Did not I take him singing yesternight
A godly Ballad, to a godly tune too,
And had a catechizme in's pocket Damsell,
One of yonr deare disciples, I perceive it?
When did he rid• abroad since he came over?
What Taverne has he us'd to• what things done
That shewes a man, and mettle? when was my house
At such a shame before, to creep to bed
At ten a clocke, and twelve, for want of company?
No singing, nor no dauncing, nor no drinking?
Thou think'st not of these scandals; when, and where
Ha• he but shewd his sword of late.




I do beseech you Sir, nor temp• your weaknesse,

  For if you lik• it so, I can assure you
He is the sam• man still.



Would thou wert ash••

On that condition; but beleeve it gossip
You shall know you have wrong•






So will I know my duty••nd •or h••ven •ak•,
Take but this counc•ll with ye ere you marry,
You were wont to •e••e me: •ake hi•, and confesse him
Search him toth' quicke, and if you find him false
Do as please you•• Mother• name I honour.



H• i• lost, and sp•il•d I am re•olv'd my 〈◊〉

Shall never har•our him: and for your Minion
Ile keepe you •lose enough, least you breake loose
And do mo•e michiefe: get ye in• who waite.
Exit. Dor.





Do you call Sir?



Seeke the Boy: and bid him wait
My pleasure in the morning: marke what house
He is in, and what he do's: and truly tell me.



I will not faile Sir.



If y• do, ile hang ye.
Exeunt.





Enter Thomas, Hylas, and Sam.


KEepe you the backe doore there, and be sure
None of her servants enter, or goe out,
If any woman pa••e, she i• lawfull prize, boyes
Cut off all convoyes.



Who shall answere this?



Why, I shall answere it, you fearefull widgen,
I shall appeare toth' action.



May we discourse too
On honourable tearmes?





  That shall appeare at window: ye may rehears• too
By your commission safely, some sweet parc•••

Of poetry to • Chambermaid.



May we sing too?
For ther's my master-piece.



By no meanes, no boyes,
I am the man reserv'd for ayre, 'tis my part,
And if she be not rock, my voyce shall reach her•

Ye may record a little, or y• may whistle,
As time shall minister, but for maine singing•

Pray ye satisfie your selves• away, be carefull.



But har• ye one word Tom, we may b• be•ten.



That's as ye think good your selv••• i• you des•rv• it,
Why 'tis the easiest thing to compasse: beat•n?
What bugbeares dwell in thy br•ins? who should beat thee?



She has men enough•




Art not thou man enough too•

Thou hast flesh enough about thee: if all that mas•e
Will not maint•ine a little spirit, hang it,
Aud dry it too for dog• meat• get you gone;
I have things of moment in my minde: that doo•e,
Keep it a• thou would'st keep thy wife from a S••vingman.
No more I say: away Sam.




At your will sir,
Exit Hyl. & Sam.





I have him here, a rare rogue, good sweet master,
Doe something of som• savour suddenly•

That we m•y eat, and live; I am almost starv'd,
No point manieur• no point devein, 〈◊〉 Signi•••,
Not by the vertue of my languages,
Nothing at my old masters to be hoped for,
O Signieur du, nothing to line my life with,
But cold Pyes with a cudgell, till you help us.



Nothing but famine •rights thee: come hither Fidler,
Whad Ballads are you seen in best: be sho•t sir.



Vnder your masterships correction, I can sing

  The Duke of Norfolk•, or the merry Ballad
Of Diver•• and Lazarus, the Rose of England,

In Creet when Dedimus first began,

Ionas his crying out against Coventry,










Mawdlin the Merchants daughter,
The Divell, and ye dainty Dames.







The landing of the Spaniards at Bow,

With the bloudy battell at Mile-end.





No tuning as ye love me; let thy Fidle
Speake welch, or any thing that's out of all tune,
The vilder still the better, like thy selfe,
For I presume thy voyce will make no trees dance.



Nay truely, ye shall have it ev'n as homely.



Keep ye to that key, are they all abed trow?



I heare no stirring any where, no light
In any window, 'tis a night for the nonce Sir.



Come strike up then: and say the Merchants daughter,
We'l beare the burthen: proceed to incision Fidler.
Song.





Who's there? what noyse is this? what rogue
At these houres?



O what is that to you my foole?
O what is that to you,
Plucke in your face you bawling Asse,
Or I will breake your brow.
A new Ballad, a new, a new.
hey down, down, adown.



The twelfth of Aprill, on May day,
My house and goods were burnt away, &c.
Maid above.




Why who is this?




Open the doore, and it shall appeare,
Open the doore,

  O gentle squire.



I'le see thee hang first: farewell my d••re,
'Ti• master Thomas, there he stands.





That nothing can redeeme him: raile him h•nce,
Or sing him out in's owne way, any thing
To be deliver'd of him.



Then have at him•

My man Thomas did me promise.
He would visite me this night.



I am here Love, tell me deer• Love,
How I may obtaine thy sight.



Come up to my window lov•, come, come, come,
Come to my window •y deere,
The win•e, nor th• raine, shall troubl• th•• ag•ine,
But thou shalt be lodged •ere.



And art thou strong enough?



Vp, up, I warrant ye.



What do'st thou meane to do•?




I'le warrant ye wee'l coole him: Madg•,Madge above.








The loue of Greec• and it ti•kled him so,
That he devised a way to goe.
Now sing the Duke of Nort•umberland.




And climbing to promotion,
He fell down suddenly,
Madge with a divels vizard roring, offers to kisse him, and he f•ls down,








What hast thou done? thou hast broke his neck.




He pitcht upon his legs lik• a Cat,




O miserable woman, I am spoil'd,
My leg, my leg, my leg, oh both my legs.



I told thee what thou hadst done, mischiefe g• w•th thee,



O I am lam'd for ever: O my leg,
Broken in twenty places: O take heed,
Take heed of women, Fidler: oh a Surgeon,
A Surgeo•, or I dye: oh my good people,
No charitable people, all despightfull,
Oh what a misery am I in: oh my leg.



Be patient sir, be patient: let me binde it.




Oh doe not touch it rogue.



My head, my head,
Oh my head's kil'd.



You must be courting wenches
Through key-holes, Captain Hylas, come and be comforted,
The skin is scarce broke.







How doe ye sir?



Oh maim'd for ever with a fall, he's spoil'd too•

I •ee his brain••.



Away with me for Gods sake,
A Surgeon.



Here'• a night indeed.




Exit all but Fidler.





Goe run for help•.







Run all• and all too little,
O cursed beast that hurt him, r•n, run, flye,
He will be dead else.







Good friend goe you too.



Who payes me for my Musicke?




Ther's twelve pence for ye.



Ther's two groate• againe forsooth,
I n•ver take above, and rest ye merry.
Exit.




A grease pot guild your fidle strings: how do you,
How is my deere?



Why well I thank ye sweet heart,
Shall we walke in, for now th••'s non• to trouble us?



Are ye so crafty sir? I shall meet with ye,
I knew your tricke, and I was willing: my Tom,

Mine owne Tom, now to satisfi• thee, welcome, welcome,
Welcome my best friend to me, all my deerest.



Now ye are my noble Mistresse: we loose time sweet.



I thinke they are all gone.



All, ye did wisely.



And you as craf•ily.



We are well met Mistresse.



Come, let's goe in then lovingly: O my Skarfe Tom.

I lost it thereabout, finde it, and weare it
As your poore Mistresse favour.
Exit.




I am made now,
I see no venture is in no hand: I have it,
How now? the doore lock't, and she in before?
Am I so trim'd?



One parting word sweet Thomas,

Though to save your credit, I discharg'd your Fidler,
I must not satisfie your folly too sir,
Ye'are subtle, but beleeve it Foxe, i'le finde ye,
The Surgeons will be here strait, •ore againe boy,
And breake thy legs for shame, thou wilt be sport else,
Good night•




She saies most true, I must not stay: she has bobd me,
Which if I live, I'le recompence, and shortly,
Now for a Ballad to bring me off againe.
All yong men be warn'd by me, how you do goe a wooing.
Seek not to climb, for feare ye fall thereby, comes your undoing, &c.
Ex•unt.






Enter Valentine, Alice, and s•rvant.


HE cannot goe and take no farewell of me,
Can he be so vnkinde? he's but retir'd
Into the Garden or the Orchard: see si•s.



He would not ride there c•rtain, those were planted
Onely for walkes I take it.




Had he horse out?



So the Groome delivers
Somewhat before the breake of day.




My best friends gone Alice? I have lost the noblest,,
The truest, and the most man I ere found yet.



Inded sir, he deserves all praise.




All, all, and all too little: O that honesty,
That ermine honesty, unspotted eve•,
That perfect goodnesse.



Sure he will returne sir,
He cannot be so harsh.




Never returne, thou know'st not where the cause lyes.



He was the worthiest welcome.







Nor wanted, to our knowledge.



I will tell thee,
Within this houre, things that shall startle thee.
He never must returne.
Enter Michael.








Good morrow master Michael.





Me thinks you are stirring early since your travell,
You have learn'd the rule of health sir, where's your mistres?

  She keeps her warme I warrant ye, a bed yet?



I thinke she do's.



T'is not her houre of wa•ing.



Did you lye with her Lady?



Not to night sir.
Nor any night •his weeke else.



When last saw ye her?







Was she abed then?




I left her at her prayers: why doe ye aske me?



I have been strangely h•unted with a dreame
All this long night, and after many waking•,
The same dreame still; me thought I met yong C•llide

Iust at S. Katherines gate the Nunnery.







Her face slubber'd o're with teares, and troubles,
Me thought she cry'd unto the Lady Abbesse,
For charity receive me holy woman,
A Maid that has forgot the worlds affections,
Into thy virgin order: me thought she tooke her•

Put on a Stole, and sacred robe upon her,
And there I left her.









Doe me the favour (yet to satisfie me)
To s•ep but up, and see.



I know she's there sir,
And all this but a dreame?



You know not my dreames,
They are unhappy ones, and often truth••

But this I hope, yet



I will satisfie ye,
Exit.




Neighbours, how do's the gentleman?




Dreame of a Nunnery?



How found ye my words
About the nature of his sicknesse Valentine?



Did she not cry out, 'twas my folly too
That forc'd her to thi•〈◊〉 did s•• not curse me?
For God sake speake: did you not dreame of me too,
How basely, poorely, tamely, like a foole,
Tir'd with his joye••





Ye promis'd me sir to 〈…〉 these 〈◊〉.



I beare 'em till I breake •g•ine.








Good neighbours, no more o• it,
Ye doe but fling flaxe on my fire• where i• she?




Not yonder s••, nor h•• not this night certaine
Bin in her bed.



It must be truth she tel• ye,
And now I'le shew ye why I came: this morning
A man of mine being •mployed about businesse,
Came early home, who at S. Kath•ri•es Nunnery,
About day peep, told •e he m•t your Mistresse,
And as I spoke it in a dreame, •o troubled
And so received by the Abbe••e, did he see her?
The wonder made me rise, and haste unto ye
To know the cause.



Farewell, I cannot speak• it.
Exit Val.




For heaven sake leave him not•




I will not Lady.



Alas, he's much afflicted,



We shall know shortly more, apply yo•r own care
At home good Alice, and trust him to my counsell.
Nay, doe not weep, all shall be well, despaire not•Exeunt.





Enter Sebasti••, and a Serva•t.


AT Val••tin•• house so merry•




As a pie •ir•




So gam•son dost thou say?



I am sure I heard it.



Ballads, and Fidl•• too•




No, but one Fidle•







Did he do devise•?



The best devises sir: her's my fellow Launc•l•t

He can informe ye all: he was among'em,
A mad thing too• I stood but in a corner.



Come sir, what can you say? is there •ny hope yet
You Master may returne?



H• went f•r else
I will assure your worship on my credi•

By the faith of a Travello•, and a Gentleman,
Your sonne i• found •gain•, the sonn•, the To••




I• he the old Tom?












Next, to consider how he is the old T•m•









I would ye had seene it handled•

Last night sir, as we handled it•〈…〉

Foot•• for leer•, and le••ings• O the noy•e
The noyse we made.








And all the Cham•erma•des, in such a whobub,
One with h•r smocke half• off •other in has•

With a servingm•n• hose upon her head.







A fellow •ayling out of a loop hole there
And his mouth stopt with durt.



y'faith a fine Boy.



Here one of our heads broke.







The gentleman himselfe yong M. Thomas,

Invirond with his furious Mermidons
The fiery Fidler, and my selfe; now singing,
Now beating at the doore, there parlying,
Courting at that window, at the other scalling
And all these severall noyses to two Trenchers,
Strung with a bottome of browne thred, which showd ad∣mirable.



There •ate, and grow againe, I am pleas'd.




Gave we the frolicke over: though at length
We quit th• Ladies Skonce on composition
But to the silent streetes we turn'd our fu•ies:
A •leeping watchman here we stole the shooes from•

There made a noyse, at which he wakes, and followes:
The streete• are durty, takes a queene hith cold,
Hard chee•e, and that choakes him o' Munday next:
Windowes, and signes we sent to Erebus;
A crue of bawling curs we entertain'd last,
When having let the pigs loose in out parishes,
O the brave cry we made as high as Algate•

Downe comes a Constable, and the Sow his Sister
Most trayterously tramples upon Authority,
There a whole stand of rug gownes rowted manly
And the Kings peace put flight: a purblind pig here
Runs me his head into the Admirable Lanthorne,
Out goes the light, and all turnes to confusion:
A Potter rises, to enquire this passion
A Boare imbost takes sanctuary in his shop.
When twenty dogs rush after, we still cheering
Down goes the pots, and pi•kins, down the pudding pans,
The creame bols cry reveng••ere, there the candlesticks.



If this be true, thou little tyny page
This tale that thou tell'st me

  Then on thy backe will I presently hang
A handson new Levery:
But if this be false, thou little tyney page
As false it well may be
Then with a cudgell of foure foote long
Ile beate thee from head to toe.
Enter Servant.




Will the boy come.









Time tries all ther.



Here he comes now himselfe sir.



To be short Thomas

Because I feele a scruple in my conscience
Concerning the demeanour, and a maine on•

And therefore like a Father would be satisfi'd,
Get up to that window there, and presently
Like a most compleat Gentleman, •ome from Tripoly.




Good Lord sir, how are you misled: what fancie•

(Fitter for idle boyes, and drunkards, let me speak't
And with a little wonder I beseech you)
Choake up your noble judgement?









Will ye spoile all agen sir.
Why, what a devill do you meane?




Ye keepe a company of sawcy fellowe•

Debosh'd, & dai•y drunkard•, to deavoure ye,
Things, whose dull soules, tend to the Celler only,
Ye are ill advis'd sir, to commit your credit.







Let me never •ate againe sir,
Nor feele the blessing o• another blew-coate
If this yong Gentleman, sweet Master Thomas

Be not as mad as heart can wish: your heart sir•

If yesternights disco•rse: speake fellow Robin

And if thou speakest lesse then truth•




Tis strange these varlets.



By these ten bones sir, if these eies, and eares

  Can heare and see.



Extre•m• strange, should thus boldly
Bud in your sight, unto your sonne.




Can ye deny, ye beat a Constable
Last night.



I touch Authoritie ye rascall?
I violate the Law?








Did you not take two Wenches from the W•tch to•

And put'em into pudding lane?




Those civill things you did at M. Valentine•

The Fidle, and the fa'las.




I do beseech you sir give no such licenc•

To knave• and drunkards, to abuse your sonne thu••

Be wise in time, and turne'em off: we live sir
In a State govern'd civilly, and soberly
Where each mans actions should confirme the Law•

Not cracke, and canzell it.





Get you upon adventers: cast your coate
And make your exit.



Pur la mour de die•


Pur me no purs• but pur at that doore, ou••irh•

Ile beate ye purblind else, out ye eight languages,



My bloud upon your head.
Exit• Lan•




Purge me'em all sir.



And you too presently.



Even as you please sir.



Bid my maid servant come• and bring my daughter
I will have one shall please me.
Exit s•r.




Tis most fit sir.



Bring me the money there• here M. Thomas,


I pray sit downe, ye are no more my sonne now,
Good gentleman be cover'd







This money I do give ye, because of whilom
You have bin thought my sonne, and by myselfe too,
And some things done like me: ye are now another
There is two hundred pound, a civill some
For a yong civill man: much land and Lordship
Will as I take it now, but prove temptation
To dread ye from your se•led, and sweet carriage.



You say right sir.



Nay I beseech ye cover.



At your dispose: and I beseech ye too sir,
For the word civill, and more setled course
It may be put to use, that on the interest
Like a poore Gentleman.



It shall, to my use
To mine againe: do you see sir: good fine gentleman,
I give no brooding money for a Scrivener,
Mine is for present trafficke, and so ile use it.



So much for that then.




For the maine cause Mounsieur
I sent to treat with you about, behold it•

Behold that p•ice of story worke, and view it
I want a right heire to inheri• me,
Not my estate alone, but my conditions,
From which you are revolted, the•efore dead,
And I will breake my backe, but I will get one.



Will you choose there sir?



There, among those Damsels,
In mine owne tribe: I know their quallities
Which cannot faile to please me• for their beauties
A matter of a three farthings, makes all perfect,
A little beere, and beeffe broth: they are sound too.
Stand all a breast: now gentle M. Thomas

Before I choose, you having liv'd long with me,
And happely sometimes with some of these too,
Which fault I never frown'd upon: pray shew me
(For feare we confound our Genealogies)

  Which h•ve you laid aboord• speake your mind freely
Have you had copulation with that Damsell?







Stand you a sid• then: how with her sir?



How, i• not seemely h••• to •ay.







Retyre you too: speake •orward M. Thomas.




I will: and to the purpose; even with all sir.



With all that's somewhat large.



And y•t you like it
W•• ever sinne so glor•ous•













A signe thou art mine own• yet,
In againe all: and to your ••v•••ll •unctions.
Exit. Maides.

What say you to yong Luce, my neighbour• daughter,
She was too yong I take it, when you travelled;
Some twelve yeare old?



Her will was fifteene sir,



A pretty answere, to cut of long discourse,
For I have many yet to aske ye of,
Where I can choose, and nobly, hold up your finger
When ye are right: what say ye to V••••ia•

Whose husband lies a dying now? Why two,
And in that forme?








A witty morall: have at ye once more Thomas,

The sisters of St. Albones, all five; dat boy,
Dat's mine own• boy.



Now our upon thee Monster.



Still hoping of your pardon.



There neede• none man:
A straw on pardon: preth•e •••d no pardon:
Ile aske no more, nor thinke no more of marri•ge,
For O my conscience I shalbe thy Cuckold:
Ther's some good yet le•t in him: bea•e your selfe well,
You may recover me, ther's twenty pound sir;
I see some sparkles which may flame againe,

  You may eat with me wh•n you pleas•, you know me.




Why do you lye so damnably, so foolishly?



Do'st thou long to have thy head broke? hold thy peace
And doe as I would have th••• or by this han•

I'le kill thy Parrat, hang up thy small hand•

And drinke away thy dowry to a p•nny.



Was eye• such a wilde A•se?







And do'st thou think men will not b•at thee mon∣strously
For abusing their wives and children?



And do'st thou thinke
Mens wives and children can be abus•d too much?



I wonder at th••.



Nay, thou shalt adjur• m•

Before I have done•




How stand ye with your mistresse?



I shall stand neerer
Ere I be twelve houres old••: ther's my busines•e,
She is monstrous subt•le Doll.




The divell I thinke
Cannot out su•tle the•.



If he play fair• play,
Come, you must help• me pre•ently.







Thou shalt not sl••• no••ate.



I'le no hand with ye,
No bawd to your abus••.



By this light Doll,

Nothing but in the way o• honesty.



Tho• never knew'st that ro•d• I hea•• your vigil••




Sweet honey Doll, if I doe not marry her,
Honestly marry her, if I mean• not honourably,
Come, thou shalt help me, take heed how you v••• m•,
I'le help thee to a husband too, a fine gentleman,
I know thou art mad, •••ll yong man, a brown man,
I sweare he has his •aidenhead, a rich man•




You may come in to dinn•r, and I'le answere ye.



Nay I'le goe with thee D•ll: four hundred a yeere wene••.
Exeunt.





Enter Michael and V•lentine.


GOod sir go back again, and take my counsell,
Sores are 〈…〉, nor time broke from us,
Pul'd back again by sighe•.



What should I doe friend?



Doe that th•t m•y red••me ye, goe back quic•ly,

Sebastians daughter can prevaile much with her,
The Abbes•e is her Aunt too•




But my f•iend then•

Whose love and losse is equall ty'd•





That shall be my ta•ke if he be alive,
Or where my travell and my care may re•ch him,
I'le bring him backe againe.



Say he •ome b•cke
To piece his poor friends life out? and my mistresse
Be vow'd for eve• a re•••se?




She cannot, haste ye therefor• instantly •w•y ••r,
To put that daughter by first as to a father,
Then as a friend she was committed to ye,
And all the care sh• now has: by which priviledge
She cannot doe her thi• violence,
But you may breake it, and the law allowe• ye.



O but I forc'd her to it.




Against your selfe, if you will need• be miserable
Spight of her goodnesse, and your friends pe•swasion•,
Thinke on, and thrive thereafter.



I will ho•• th•••

And follow you• advis•• and good, good Mich••l.




No more, I know your soul's divided Valentine,

Cure but that part at home with spe•dy marriag•

Er• my r•turn•, for then those thoughts that vext her,
While there ran any str•am• for l•o•• affections,
Will be stopt up, and chaste ey'd honour guide h•r
Away, and hope the b•st still: I'le worke for ye,
And pray too h•••tily, away, no more word•.
Ex•unt.





Ent•r Hyl•• and Sam•


I Care not for my broken he•d,
But that it should be his plo•, and • w•n•h too,
A lowzie, lazie wench pre•••'d to do• it.



Thou hadst as good be quiet, fo• o' my co•scienc•

He'l put another on thee 〈◊〉





To call him to account, was it not manif•st
He meant a mischiefe to me, and laughed at me,
When he l•y •o•ring out, his leg was broken,
And no such matter: had he broke hi• necke,
Indeed 'twould ne'r ha griev'd m•: gallow•• g•ll him.
Why should he 〈◊〉 but m•?



Thou art 〈◊〉 r•ady
To thrust thy selfe i•to th•se she occasions,
And he as f•l• o• knavery to accept it.



Well, if I live, I'le hav• a n•w •ricke for him.



That will not be amisse, but to fight with him
Is to no purpose: besides, he's truely valiant,
And a most deadly hand: thou never foughtst yet,
Nor o' my cons•ien•e hast •o ••ith in •ighting.



No, no, I will not fight.





  Which has a woman in't, to make it scurvy,
Who would lye stinking in a Surgeons hands
A moneth or two thi• weather; for beleeve it,
He never hurts under a quarters healing.



No 〈…〉 thoug••, I will not fight S•m,

But watch my time



To pay him with • proje•t•

Watch hi• too, I would wish ye: prethe•••ll me,
Do'st thou affect thes• women still?





I love 'em ev'n as well as ev'r I did,
Nay, if my braine• we••〈◊〉 out• I must •o 〈◊〉.



Dost thou love any woman?





Of what degr•e or •alling.



Of any age too?



Of any age• from fourscore to •ou•teen boy,
Of any fashion.









For those I love to leade •e to repent•••e•

A woman with no 〈◊〉•ft•r my 〈◊〉

Shewes lik• King Phil••• morall, 〈…〉 mori,

And she that has a wodden leg, demonstrate•

Like Hy••c•it•s, w• halt befor• th• g•llowes:
An old one with one tooth, seem••〈◊〉 lay•ou•

Sweet meat• have sowre sawce• she that'•••ll of •ch••,
Crum no• your bread before you taste your po••idg•,
And many mor•l• w• may finde.




Ye make so worthy uses: but quid 〈◊〉

What shall we now de••rmin•?




An houre or two, how I may •it this ••llow.



Let's f•nde him •irst, he'l quickly give occasion•

But take heed to your s•l••••nd s•y • warn'd y•:
He has a p••guy 〈◊〉.



That •t my 〈◊〉.
Ex•unt. Musick.





Enter Saylors ••nging to th•m, Mic•••• and Fra••••.


ABoard, aboard, the winde stand•••ire.



These call for passengers, I'le stay, & see
What men th•y take aboard.



A boat, a boat, a boat.







Whether •r• ye bo••d friend•?



Downe to the Strayte•.



Ha, 'ti• not much unlike him.



May I have passage for my mo••y?







'Tis he, I know 'tis he now.



Then merrily aboard, and noble friend
Heauen• goodnesse keep thee ev•r, and all vertue
Dwell in thy bosome C•llid•, my last teare•


I leave behinde m• thu•, a sacrifi••,
For I dare stay no l•nger to b•tr•y y••




Be not so q••cke sir: Saylo••I h•re •harge ye
By vertu• of this warrant, a• you will answer it,
For both your ship and Merchant I know perfectly:
Lay hold upon this f•llow.












No hand to sword sir, we shall master y••

Fetch out the manacle•.




I doe obey ye•

But I beseech ye sir, in•or•• me t•••ly
How I am guilty.



Y• have rob'd a gentl•man,
O•• that ye are bound to for your lif• and being•

Money and horse unjustly ye took• from him,
And something of more note, but for y'ar• a gentlema••




It shall be so, and here 〈…〉 all miser•es,

  Since friendship is so cruell, I confesse it,
And which is more, a hundred of these robberies•

This Ring I stole too from him: and this jewell
The first and last of all my wealth: forgive me
My innocence and truth, for saying I stole 'em,
And may they prove of value but to recompence
The thousand part of his love, and bread I have eaten.
Pray see 'em render'd noble sir, and so
I yeeld me to your power.



Guard him to'th water,
I charge you Saylors, there I will receive him,
And backe convey him to a Iustice.




Look to your neck, you are like to sayle i'th ayre now.





Enter Thomas, Dorothy, and Maid.


COme quickly, quickly, quickly, paint me handsomly
Take heed my nose be not in graine too,
Come Doll, Doll, disen me.



If you should play now
Your divels parts againe.



Yea and nay Dorothy.




If ye doe any thing, but that ye have sworne to,
Which onely is accesse.



As I am a gentleman:
Out with this hayre Doll, handsomely.



You have your breeches?



I prethee away, thou know'st I am monstrous ticklish,
What do'st thou think I love to blast my buttocks?



I'le plague ye for this roguery: for I know well
What ye intend sir.



On with my Muffler•




Ye are a sweet Lady: come let's see you cu•tsie•

What broke i'th •um, hold up your head.




I shall be pisse my bre•ches if I cowre th•s
Come, am I ready.



At all points, as like sir
As if you were my Mistris.



Who goes with ye.



None but my fortune, and my selfe.
〈◊〉.





Now run thou for thy life, and get before him•

Take the by way, and tell my Cosin Marie

In what shape he intends to come to coz•n her
Ile follow at thy heeles my selfe: flie wench










My Father has met him• thi• goes excellent
And ile away in time: looke to your •kin Thomas.Exit.




What, are you growne so corne f•d gooddy Gillian.

You will not know your Father: what vaga'res
Have you in hand, what out l•apes, dur•y heeles
That at thes• houres of night ye must be gadding,
And through the Orchard take your private passage•

What, is the breeze in your breech or has your brother
Appointed you an houre of meditation
How to demeane himselfe: get ye to bed, drab
Or ile so crab your shoulders: ye demure slut
Ye civill dish of sliced beefe get ye in.



I wy' not, that I wy' not.



Is't ev'n so Dame
Have at ye with a nigh• spell then.







St. Geoge, St. George• our Ladies knight
He walkes by day, so do'• he by night,
And when he had her found

  He her beat, and her bound,
Vntill to him her troth she pligh••

She would not stir from him that night.



Nay then have at ye with a counter-spell,
From Elves, Hobs •nd •ayri•s, that trouble our Dayries,
From Fire-drakes and fiends, and such as the divell sends,
Defend us heaven.
Exi••





Blesse my Master: looke up sir I beseech ye,
Vp with your e•es to heaven•




Vp with your nose sir,

I doe not bleed, 'twas a sound knock she gave me,
A plaguy mankinde girle, how my braines totters?
Well, go thy waies, thou hast got one tho••and pound mo•e
With this dog tricke,
Mi•e owne true spirit in her too,



In her, alas sir,
Alas poore gentlewoman, she a hand so heavy
To knocke ye like a Calfe down, or so brave a courage
To beat her father? if you could bel•eve sir.



Who wouldst thou make me beleeve it was, the divell?



One that spits fire as fast 〈◊〉 he sometimes sir,
And changes shapes as often: your sonne Thomas:

Never wonder, if it be not he, straight hang me.



He• if it be so•


I'le put thee in my Will, and ther's an end on't.




I saw his legs, has Boot• on like a Player,
Vnder his wenches cloath•: •tis he, 'tis Thomas

In his own sisters cloaths• sir, and I can wa•t him.



No more words then, w•'l watch him• thou'•t not be∣leeve Lance,

How heartily glad I am.



May ye be gladder,
But not t•is way sir.



No more words, but watch him.
Exeunt.





Enter Mary, Dorothy, and Maid.










Then get you up Doll,

Away, I'le strait come to you: is all ready?







Let the light stand far enough.







Stay you to entertaine him to his chamber.
But keep close wench, he flyes at all.







You need no more instruction?










Enter Valentine and Thomas.


MOre stop• y•t? ••re the fiend's my ghostly •a••er•

Old Valentine: what wind's in his poope•





You are met most happily: O gentle Doll,

You must now doe me an especiall favour.



What is it Master Valentine? I am •or•ly troubled
With a salt •heum••alne i'my gu•••.




And let it move you equally: my blest Mistresse
Vpon a slight occasion taking anger,
Tooke also (to undoe me) your Aunt• Nunnery,
From whence by my perswasion to r•deem• her,
Will be impossible: nor have I liberty

  To come, and visite her: my good, good Dorothy,

You are most powerfull with her, and your Aunt too,
And have accesse at all houres liberally,
Speake now, or never for me,




That course must not be suffered Master Valentine,

Her mother never knew its rare sport for me:
Spo•• upon sport, by th' breake of day I'le meet ye,
And feare not man, wee'l have •er out I warrant ye,
I cannot stay now.



You will not breake?








Good night kinde Mistresse Doll.Exit.





Every one take• me for my si••er, excellent•

Thi• N•••ery• fal •o pat too, to my figure,
Where there •e handsome wenches, and they shall know it
If once I creep in, ere they get me out againe:
Stay, her'• the house and one of her Maids,





O Mistresse Dorothy you are a stranger.



Still Mistresse Dorothy? this geere will cotton.



Will you walke in fo•soo•h?



Where is your Mistresse?



Not very well: she's gone to bed, I am glad
You are come so fit to comfort her.



Yes, I•le comfort her.



Pray make not much noise, for she i• sure asleep,
You know your side, creep softly in, your company
Will warme her well.



I warrant thee I'le warme her.



Your brother has been h•re, the strangest fell•w.



A very rogue, a ranke rogue.




Even to her chamber door, and there commit ye.
Exeunt.





Enter Michael, Francis• and O•••ers.


COme sir, for this night I shall entertaine ye•

And like a gentleman, how ere your for••ne
Hath cast ye on the worst part.



How you please sir,
I am resolv'd, nor can a joy or misery
Much move me now.



I am angry with my selfe now
For putting this forc'd way •non his patience,
Yet any other course had been too slender•

Yet what to thinke I know •ot for most liberally•

He hath confess • strange wrongs, which if they pr•ve 〈◊〉

How ere the others long love may forget all•

Yet 'twas most fit he should come back, and this wa•

Drinke that: and now to m• ca•e leave your priso•er•

I'le be his guard for this night.



Good night to your worship.



Good night my honest friends: Come sir, I hope
There shall be no such cause of such a sadnesse
As you put on.




•aith si•, my rest is 〈◊〉

And what I now pull, 〈◊〉 no more 〈◊〉 me
Then if I plaid at span-counter, nor is my face
The map of any thing I seeme to suffer,
Lighter affections seldome dwell in me s•r.



A constant gentleman• would I had taken
A 〈◊〉 when I took this harsh way to disturb him•

Come walke with me •i• ere to morrow night

I doubt not but to see all this blown over.
Exeunt.









I Have dog'd his sister, sure 'twas she,
And I hope she will come back again this night too:



I have lost of purpose: now if I can
With all the art I have, as she comes backe,
But win a parley for my broken pate,
Off goes her maiden-head, and there's vindict•.

They stir about the house, I'le stand at distance.
Exit.





Is he come in?




He is, and there he goes.



Good night, good night wench.

a bed discovered with a black More in it.


As softly as you can.
Exit•




I'le play the Mouse Nan,

How close the lit•le thiefe lyes.







What would you give now to be there, and I
At home Mall?







In what a figure
The little foole has pull'd it selfe together:
Anone you will lye streighter:
Ha, ther's rare circumstance
Belongs to such a treatise: doe ye tumble,
I'le tumble with ye straight wench: she sleeps soundly,
Full little thinkst thou of thy joy that'• comming,
The sweet, sweet joy, full little of the kis•es,
But those unthought of things com• ever happiest.
How soft the rogue feeles? Oye little villaine,
Ye delicate coy thiefe, how I shall thrum ye?

  Your fy away, good servant, as ye are a gentleman•





Out upon ye Thomas

What do ye meane to do? ile call the house up,
O god• I am sure ye will not, shall not serve ye,
For up ye goe now, and ye were my Father.



Your courage wilbe cold anon.



If it do hang for'
Yet ile be quarterd here first.







What would he do indeed Doll?



You had best try him.



Ile kisse thee ere I come to bed: sweet Mary.








O, for gentle Nicholas.




And view that stormy face, that has so thundered me,
A coldne's crept over't now; by your leave, candle,
And next doore by yours too, so, a pretty, pretty
Shall I now looke upon ye: by this light it moves me.



Much good may it do you sir.



Holy saint•, defend me.
The devill, devill, devill, devill, O the devill.




Dor. Ha, ha, ha, ha, the devill O the devill.



I am abus'd most damnedly: most beastly,
Yet if it be a she devill: But the house is up,
And here's no staying longer in this Cassock,
Woman, I here disclaime thee; and in vengeance
Ile marry with that devill, but ile vex thee.



Byr' Lady, but you shall not sir, ile watch ye.



Plague O your spanish leather hide; ile waken ye:
Devill, good night: good night good devill.







Rore againe, devill, rore againe.
Ex. Tho.








Open the doores before him: let him vanish.
Now, let him come againe, ile use him kinder
How now Wench.



Pray lye here your self, nex• Mistris

  And entertaine your sweet heart.



What said he to thee.



I had a soft bed: and I slept out all,
But his kind farewell: ye may bake me now
For O my conscience, he has made m• venison.



Alas poore Kat•; ile give thee a new Petticoate,



And I a Wastcoate, Wench.



Draw in the bed Maides,
And see it made againe; put fresh sheetes on too,
For Doll. and I: come Wench, lets laugh an houre now,
To morrow earely, will wee see yong Cellid•

They say she has taken Sanctuary: love, & they
Are thicke sowne, but come up so full of thistles.



They must needs Mall: for 'tis a pricking age grown
Prethee to bed, for I am monstrous sleepy•




A match, but art not thou thy brother?



Would I were Wench,
You should heare further.



Come, no more of that Doll.Exeunt.





Enter Hylas, and Thomas.


I Heard the doores clap: now, and't be thy will, wench
By th' mas she comes: you a•e surely melt f•ir• gen∣tlewoman,
I take it Mistris Doll, Sebastians daughter.



I take right sir: Hylas, are you feretting
Ile fit you with a pennyworth presently.



How dare you walk so late so sweet: so weak gu•rd•d?



Faith sir, I do no harme, nor none I looke for
Yet I am glad, I have met so good a gentleman,
Against all chances: for though I never kn•w ye
Yet I have heard much good spoke of ye,




What if a man should kisse ye?



That's no harme sir,

  Pray God he scapes my heard, there lyes the mischiefe.



Her lips are monstrous rugged, but that surely
Is but the sharpnesse of the weather: harke ye once more,
And in your eare, sweet Mistresse, for ye are so,
And ever shall be from this houre: I have vow'd it.




Why that's my daughter, rogue, do'st thou not see her
Kissing that fellow there, there in that corner?







Now, now, now they agree o'th match too.



Nay then ye love me not.



By this white hand Doll.




I must confesse, I have long desir'd your sight sir.



Why ther's the Boots still sir.




Why they'l weare breeches too.




Not for the world.



Why now they kisse againe, there
I knew 'twas she, and that her crafty stealing
O•t the back way must needs have such a meaning.



I am at my small wits end.



If ye meane honourably.



Did she nev'r beat ye before sir?



Why do'st thou follow me?
Thou rascall slave hast thou not twice abus'd me?
Hast thou not spoil'd the boy? by thine owne covenant,
Would'st thou not now be hang'd?



I thinke I would sir,
But you are so impatient: do's not this shew sir,
(I do beseech ye speake, and speake with judgement,
And let the case be equally considered)
Far braver in your daughter? in a son now
'Tis nothing, of no marke: every man do's it,
But, to beget a daughter, a man maiden
That reaches at the•e high exploits, is admirable:
Nay she goes far beyond him: for when durst he,

  But when he was drunke, doe any thing to speake of?
This is Sebastian truely.



Thou sayest right Lance,

And ther's my hand once more.







Didst thou heare that?



I thinke she spoke of marriage,



And he shall marry her, for it •eems she likes him,
And their first boy shall be my heire.




Now ye goe right to worke.




Now I have promis'd ye this night to marry,
Would ye be so intemperate? are ye a gentleman?



I have no maw to marriage, yet this rascall
Tempts me extreamely: will ye marry presently?



Get you afore, and stay me at the Chappell,
Close by the Nunnery, there you shall finde a night Pri•

Little sir Hugh, and he can say the Matrimony
Over without booke, for we must have no company
Nor light, for feare my father know, which must not yet•

And then to morrow night.



Nothing to night sweet?



No, not a bit, I am sent of businesse
About my dowry, sweet, doe not you spoile all now,
'Tis of muh haste. I can scarce stay the marriage,
Now if you love me, get you gone.







Within this houre, my sweet chicke.







A rope kisse ye,
Come, come, I stand o'thorne••




Me thinkes her mouth still
Is monstrous rough, but they have waies to mend it,
Farewell.



Farewell, I'le fit ye with a wife, sir.



Come, follow close, I'le see the end she aymes at,

  And if he be a handsome fellow La••c•lot,


Fiat, 'tis done, and all my state is setled.
Exeunt.





Enter Abbesse, C•llide, and N••s.


COme, to your Mattin• Maids: th•se early houres
My gentle daughter, will disturb a while,
Your faire eyes, nurterd in ease.





Tis for my holy health, to purchase which
They shall forget the childe of ease, soft slumbers,
O my afflicted heart, how thou art tortur'd,
And Love, how like a tyrant, thou raign'st in me,
Commanding and forbidding at one instant:
Why came I hither that desire to have
Onely all liberty, to make me happy?
Why didst thou bring that yong man home, O Valentine,

That vertuous youth, why didst thou speake his goodnesse
In such a phrase, as if all tongues, all praises
Were made for him? O fond and ignorant,
Why didst thou foster my affection
Till it grew up, to know no other father,
And then betray it?












Be gone, and to the Quire then.
Exeunt.






Enter Michael and Servant, and Francis.


HA'st thou inquir'd him out?



He's not at home sir,
His sister thinks he's gone to th' Nunnery,



Most likely: I'le away, an houre hence sirha,
Come you alo•g with this yong gentleman,
Doe him all service, and faire office.










Enter Hylas and Sam.


VVHere hast thou been man?



Is there nev'r a shop open?
I'le give thee a paire of gloves Sam.








What do'st thou thinke?



Thou art not married?



By th'masse but I am, all to be married,
I am i'th order now Sam.





I thought there was some such trick in't, you •tole from m•

But who, sor heaven sake?



Ev'n the sweetest woman,
The rarest woman Samuel, and the lustiest,
But wondrous honest, honest as the ice boy,
Not a bit before hand, for my life, sirha,
And of a lusty kindred.







The yong gentleman and I are like to be friends a∣gaine,

  The fates will have it so.











O now I smell ye Hylas.

Do's he know of it?



No, ther's the tricke I owe hi•


•Tis done boy, we are fast faith, my youth now
Shall know I am aforehand, for his qualities•




Is there no tricke in't?



None, but up and ride boy:
I have made her no joynture neither, there I have paid him•




She's a brave wench.



She shall be, as I'le use her,
And if she anger me, all his abuses
I'le clap upon her Caslocke.








'Tis past that Sam, come, I must meet her presently,
And now shalt •ee me, a most glo•ious husband.





Enter Dorothy, Mary, Valentine.


IN troth sir, you never spoke to me.



Can ye forget me?
Did not you promise all your helpe and cunning
In my behalfe, but for one houre to see her,
Did you not sweare it? by this hand, no strictnesse
Nor rule this house holds, shall by me, be broken.



I saw ye not these two dayes.



Doe not wrong me,
I met ye, by my life, just as yon entred
This gentle Ladies Lodge last night, thus suited
About eleven a clocke.



'Tis true I was there,
But that I saw or spoke to you.



I have found it,
Your brothor Thomas, Doll.




Pray sir be satisfi'd,
And wherein I can doe you good, command me,
What a mad foole is this? stay here a while sir,
Whilst we walke in, and make your peace.
Exit.











Why, what's the matter there among these Maids?
Now benedi•ite, have ye got the bre•ze there?
Give me my holly sprinckle.







O Madam, ther's a strange thing like a gentlewo∣man,
Like Mistresse Dorothy, I think the fiend
Crept in to th' Nunnery we know not which way,
Playes revell rowt among us.



Give me my holy water pot.








Spirit of earth or ayre, I do conjure thee, squeake within

Of water or of fire.








Be thou ghost that can•ot rest• or a shadow of the blest,
Be thou black, or white, or green, be thou heard, or to be seen





It comes, it comes.



What are ye? speake, speake gently,
And next, what would ye with me?



Any thing you'l let me.



You are no woman certaine.



Nor you no Nun, nor shall not be.



What make ye here?



I am a holy Fryer.



Is this the Sipirit?



Nothing but spirit Aunt.



Now out upon thee.



Peace, or I'l• conjure too Aunt.



Why come you thus?



That's all one, her's my purpose:
Out with this Nun, she is too handsome for ye,
I'le tell thee (Aunt) and I speake it with teares to thee,
If thou keptst her here, as yet I hope thou art wiser,
Mark but the mischiefe followes.



She is a Votresse.



Let her be what she will, she will undoe thee,

  Let her but one houre o•t, as I direct ye,
Or have among your N•n• againe.



You have no project
But faire and honest?



As thine eyes, sweet Abbesse,




I will be ruld then.



Thus then and perswade her
But do not iuggle with me, if ye do Aunt.



I must be there my selfe.



Away and fit her.



Come daughter, you must now be rull'd, or never.



I must obey your will.



That's my good daughter•Exeun•.





Enter Dorothy, and Mary.


VVHat a coyle has this Fellow kept i'th' Nunnery
Sure he has run the Abbesse out of her wits.



Out of the Nunnery I think, for we can neither see her
Nor the yong Cellide.




Pray heavens he be not teasing.



Nay you may thanke your selfe, 'twas your owne structures.




Why there's the gentlewoman,



Mas tis she indeed
How smart the pretty thee•e lookes? 'morrow Mistresse.



Good morrow to you sir.



How strange she beares it?



Maids must do so, at first.



Would ye ought with us, gentlemen?



Yes marry would I
A little with your Lad•ship.








Doll, I would have ye presently prepare your selfe
And those things you would have with y•u,
For my house is ready.







And this night not to faile, you must come to me,
My Friends will all be there too: For Trunks & those things
And houshold stuffe, and clothe• you would have carried
To morrow, or the next day, ile take order:
On•ly, What money you have, bring away with ye,
And Iewels:








There's a bed up, to play the game in, Dorothy,

And now come kisse me heartily.







This Lady shalbe welcome too.







Your neighbour can resolve ye.




Sir, you looke soberly: who is this fellow,
And where's hi• busines•e?



By heaven, thou art abu•'d still.



It may be so: Come, ye may speake now boldly
There's none but friends, Wench.



Came ye out of Bedlam?
Alas, tis ill sir, that ye suffer him
To walke in th' open ayre thus •'tw•ll undo• h•m.
A pretty hansome gentleman: great pitty.



Let me not live more if thou be'st not cozens,



Are not you my Wife? did not I marry you last night
At St•Michaels Chappell?



Did not I say he was mad?



Are not you Mistresse Dorothy, Thomas sister?



There he speakes sence, but ile assure ye gentleman,
I think no Wife of yours: at what hour• was it?




•' pretious; you'll make me mad; did not the Priest
Sir Hugh that you appointed, about twelve a clocke
Tye our hands fast? did not you sweare you lov'd me?
Did not I court ye, comming from this gentlewomans?



Good sir, goe sleepe: for if I credit have
She was in my armes, then, abed.







Be not so confident.



By th' mas, she must sir•

For ile •o husband here, before I know him:
And so good morrow to ye: Come, let's goe seeke'em.



I told ye what ye had done.



Is the devill stirring?
Well, goe with me: for now I wilbe married.
Exeunt.





Enter Michael, Valentine, and Alice.


I Hav• brought him backe againe.



You have don a friendship
Worthy the love you beare me.



Would he had so too.



O he's a worthy yong man.




I feare you'l change your faith• bring in the g•ntleman.






My happy Mistresse too: now Fortune helpe me,
And all you starres, that governe chast desire•

Shinne faire, and lovely.



But one houre, deere Daughter,
To heare your Guardian, what he can deliver
In Loves defence, and his: and •hen your pleasure.



Though much unwilling, you have made me yeeld,
More for his sake I see: how full of sor•ow
Sweet catching sorrow, he appeares? O love,
That thou but knew'st to h•ale, as well as hurt us.



Be ru•d by me: I see her •ye 〈…〉 him:
And what ye hea•d, beleeve, for 〈…〉

He neither dar'd, no• must oppo•e my 〈…〉;
And be you wife, yong L•dy, and beleeve to•.
This man you love, Sir?



As I love my soule, Sir.



This man you put into a free poss•ssion
Of what his wants could aske: or your selfe render?



And shall do still.



Nothing was bard his libertie•

But this faire Maide; that friendship first was broken,
And you, and she abus•d; next, (to my sorrow
So faire a forme should hide so darke intention•,)
He hath himselfe confes'd (my purpose being
Only to stop his Iourney, by that pollicy
Of laying fellony to his charge, to fright the Saylors)
Divers abuses, done, thefts often practis'd,
Moneys, and Iewels too, and those no •rifles.



O where have I bestrew'd my •aith: in neither•

Let's in for ever now, there is vertue.



Nay do not wonder at it, he shall say it.
Are ye not guiltie thus?



Yes: O my Fortune.



To give a proofe I speake not enviou•ly
Looke here: do you know these Iewel•.








These Iewels; I have knowne.



You have made brave sport.



Ile make more, if I live Wench
Nay doe not looke on me: I care not for ye.



Do you see now plaine? that's Mistris Dorothy,

And that's his Mistris.



Peace, let my joy worke easely
Ha, boy: art there my boy: mine owne boy, Tom. boy,
Home Lance, and strike a fresh peece, of wine, the townes ours,



Sure, I have knowne these Iewels.



They are they, certaine.



Good heaven, that they were.



Ile pawne my life on't
And this is he; Come hither Mistris Dorothy,

And Mistris Mary: who do's that face looke like:
And view my brother well?



In truth like him.



Vpon my troth exceeding like,




But much: and maine resemblance, both of face
And li•eaments of body: now heaven grant it.



My brother'• full of passion, I'le speake to him.

  Now, as you are a gentleman, resolve me,
Where did you get these jewels?



Now I'le tell ye,
Because blinde fortune yet may make me happy,
Of whom I had 'em, I have never heard yet,
But from my infancy, upon this arme

I ever wore 'em.




By heaven I ty'd 'em on: a little more sir,
A little, little more, what parents have ye?




That I know yet: the more my stubborne fortune,
But as I heard a Merchant say that bred me,
Who, to my more affliction, di'de a poore man,
When I reach'd eighteen yeers.



What said that Merchant?



He said, an infant, in the Ge•oway Galleyes,
But from what place he never could direct me.
I was taken in a sea fight, and from a Marriner,
Out of his manly pitty he redeem'd me.
He told me of a Nurse that waited on me,
But she, poore soule, he said was killed.
A letter too, I had enclos'd within me,
To one Castructio a Venetian Merchant,
To bring me up: the man, when yeers allow'd me,
And want of friends compell'd, I sought, but found him
Long dead before, and all my hope• gone with him.
The wars was my retreat then, and my travell
In which I found this gentlemans free bounty,
For which, heaven recompenc'd him: now ye have all.



And all the worldl• bli••e that heaven can send me,
And all my prayers and thanks.



Down o' your knees, sir,
For now you have fonnd a father, and that father
Tha••ill not venture ye againe in Gallyes.



'Tis true, beleeve her sir, and we all joy with ye.



My best friend still: my deerest: now heaven blesse thee
And make me worthy of this benefit.

  Now my best Mistresse.



Now sir, I come to ye.



No, no, let's in wench.



Not for the world, now, Mother,
And thus sir, all my service I pay to you,
And all my love to him.



And may it prosper,
Take her Francis•o: now no more yong Callidon,

And love her deerely, for thy father do's so.



May all hate seek me else, and thus I seale it.



Nothing but mirth now, friends.




Nay, I will finde him.



What doe all these here?



You are a trusty husband,
And a hot lover too.



Nay then, good morrow,
Now I perceive the knavery.




I still told ye.



Stay, or I'le make ye stay: come hither sister,



Why how now Mistresse Thomas?




Thou would'st faine have a wife?



Not I, by no meanes.



Thou shalt have a wife, & a fruitfu•l wife, for I finde
That I shall never be able to bring thee children.
Hylas, known son agen.




A notable brave boy.




I am very well sir.



Thou shalt be better Hylas, thou hast 7 hundred pound a yeer,
And thou shalt make her 3 hundred joynture.







Thou shalt boy, and shalt bestow
Two hundred pound in clothes, looke on her,
A delicate lusty wench, she has fifteen hundred,
And feasible: strike hands, or I'le strike first.



You'l let me like?



He's a good handsome fellow,

  Play not the foole.



Strike, brother, Hylas quickly.



If you can love me well.



If you can please me.



Try that out soon, I say, my brother Hylas.




Take her, and use her well, she's a brave gentle wo∣man.



You must allow me another Mistresse.



Then you must allow me another servant.



Well, let's together then, a lusty kindred.



I'le give thee five hundred pound more for that word.



Now sir, for you & I to make the feast full.



No, not a bit, you are a vertuous Lady,
And love to live in contemplation.



Come foole, I am friends now.



The foole shall not ride ye,
There lye my woman, now my man againe,
And now for travell on•e more.



I'le bar that first.







Hold your selfe contented: for I say I will travell,
And so long I will travell, till I finde a father
That I never knew, and a wife that I never look'd for,
And a state without expectation,
So rest you merry gentlemen.




Vpon my faith, I love you now extremely,
And now I'le kisse ye.



This will not doe it, Mistres•e,



Why when we are married, we'l doe more,




The keyes of all I have, come, let's be merry,
For now I see thou art right.



Shall we to Church straight?



Now presently, and there with nuptiall.
The holy Priest shall make ye happy all.



Away then, faire afore.
Exeunt.



