




ROund, round, perfume it round, quick, look ye diligent∣ly the state be right; Are these the Richest Cushions? Fie, fie, who waits i'th' Wardrobe?




But pray tell me, do you think for certain these Ambassadors shall have this morning Audience?




They shall have it: Lord, that you live at Court and understand not? I tell you they must have it.









Still you are Ignorant of the Trick of Court, sell your Place.



And Sow your Grounds, you are not for this Tillage. Ladies, the best way is the upper Lodgings, there you may see at ease.


We thank you, Sir.






Would you have all these slighted? Who should report then the Embassadors were handsome Men? his Beard a neat one? the fire of his eyes quicker then Lightning, and when it breaks, as blasting? his Legs, tho little ones, yet movers of a Mass of Understanding? Who shall commend their Clothes: who shall take notice of the most wise behaviour of their Fea∣thers? ye live a raw Man here.




I think I do so.






Why, whether would you all press?









My Wife, and some few of my honest Neighbours here.




Prethee be gone thou and thy honest Neighbours, thou look'st like an Ass; why, Whether would you Fish-Face?




If I might have the honour to see you at my poor House, Sir, a Capon bridled, and sadl'd I'll assure your Worship, a Shoulder of Mutton, and a Bottle of Wine Sir; I know your Brother, he was as like ye, and shot the best at Buts 









Some Musick I'll assure you too, my Toy, Sir, can play o'th' Virginals.




Prethee good Toy take away thy Shoulder of Mutton, it is Flie∣blown, and Shoulder, take thy Flap along, here's no place for ye; nay then you had best knock'd.







I wou'd fain see him
The glory of this place, makes me remember,
But dye those thoughts, dye all but my desires,
Even those to death are sick too; he's not here,
Nor how my eyes may guide me 




What's your business? who keeps the outward door there? here's fine shufling, you wastcoateer you must go back.




There cannot be, six days and never see me?
There must not be desire; Sir, Do you think
That if you had a Mistris 




Death, she is Mad.



And were your self an honest Man? it cannot 




What a Devil hast thou to do with me or my honesty? Will you be jogging, good nimble Tongue? my fellow Door-keeper?




Prethee let her alone.




The King is coming, and shall we have an Agent from the Sub∣urbs come to crave Audience too?



Before I thought ye
To have a little Breeding, some tang of Gentry;
But now I take ye plainly,
Without the help of any Perspectivo,
For that ye cannot alter.








An Ass, Sir, you Bray as like one,
And by my Troth, methinks, as ye stand now,
Considering who to kick next, you appear to me
Just with that kind of Gravity, and Wisdom;
Your Place may bear the Name of Gentleman,
But if any of that Butter stick to your Bread 




You must be modester.



Let him use me nobler,
And wear good Clothes to do good Ossices;
They hang upon a Fellow of his Vertue,
As tho they hung on Gibbets.









Thrust her into a corner, I'll no more on her.




You have enough, go pretty Maid, stand close, and use that little Tongue with a little more temper.



I thank ye, Sir.




When the Shews are past, I'll have ye into the Cellar, there wee'l Dine, a very pretty 〈◊〉, a witty Rogue, and there wee'l be as merry, Can ye be Merry








Only our selves; this churlish fellow shall not know.








And can you love a little?




I have cause to love you dear sir.




Then I'll carry ye, and shew you all the Pictures, and the Hang∣ings, the Lodgings, Gardens, and the Walks: and then (sweet) you shall tell me where you lye.



Yes marry will I.




And't shall go hard but I'll send ye a Venison Pasty, and a Bottle of Wine.









Room there afore, stand close, the Train is coming.





Have I yet left a Beauty to Catch Fools?
Yet, yet, I see him not, O what a misery
Is love, expected long, deluded longer!



Conduct in the Embassadors.








They shall not wait long Answer 



Yet he comes not.




Why are Eyes set on these, and Multitudes
Follow to make these Wonders? O good gods!
What would these look like if my Love were here?
But I am fond, forgetful.




Speak short, and have as short dispatch.





In all our Royal Masters names, We tell you
Ye have done Injustice, broke the bonds of Concord,
And from their equal shares from Alexander

Parted, and so possess'd, not like a Brother,
But as an open Enemy, Ye have hedged in
Whole Provinces, Man'd and maintain'd these Injuries;
And daily with your Sword (though they still honour ye)
Make bloody Roades, take Towns, and ruin Castles,
And still their sufferance feels the weight.




Think of that Love, Great Sir, that honour'd Friendship
Your self hold with our Masters, think of that strength
When you were all one Body, all one Mind;
When all your Swords strook one way, when your Angers,
Like so many brother billows rose together,
And curling up your foaming crests, defy'd
Even Mighty Kings, and in their falls, entomb'd 'em:


O think of these; and you that have been Conquerors,
That ever led your Fortunes open ey'd,
Chain'd fast by considence; you that Fame courted,
Now ye want Enemies and Men to match ye;
Let not your own Swords seek your ends to shame ye.






Choose which you will, or Peace or War,
We come prepar'd for either.




Room for the Prince there.



Was it the Prince they said! how my heart trembl'd!
'Tis he indeed; What a sweet noble sierceness
Dwels in his eyes? young Meleager like,
When he return'd from slaughter of the Boar,
Crown'd with the loves and honours of the People,
With all the gallant youth of Greece, he looks now,
Who could deny him Love?







Ye are welcome from your Sport; Sir, Do you see this,
You that bring Thunders in your mouths, and Earthquakes Gentlemen,
To shake and totter my Designs? Can you imagine
(You Men of poor and common apprehensions)
Whilst I admit this Man, my Son, this nature
That in one look carries more fire, and sierceness,
Then all your Masters in their lives: dare I admit him,
Admit him thus, even to my side, my Bosome,
When he is fit to rule, when all Men cry him,
And all hopes hang about his head; thus place him,
His Weapon hatch't in blood, all these attending
When he shall make their fortunes, all as sudden
In any Expedition he shall point 'em,
As Arrows from a Tartar's Bow, and speeding,
Dare I do this, and fear an Enemy?
Fear your great Master? yours? or yours?





Who sayes you do Sir? Is there any thing
In these mens Faces, or their Masters actions
Able to work such wonders?




O I could dwell upon that Tongue for ever.



You call 'em Kings, they never wore those Royalties
Nor in the progress of their Lives ariv'd yet
At any thought of King: Emperial Dignities,
And powerful God-like actions sit for Princes,
They can no more put on, and make 'em sit right,
Then I can with this Mortal hand hold Heaven:
Poor petty Men, nor have I yet forgot


The chiefest honours time, and merit gave 'em:

Lysimachus your Master, at his best,
His highest, and his hopefull'st dignities
Was but Grand master of the Elephants;


Seleucus of the Treasure; and for Ptolomy,

A thing not thought on then, scarce heard of yet,
Some Master of Amunition: and must these Men 



What a brave considence flowes from his spirit?
O sweet young Man!



Must these hold pace with us,
And on the same Field hang their Memories?
Must these examine what the Wills of Kings are?
Prescribe to their designs, and chain their Actions
To their Restraints? be Friends, and Foes when they please?
Send out their Thunders, and their Menaces,
As if the fate of Mortal things were theirs?
Go home, good Men, and tell your Masters from us,
We do 'em too much honour to force 〈◊〉 'em
Their barren Countries, ruin their vast Cities,
And tell 'em, out of Love, we mean to leave 'em
(Since they will needs be Kings) no more to tread on,
Then they have able Wits, and Powers to manage,
And so we shall befriend 'em: Ha? What does she there?



This is your Answer, King.



'Tis like to prove so.



Fie, Sweet, What make you here?



Pray ye do not Chide me.



You do your self much wrong, and me.



Pray you pardon me,
I feel my fault, which only was committed.
Through my dear love to you: I have not seen ye,
And how can I live then? I have not spoken to ye 



I know this Week ye have not; I will redeem all.
You are so tender now: think where you are, Sweet.



What other light have I left?





Indeed, I'll see ye presently.



I have done, Sir:
You will not miss?



By this, and this, I will not.



'Tis in your will: and I must be obedient.



No more of these Assemblies.








Room for the Lady there: Madam, my Service 




My Coach and't please you, Lady.









The honour, Madam, but to wait upon you 



My Servants, and my State:
Lord, how they flock now?
Before I was affraid they would have beat me;
How these flies play i'th Sunshine? pray ye no services,
Or if ye needs must play the hobby horses,
Seek out some beauty that assects 'em: farewell,
Nay pray ye spare: Gentlemen I am old enough
To go alone at these years, without Crutches.
Exit.




Well, I could curse now: but that will not help me, I made as sure account of this Wench now, immediately, Do but consider how the devil has crost me, Meat for my Master she cries, well 





We aske your resolutions: peace or war yet?



War, war, my noble father.




Thus I fling it:
And fair ey'd peace, farewell.



You have your answer;
Conduct out the Embassadours, and give 'em convoies.



Tell your high hearted Masters, they shall not seek us,
Nor cool i'th' sield in expectation of us,
We'l ease your men those marches: In their strengths,
And full abilities of mind and courage,
We'l find 'em out, and at their best trim buckle with 'em.




You will find so hot a Souldiers welcome sir,
Your favor shall not freeze,





Pitty the wars should bruse such hopes 



Conduct 'em  Ex- Em.

Now, For this preparation: where's Leontius?

Call him in presently: for I mean in person Gentlemen
My self, with my old fortune 




Thus low I beg this honour: fame already
Hath every where rais'd trophies to your glory,
And conquest now grown old, and weak with following
The weary marches, and the bloody shockes
You daily set her in: 'tis now scarce honour
For you that never knew to sight, but conpuer,
To sparkle such poor people: the royal Eagle
When she hath tri'd her young ones 'gainst the Sun,
And found 'em right; next teacheth 'them to prey,
How to command on wing, and check below her
Even birds of noble plume; I am your own Sir,
You have found my spirit, try it now, and teach it,
To stoop whole kingdoms: leave a little for me;


Let not your glory be so greedy sir,
To eat up all my hopes; you gave me lise,
If to that life you add not what's more lasting,
A noble name, for man you have made a shadow;
Bless me this day: bid me go on, and lead,
Bid me go on, no less fear'd, then Antigonus,

And to my maiden sword, tye fast your fortune;
I know 'twill sight it self then: dear sir honour me:
Never fair virgin long'd so.



Rise, and command then,
And be as fortunate as I expect ye:
I love that noble will; your young companions
Bred up and foster'd with ye, I hope Demetrius,Enter Leon.


You will make souldiers too: they must not leave ye.




Never till life leave us sir.





Here's work for you in hand.



I am ev'n right glad sir.
For by my troth, I am now grown old with idleness;
I hear we shall abroad Sir.




But who thinks you commands now?




Methinks my eye should guide me: can there be
(If you your self will spare him so much honour)
Any found out to lead before your armies,
So full of faith, and sire as brave Demetrius?

King Philips Son, at his years was an old Souldier,
'Tis time his fortune be a wing, high time Sir,
So many idle houres, as here he loyters,
So many ever-dying names he loses,
I hope 'tis he.



'Tis he indeed, and nobly
He shall set forward: draw you all those Garrisons
Upon the frontiers as you pass: to those
Joyne these in pay at home, our ancient souldiers,
And as you go press all the Provinces.



We shall not need;
Believe this hopeful Gentleman
Can want no swords, nor honest hearts to follow him,
We shall be full, no fear Sir.





Because you are an old, and faithful servant,
And know the wars, with all its vantages,
Be near to his instructions, lest his youth


Lose valours best companion, staid discretion,
Shew where to lead, to lodge, to charge with safetie;
In execution not to break nor scatter,
But with a provdent anger, follow nobly:
Not covetous of blood, and death, but honour,
Be ever near his watches; cheer his labours,
And where his hope stands faire, provoke his valour;
Love him, and think it no dishonour (my Demetrius)
To wear this Jewel near thee; he is a tri'd one,
And one that even in spight of time, that sunk him,
And frosted up his strength, will yet stand by thee.
And with the proudest of thine enemyes
Exchange for blood, and bravely: take his counsel.



Your grace hath made me young again, and wanton.



She must be known and suddenly; when you have done
Come in and take your leave Sir, and some few
Prayers along.



Do ye know her?







Did you observe her Tymon?




I look'd on her,
But what she is 



I must have that found.







I know my duty, Exit. Am.

You shall be half my father.




Come Gentlemen, you are resolv'd I am sure
To see these wars.




We dare not leave his fortunes,
Though most assured death hung round about us.



That Bargain's yet to make;
Be not too hasty, when ye Face the Enemy,
Nor too ambitious to get honour instantly,
But Charge within your Bounds, and keep close Bodies,
And you shall see what sport we'll make these Mad-caps
You shall have Game enough, I warrant ye,
Every Man's Cock shall Fight.



I must go see, Sir:
Brave Sir, as soon as I have taken leave,
I'll meet you in the Park;
Draw the Men thither,
Wait you upon Leonitus.








But I beseech your Grace, with speed; the sooner
We are i'th' Field 



You could not please me better.




You never saw the wars yet?







These foolish Mistresses do so hang about ye,
So whimper, and so hug, I know it Gentlemen,
And so intice ye, now ye are i'th' bud;
And that sweet tilting war, with eyes and kisses,
Th' allarums of soft vowes, and sighes, and fiddle faddles,
Spoiles all our trade: You must forget these knick knacks,
A woman at some time of the year, I grant ye
She is necessary; but make no bussiness of her;
How now Lieutenant?





Oh Sir, as ill as ever;
We shall have Wars they say; they are Mustering yonder:
Would we were at it once: 〈◊〉, how it plagues me.



Here's one has served now under Captain Cupid,

And crack't a Pike in's youth: you see what's come on't.



No, my Disease will never prove so honourable.



Why sure thou hast the best Pox.



If I have 'em,
I am sure I got 'em in the best Company;
They are Pox of thirty Coates.



Thou hast mew'd 'em finely:
Here's a strange fellow now, and a brave Fellow,
If we may say so of a Pockie Fellow,
(Which I believe we may) this poor Lieutenant;
Whether he have the Scratches, or the Scabs,
Or what a Devil it be, I'll say this for him,
There sights no braver Soldier under Sun, Gentlemen;
Show him an Enemy, his Paine's forgot straight;
And where other Men, by Beds and Bathes have ease,
And easie Rules of Physick, set him in a danger,
A danger, that's a fearful one indeed,
Ye rock him, and he will so play about ye,
Let it be ten to one, he ne'r comes off agaiu;
Ye have his heart: and then he works it bravely,
And throughly bravely: not a Pang remembred:
I have seen him do such things, belief would shrink at.



'Tis strange he should do all this, and Diseas'd so.



I am sure 'tis true: Lieutenant, canst thou drink well?



Would I were drunk, Dog-drunk, I might not feel this.



I would take Physick.



But I would know my Disease first.



Why? it may be the Collick: Canst thou blow backward?



There's never a Bag-pipe in the Kingdom better.



Is't not a Pleurisie?




That has the Devil, and Death in't: Will ye March Gentlemen?
The Prince has taken leave.



How know ye that?



I saw him leave the Court, dispatch his Followers, and met him 〈◊〉 in a bye-street: I think he has some Wench, or such a Toy, to lick over be∣fore he go: would I had such another to draw this foolish Pain down.




The Prince will stay on us.









Enter Demetrius, and Celia.


Must ye needs go?



Or stay with all dishonour.



Are there not Men enough to Fight?





This ill becomes the noble love you bear me;
Would you have your Love a Coward?




I would have him fight, but not so far off from me.



Wouldst have it thus? or thus?



If that be fighting 



Ye Wanton Fool: when I come home again
I'll fight with thee, at thine own Weapon, Celia,

And conquer thee too.



That you have done already,
You need no other Armes to me, but these Sir;
But will you fight your self Sir?



Thus deep in Blood Dear,
And through the thickest rankes of Pikes.




Your firie Courser, beat the Troops before ye,
And cramb the mouth of Death with Executions.



I would do more then these: But prithee tell me,
Tell me, my Faire, Where got'st thou this Male Spirit?
I wonder at thy Mind.



Were I a Man, you would wonder more.



Sure thou wouldst prove a Soldier, and some great Leader.



Sure I should do somewhat;
And the first thing I did, I should grow envious,
Extreamly envious of your Youth, and Honour.



And fight against me?



Ten to one, 〈◊〉 should do it.



Thou wouldst not hurt me?



In this Mind I am in,

  11I think I should be hardly brought to strike ye,
Unless 'twere thus; but in my Mans mind 








I should be Friends with ye too, now I think better.



Ye are a tall Soldier: Here, take these, and these; this Gold to furnish ye, and keep this Bracelet; Why do you weep now? You a Mascu∣line Spirit?



No, I confess, I am a Fool, a VVoman:
And ever when I part with you 




These tears are like prodigious signs, my sweet one,

I shall come back, loden with fame, to honour thee.




I hope you shall:
But then my dear Demetrius,

VVhen you stand Conquerour, and at your Mercy
All People bow, and all things waite your sentence;
Say then your eye (surveying all your conquest)
Finds out a Beauty, even in sorrow excellent,
A constant face, that in the midst of ruine
VVith a forc'd smile, both scornes at Fate, and Fortune:
Say you find such a one, so nobly fortify'd,
And in her figure, all the sweets of Nature?



Prithee, no more of this, I cannot find her.



That shews as far beyond my with er'd 〈◊〉;
And will run Mad to love ye too.



Do ye fear me,
And do you think, besides this Face, this Beauty,
This Heart, where all my hopes are lock'd 





No sure, I think ye honest; wondrous honest.
Pray do not Frown, I Swear ye are.







But how long will ye be away?









I know you are angry now: pray look upon me
I'll ask no more such Questions.





I can no longer stay.



They do but Call yet:
How fain you would leave my Company.





Unless a greater Power then Love Commanded,
Commands my Life, mine Honour.







Prithee farewell, and be not doubtful of me.




I would not have ye hurt: and ye are so 〈◊〉



But good sweet Prince preserve your self, Fight nobly,
But do not thrust his Body; 'tis not yours now,
'Tis mine, 'tis onely mine: do not seek wounds, Sir,
For every drop of Blood you bleed 




I will, Celia, I will be careful.



My heart that loves ye dearly.



Prithee no more, we must part:
Hark, they March now.
Drums a March.



Fye on 〈◊〉 Bawling Drums: I am sure you'll kiss me,
But one Kiss? What a Parting's this?




And do what thou wilt with me, smother me;
But still remember, if your Fooling with me,
Make me forget the trust 




I have done. farewell Sir,
Never look back, you shall not stay, not a minute.




I must have one farewell more.



No, the Drums beat;

I dare not slack your Honour; not a hand more,
Onely this Look; the gods preserve, and save ye.










WHat have ye found her out?



We hawe hearkned after her.



What's that to my desire?



Your grace must give us time, and a little means.



She is sure a stranger, if she were bred or known here 



Your dull endeavours 
Enter Menippus.

Should never be employ'd. Welcome Menippus.




I have found her Sir, I mean the place she is lodg'd in; her name is Celia, And much a do I had to purchase that too.



Dost think Demetrius loves her?



Much I fear it,

〈◊〉 nothing that way yet can win for certaine.
I'll tell your grace within this hour.











But how should he come to her?



There lies the 〈◊〉 of the matter hid yet.




〈◊〉 thou been with thy wife?




No Sir, I am going to her.



Go and dispatch, and meet me in the Garden,
And get all out ye can.
Exit.



I'll do my best Sir.
Exit.



Blest be thy wife, thou wert an arrant Asse else.



I, she is a stirring woman indeed: there's a brain, brother.



There's not a handsome wench of any mettle within an hundred miles, but her intelligence reaches her, and out-reaches her, and brings her as considently to Court, as to a sanctuary: What had his mouldy brains ever arriv'd at, had not she beaten it out oth' Flint to fasten him? They say she keeps an office of Concealements: there is no young wench, let her be a Saint, Unless she live ith' Center, but she finds her, and every way prepares addresses to her: if my wife would have followed her course Charintbus, her lucky course, I had the day before him: O what might I have been by this time, Brother? But she (forsooth) when I put these things to her, these things of honest thrift, groans, O my conscience, the load upon my consci∣ence, when to make us cuckolds, they have no more burthen then a brood∣goose, brother; but let's do what we can, though this wench fail us, ano∣ther of a now way will be lookt at: Come, let's abroad, and beat our brains, time may for all his wisdome, yet give us a day.





 Drum within, Allarme. Enter Demetrius and Leoentius.


I will not see 'em fall thus, give me way, Sir,

I shall forget you love me else.



Will ye lose all?
For me to be forgotten, to be hated,
Nay never to have been a Man, is nothing,
So you, and those we have preserv'd from slaughter
Come safely off.




I have lost my self.








〈◊〉 am most miserable.



There's no Man so, but he that makes himself so.








You must not: I shall tell you then,
And tell you true, that Man's unsit to govern,
That cannot guide himself: You lead an Army?
That have not so much Manly suff'rance left ye,
To bear a Loss?



Charge but once more Leonitus,

My Friends and my Companions are engag'd all.



Nay give 'em lost, I saw 'em off their Horses,
And the Enemy Master of their Armes; nor could then,
The policy, nor strenth of Man redeem 'em



And shall I know this, and stand fooling?



By my dead Father's Soul you stir not, Sir,
Or if you do, you make your way through me first.



Thou art a Coward.



To prevent a Madman.
None but your Father's Son, durst call me so,
'Death if he did  Must I be scandal'd by ye,
That hedg'd in all the helps I had to save ye?
That, where there was a valiant weapon stirring,
Both search'd it out, and singl'd it, unedg'd it,
For fear it should bite you, Am I a Coward?
Go, get ye up, and tell 'em ye are the King's Son;
Hang all your Ladies Favours on your Crest,
And let them fight their shares; spurre to destruction,
You cannot miss the way: be bravely desperate,
And your young friends before ye, that lost this battel,
Your honourable friends, that knew no order,
Cry out, Antigonus, the old Antigonus,

The wise and fortunate Antigonus,

The great, the valiant, and the fear'd Antigonus,

Has sent a desperate son, without discretion
To bury in an hour his age of honour.







'Tis ten to one, I dye with ye:
The coward will not long be after ye;
I scorn to say I saw ye fall, sigh for ye,
And tell a whining tale, some ten years after
To boys and girles in an old chimney corner,
Of what a Prince we had, how bravely spirited;
How young and fair he fell: wee'll all go with ye,
And ye shall see us all, like sacrifices
In our best trim, 〈◊〉 up the mouth of ruine?
Will this faith satisfie your folly? Can this show ye
'Tis not to die we fear, but to die poorly,
To fall, forgotten, in a Multitude?
If you will needs tempt Fortune now she has held ye,
Held ye from sinking up.



Pray do not kill me,
These words pierce deeper then the wounds I suffer,
The smarting wounds of loss.



Ye are too tender;
Fortune has houres of loss, and houres of honour,
And the most valiant feel them both: take comfort,
The next is ours, I have a Soul descries it:
The angry Bull never goes back for breath,
But when he meanes to arm his fury double.
Let this day set, but not the Memory,
And we shall find a time: How now Lieutenant?





I know not: I am mall'd: we are bravely beaten,
All our young Gallants lost.







I am pepper'd, I was i'th' midst of all: and bang'd of all hands: They made an Anvil of my Head, it rings yet; never so thresh'd: Do you call this Fame? I have fam'd it; I have got Immortal fame, but I'll no more on't; I'll no such scratching Saint to serve hereafter; O' my Consci∣ence I was kill'd above Twenty 〈◊〉, and yet I know not what a Devil's in't, I crawl'd away, and liv'd again still; I am hurt plaguily, but now I have nothing neer so much pain Colonel, they have sliced me for that Ma∣lady.



All the young Men lost?



I am glad you are here: but they are all i'th' pound Sir, they'l never ride o'r other Mens Corn again, I take it, such frisking, and such flaunting with their Feathers, and such careering with their Mistriss favours; and here must he be pricking out for honour, and there got he a knock, and down goes Pilgarlick, commends his Soul to his She Saint, and Exit. Ano∣ther spurs in there, cries, Make room Villaines, I am a Lord, scarce spoken, but with reverence a Rascal takes him o'r the Face, and fells him, there lies the Lord, the Lord be with him.




Do you find this truth?









They have such tender Bodies too; such Cullisses,
That one good handsome blow breaks 'em in pieces.



How stands the Enemy?



Even cool enough too: for to say truth, he has been shrewdly heated, the Gentleman no doubt will fall to his Jewlips.



He Marches not i'th'-tail on's.



No, plague take him, he'll kiss our Tailes as soon; he looks upon us, as if he would say, If ye will turn again, Friends, we will belabour you a little better, and beat a little more care into your Coxcombs. Now shall we have damnable Ballads out against us, most wicked Madrigals: and ten to one, Collonel, Sung to such lowsie, lamentable Tunes.




How e're the Game goes: good Sir be not troubled,
A better day will draw this back again.
Pray go, and cheer 〈◊◊〉, and lead 'em 〈◊〉,
They are hot, and 〈◊〉.




I'll do any thing.



〈◊〉, send one presentlie away To 'th' King, and let him know our state: and 〈◊〉 ye, be sure the messenger advise his Majesty to comfort up the Prince: he's full of sadness.



When shall I get a Surgeon? this hot weather,
Unless I be well pepper'd, I shall stink Colonel.



Go, I'll prepare thee one.



If ye catch me then,
Fighting again, I'll eat hay with a horse.





Leucippe (reading) and two Maids at a Table writing.


Have ye written to Merione?









And let her understand the hopes she has
If she come speedily 




All these are specified.



And of the chaine is sent her,
And the rich stuffe to make her shew more handsome here?




All this is done, Madam.



What have you dispatcht there?




A letter to the Countrey maid, and't please ye.



A pretty girle, but peevish, plaguy peevish:
Have ye bought the embordyered gloves, and that purse for her,
And the new Curle?




They are ready packt up Madam.



Her maiden-head will yield me, let me see now, She is not fifteen they say: for her complexion Cloe, Cloe, Cloe, here, I have her, Cloe, the Daughter of a Countrey gentleman; Her age upon fifteen: now her complexion, a lovely brown; here 'tis; eyes black and rolling, The body neatly built: she strikes a Lute well, sings most inticingly: these helps con∣sider'd, Her maiden-head will amount to some three hundred, or three hundred and fifty crowns; 'twill bear it handsomly. Her father's poor, some little share deducted, to buy him a hunting Nag: I, 'twill be pretty: Who takes care of the Merchants wife.




I have wrought her.



You know for whom she is?




Very well, Madam, though very much ado, I had to make her apprehend that happiness.



These kind are subtile:
Did she not cry and blubber when ye urg'd her.




O most extremly, and swore she would rather perish.



Good signs, very good signs, symptoms of easie nature. Had she the plate?




She lookt upon't, and left it, and turn'd again and view'd it.








At length she was content to let it lye there.
Till I call'd for't, or so.








Do you take me
For such a fool, I would part without that promise?



The Chambers next the park.




The Window Madam, you bad me look upon.



Hang her, she is musty:
She is no Mans meat; besides, she is poor and sluttish:
Where lies old 〈◊〉 now, you are so long now 




Thisbe, Thisbe, This. Agent Thisbe, O I have her,

She lies now in Nicopolis.




Dispatch a Packet, and tell her, her Superiour here commands her, the next Month not to fail, but see deliver'd here to our use, some Twenty young and handsome, as also able Maids, for the Court service, as she will answer it: we are out of beauty, Utterly out, and rub the time away here, With such blown stuff, I am asham'd to send it.

Who's that? look out, to your business maid, there's nothing got by idleness: There is a Lady, Which if I can but buckle with, Altea, A, A, A, A, Altea, young, and married, and a great lover of her husband, well, not to be brought to Court: say ye so? I am sorry, the Court shall be brought to you then: how now, who is't?




An ancient Woman, with a Maid attending, a pretty Girle, but out of Cloathes; for a little Money, it seems she would put her to your bringing up, Madam,





Let her come in. Would ye ought with us, good Woman? I pray be short, we are full of Business.



I have a tender Girle here, and please your Honour.







That hath a great desire to serve your Worship.



It may be so; I am full of Maids.



She is young, forsooth 
And for her Truth; and as they say her bearing.



Ye say well: come ye hither, Maid, let me feel your Pulse, 'tis some∣what weak but Nature will grow stronger; let me see your Leg, she treads but low ith' Pasterns.



A Cork heel, Madam.



We know what will do it, without your aim, good Woman: What do you pitch her at? she's but a slight Toy cannot hold out long.



Even what you think is meet.



Give her Ten Crowns, we are full of business, she is a poor Woman, let her take a Cheese home: Enter the Wench in the Office.






What's your Name, Sister?








A pretty Name; 'twill do well: Go in, and let the other Maid in∣struct ye Phebe;


Let my old Velvet Skirt be made sit for her, I'll put her into action for a Wastcoat, and when I have rigg'd her up once, this small Pinnace shall sail for Gold, and good store too: Who's there?



we never have any case in this World? still troubled? still molested? What would you have? I cannot furnish ye faster then I am able.

And ye were my Husband a Thousand times, I cannot do it; at least a do∣zen Poasts are gone this Morning for several parts of the Kingdom: I can do no more but pay 'em, and instruct 'em.




Prethee, good sweet heart, I come not to disturb thee, nor discou∣rage thee, I know thou labour'st truly: hark in thine ear.



Ha? What do you make so dainty on't? look there, I am an Ass, I can do nothing.




Celia? I, this is she; a stranger born.



What would you give for more now?



Prithee, my best Leucippe, ther's much hangs on't, lodg'd at the end of Marse's street? that's true too; at the sack of such a Town, by such a Souldier preserv'd a prisoner: and by Prince Demetrius bought from that man again, maintain'd, and favourd: How came you by this knowledge?



Poor weak man, I have a thousand eyes, when thou art sleeping, abroad, and full of business.



You never tri'd her;



No, she is beyond my level; so hedg'd in by the Princes insinite love, and favour to her 



She is a handsome wench.



A delicate, and knows it; and out of that proof arms her self.



Come in then; I have a great design from the King to you, and you must work like wax now.







On this, and all your wits call home.



I have done Toyes in my time of some note; old as I am, I think my brains will work without barme, take up the Books.





 Enter Antigonus, Tymon, Lords, and a Souldier.


No face of sorrow for this loss? 'twill choak him,
Nor no man miss a friend, I know his nature
So deep imprest with grief, for what he has suffer'd,
That the least adding to it, adds to his ruin;
His loss is not so insinite, I hope Souldier.



Faith neither great, nor out of discretion, the young men out of heat.
Enter Demetrius, 〈◊〉, and Lieutenant.



I guess the manner.




The Prince and't like your Grace s.



You are welcome home Sir;
Come, no more sorrow, I have heard your fortune,
And I my self have trid the like: clear up man,
I will not have ye take it thus if I doubted.
Your fear had lost; and that you had turn'd your back to 'em,
Basely besought their mercies 



No, no, by this hand Sir,


We fought like honest and tall men.



I know't Leontius; or if I thought
Neglect of rule, having his counsel with ye,
Or too vain-glorious appetite of fame,
Your men forgot, and scatter'd 



None of these Sir,
He shew'd himself a noble gentleman,
Every way apt to rule.




Why should you think you have done an act so hainous,
That nought but discontent dwells round about ye?
I have lost a Battel.



I, and fought it hard too.



With as much means as Man 



Or Devil could urge it.



Twenty to one of our side now.




Beaten like Dogs again, like Owles, you take it
To heart for flying but a Mile before 'em,
And to say truth, 'twas no flight neither Sir,
'Twas but a walk, a handsome walk,
I have tumbl'd with this old Body, beaten like a Stock-fish,
And stuck with Arrows, like an arming Quiver,
Blouded and bang'd, almost a day before 'em,
And glad I have got off then. Here's a Mad Shaver,
He sights his share I am sure, when e're he comes to't;
Yet I have seen him trip it titely too,
And cry, the Devil take the hindmost.



I learn'd it of my betters.







Has Fortune but one Face;



In her best Vizard, methinks she looks but Lowzily.



Chance, though she faint now,
And sink below our expectations,
Is there no hope left strong enough to buoy her?



'Tis not this day, I sled before the Enemy,
And lost my People, left mine honour murder'd,
My Mayden honour, never to be ransom'd,
(Which to a noble Soul is too too sensible)
Afflicts me with this sadness; most of these,
Time may turn straight again, experience perfect,
And new Swords, cut new ways to nobler Fortunes.
O have lost 



As you are mine forget it:
I do not think it loss.



O Sir, forgive me,


I have lost my Friends, those worthy Soules bred with me,
I have lost my self, they were the pieces of me;
I have lost all Arts, my Schooles are taken from me,
Honour and Armes, no emulation left me:
I liv'd to see these Men lost, look'd upon it:
These Men that twin'd their loves to mine, their 〈◊〉,
O shame of shames, I saw, and could not save 'em,
This carries Sulphure in't, this burnes and boyles me,
And like a fatal Tombe bestrides my Memory.



This was hard fortune, but if alive and taken,
They shall be ransom'd; let it be at Millions.



They are dead, they are dead.



When would he weep for me thus? I may be dead, and Powder'd.



Good Prince, grieve not: we are not certain of their Deaths: the Enemy, though he be hot and keen, yet holds good Quarter. What Noise is this?





He does not follow us?
Give me a Steeple top.



They live, they live, Sir.



Hold up your Manly Face;
They live, they'r here Son.



These are the Men.




They are, and live to honour ye.



How scap't ye, noble Friends? methought I saw ye
Even in the jaws of Death.




Thanks to our folly,
That spurr'd us on; we were indeed hedg'd round in't,
And ev'n beyond the hand of succour beaten,
Unhors'd, disarm'd: and what we lookt for then Sir,
Let such poor weary Souls that hear the Bell Toll,
And see the Grave a digging, tell.




Delude mine eyes no longer: How came ye off?




Against all expectation: the brave 〈◊〉,


I think this day enamour'd on your Vertue,
When, through the Troops, he saw you shoot like Lightning;
And at your Manly Courage all took sire,
And after that, the Misery we fell too,
The never-certain fate of War considering,
As we stood all before him, Fortunes ruines,
Nothing but Death expecting, a short time
He made a stand upon our Youths and Fortunes,
Then with an eye of Mercy inform'd his judgment,
How yet unripe we were, unblown, unharden'd,
Unsitted for such fatal ends; he cry'd out to us,


Go, Gentlemen, commend me to your Master,
To the most high, and Powerful Prince 〈◊〉,

Tell him, the 〈◊〉 he showed against me
This day, the Virgin-valour, and true sire
Deserves, even from an Enemy, this Courtesie;
Your Lives and Armes freely I'll give 'em: than him,
And thus we are return'd, Sir.



Faith 'twas well done;
'Twas bravely done; Was't not a noble part, Sir?



Had I been there, up had I gone, I am sure on't;
These noble tricks, I never durst trust 'em yet.



Let me not live, and wer't not a famed honesty,
It takes me such a tickling way: now would I wish Heaven,
But ee'n the happiness, ee'n that poor Blessing,
For all the sharp 〈◊〉 thou hast sent me,
But ee'n i'th' head o'th' Field to take Seleucus.

I should do somewhat memorable: 〈◊〉, sad still.




Do you grieve we are come off?












And with such a fame to me?
Said ye not so?



Ye have heard it.





Better I had lost 'em all: my self had perish'd
And all my Father's hopes.




What ayle ye, Sir? 'Death, do not make sools 〈◊〉,
Neither go to Chuech, nor tarry at home,
That's a 〈◊〉 Horn-pipe?



What's now your Grief, Demetrius?




Did he not beat us twice?



He beat a Pudding;
Beat us but once.



'Has beat me twice, and beat me to a Coward,
Beat me to nothing.



Is not the Devil in him?




I pray it be not worse.







Bear Witness all the World, I am a 〈◊〉 here.



With valour 〈◊〉 he strook me, then with honour:
That stroak Leontius, that stroak, do'st thou not feel it?



Where abouts was it? for I remember nothing yet.



All these Gentlemen that were his Prisoners 



He set 'em free, Sir, with Armes and Honour.



There, there, now thou hast it
At mine own Weapon, Courtesie, h'as beaten me,
At that I was held a Master in, he has cow'd me,
Hotter then all the dint oth' sight he has charg'd me:
Am I not now a wretched Fellow? think on't;
And when thou hast examin'd all ways honourable,
And find'st no door left open to requite this,
Conclude I am a Wretch, and was twice beaten.




I have observ'd your way, and understand if,
And equal love it as 〈◊〉,

My noble Childe, thou shalt not fall in Vertue,

I and my Power will sink first: you Leontius,

Wait for a new Commission, ye shall out again,
And instantly: you shall not lodge this night here,
Not see a friend, nor take a blessing with ye,
Before ye be i'th' field: the enemy is up still,
And still in full design: Charge him again, Son,
And either bring home that again thou hast lost there,
Or leave thy body by him.




And now I dare look up again, Leontius.




I, I, Sir, I am thinking who we shall take of 'em,
To make all straight; and who we shall give to th' devil.
What saist thou now Lieutenant?





Lord what aile I, that I have no mind to sight now?

I find my constitution mightily alter'd
Since I came home: I hate all noises too,
Especially the noise of Drums; I am now as well
As any living man; why not as valiant?
To fight now, is a kind of vomit to me,
It goes against my stomach.




You cannot do your Son, so fair a favour.



'Tis my intent: I'll see ye march away too;
Come, get your men together presently, Leontius,

And press where please you, as you march.







Wait you on me, I'll bring ye to your command,
And then to fortune give you up.








Go, get the drums, beat round, Lieutenant.




I have a foolish business they call marriage.



After the wars are done.



The partie staies Sir,

  23I have giv'n the Priest his money too: all my friends Sir,
My father and my mother.



Will you go forward?



She brings a pretty matter with her.



Half a dozen Bastards.












I mean Sir, pounds a year; I'll dispatch the matter,
'Tis but a night 〈◊〉 two; I'll overtake ye Sir.



The 2 old legions, yes: where lies the horse-quarter?



And if it be a boy, I'll even make bold Sir.



Away with your Whore,
A plague o' your Whore, you damn'd rogue,
Now ye are cur'd and well; must ye be clicketing?



I have broke my mind to my Ancient, in my absence,
He's a sufficient gentleman.







Only receive her portion.




Else I'll bang ye forward.




A Gentleman and an officer cannot have the liberty
To do the office of a man.



Shame light on thee,
How came this Whore into thy head?




'Tis strange, a poor whore.



Do not answer me:
Troop, Troop away: do not name this whore again,
Or think there is a whore.



That's very hard Sir.



For if thou dost, look too't, I'll have thee guelded,
I'll walk ye out before me: not a word more.





Enter Leucippe, and Governess.


Ye are the Mistress of the house ye say,
Where this young Lady lyes.



For want of a better.



You may be good enough for such a purpose:
When was the Prince with her? answer me directly.



Not since he went a warring.




What 〈◊〉 copulation are you privie too
Between these two? be not afraid, we are women,
And may talk thus amongst our selves, no harm in't.



No sure, there's no harm in't, I conceive that;
But truely, that I ever knew the gentlewoman
Otherwise given, then a hopeful gentlewoman 



You'll grant me the Prince loves her?



There I am with ye.
And the Gods bless her, promises her mightily.



Stay there a while. And gives her gifts?




And truely makes a very Saint of her.



I should think now,
(Good woman let me have your judgement with me,
I see 'tis none of the worst: Come sit down by me)
That these two cannot love so tenderly 



Being 〈◊◊〉 as they are too 



You say well 
But that methinks some further promises 




I have heard the Prince swear he would marry her.



Very well still: they do not use to fall out?



The tenderest Chickens to one another,
They cannot live an hour assunder.



I have done then;
And be you gone; you know your charge, and do it.
You know whose will it is; if you transgress it 
That is, if any have access, or see her,
Before the Kings will be fulfill'd 



Not the Prince, Madam?



You'll be hang'd if you do it, that I'll assure ye.



But ne're the less, I'll make bold to obey ye.



Away, and to your business then.















THou hast taken wondrous pains; but yet 〈◊〉,

You understood not of what blood, and 〈◊〉.




I labour'd that, but cannot come to know it.
A Greek I am sure she is, she speaks this Language.



Is she so excellent handsome?







Sold for a prisoner?








And he loves tenderly?







'Tis well prevented then yes, I perceiy'd it:
When he took leave now, he made a hundred stops,
Desir'd an hour, but half an hour, a minute,
Which I with anger cross'd; I knew his business,

I knew 'twas she he hunted on; this journey, man,

I beat out suddenly for her cause intended,
And would not give him time to breath. When comes she?







Lodge her to all delight then: For I would have her tri'd toth'test: I know she must be some crackt Coyn, not sit his Traffique; which, when we have found, the shame will make him leave her, or we shall work a nearer way, I'll bury him, and with him all the hopes I have cast upon him, ere he shall dig his own Grave in that Woman: you know which way to bring her: I'll stand close there, to view her as she passes: And do you hear Menippus, observe her with all sweetness: humour her, 'twill make her lie more care∣less to our purposes. Away, and take what helpes you please.



I am gone Sir.





Enter Celia, and Governess.


Governess, From whom was this Gown sent me; Prithee be serious true; I will not wear't else: 'Tis a handsome one.



As though you know not?



No Faith: But I believe for certain too, yet I wonder, because it was his caution, this poor way, still to preserve me from the curious search∣ings of greedy eyes.



You have it: Does it please you?



'Tis very rich methinks too, prithee tell me 



From one that likes you well, never look coy, Lady;
These are no gifts, to be put off with poutings.



Powtings, and Gifts? Is it from any stranger?



You are so curious, that there is no talking to ye. What if it be I pray ye?



Unpin good Governess, Quick, quick.



Why what's the matter?



Quick, good Governess: Fie on't, How beastly it becomes me? poor∣ly? A trick put upon me? well said Governess: I vow I would not wear it out, it smells musty. Are these your tricks? now I begin to smell it abominable musty; Will ye help me? The Prince will come again 



You are not Mad sure?



As I live Ill' cut it off: a Pox upon it; for sure it was made for that use; Do you bring me Livories? Stales to catch Kites? Dost thou Laugh too, thou base Woman?



I cannot chuse, if I should be hang'd.



Abuse me, and then Laugh at me too?



I do not abuse ye: Is it abuse to give him Drink that's Thirsty?
You want Clothes; Is it such a heinous sin I beseech ye, to see you stor'd?



There is no greater wickedness then this way.







I shall Curse thee fearfully, if thou provok'st me further: and take heed, Woman; my 〈◊〉 never miss.



Curse him that sent it.



Tell but his Name 



You dare not Curse him,



Dare not I? By this fair light 



You are so full of Passion 



Dare not be good? Be honest? Dare not Curse him?



I think you dare not: I believe so.







Up with your Valour then, up with it bravely, and take your full charge.



If I do not, hang me; tell but his Name.



'T was Prince Demetrius sent it:
Now, now, give sire, kill him ith' eye now Lady.



Is he come home?



It seems so; but your Curse now.



You do not lie, I hope.



You dare not Curse him.



Prithee do not abuse me: Is he come home indeed?
For I would now with all my heart believe thee.



Nay, you may chuse: alas, I deal for Strangers, that send ye scurvy
Musty Gowns, stale Livories: I have my Tricks.



'Tis a good Gown, a handsome one; I did but jest; Where is he?



He that sent it 



How? he that sent it? Is't come to that again? thou canst not be so foolish prithee speak out, I may mistake thee.



I said he that sent it.



Curse o' my life: Why dost thou vex me thus? I know thou meanst Demetrius, dost thou not? I charge thee speak truth: if it be any other, thou knowst the charge he gave thee, and the justice his anger will inflict, if e're he know this, as know he shall, he shall, thou spiteful Wo∣man, thou beastly Woman; and thou shalt know to late too, and feel too sensible, I am no Ward, no Sale-stuff for your Money-Merchants that sent it? Who dare send me, or how durst thou, thou 



What you please: for this is ever the reward of service. The Prince will bring the next himself.



'Tis strange that you should deal so peevishly: beshrew ye, you have put me in a heat.



I am sure ye have kill'd me: I ne're receiv'd such language: I can but wait upon ye, and be your drudge; keep a poor life to serve ye.



You know my nature is too easie, Governess,
And you know now, I am sorry too: how does he?



O God, my head.



Prethee be well, and tell me, did he speak of me, since he came? nay, see now, if thou wilt leave this tyranny? good sweet governess: did he but name his Celia? look upon me, upon my faith I meant no harm: here, take this, and buy thy self some trifles: did a good Girle?



He loves ye but too dearly.



That's my good Governess.



There's more cloathes making for ye.







More: richer and braver; I can tell ye that news; And twenty glorious things.







Ye are too good for our house now: we poor wretches Shall lose the comfort of ye.



No, I hope not.



For ever lose ye Lady.



Lose me? wherefore? I hear of no such thing.



'Tis sure it must be so: you must shine now at Court: such pre∣paration, such hurry, and such hanging rooms 



Toth' Court wench? Was it toth' Court thou saidst?



You'll find it so.



Stay, stay, this cannot be.




I say it must be: I hope to find ye still the same good Lady.



Toth' Court? this stumbles me: art sure for me, wench, this pre∣peration is?



She is perilous crafty: I fear too honest for us all too. Am I sure I live?



Toth' Court? this cannot down: what should I do there? why should he on a sudden change his mind thus, and not make me acquainted? sure he loves me; his vow was made against it, and mine with him: At least while this King liv'd: he will come hither, and see me ere I go?



Wou'd some wise woman had her in working: that I think he will not, because he means with all joy there to meet ye. Ye shall hear more within this hour?



A Courtier? what may the meaning be? sure he will see me if he be come, he must: Hark ye Governess, what age is the King of?



He's an old man, and full of business.




I fear too full indeed: what Ladies are there?

I would be loath to want good company.



Delicate young Ladies, as you would desire;
And when you are acquainted, the best company.



'Tis very well: prethee go in, let's talk more.
For though I fear a trick, I'll bravely try it.





I see he must be cunning, knoks this 〈◊〉 down





Enter Lieutenant, and Leontius. Drums within.



You shall not have your will, sirrah, are ye running?
Have ye gotten a toy in your heels? Is this a season,
When honour pricks ye on, to prick your 〈◊〉 up
After your Whore, your Hobby-Horse?



Why look ye now: What a strange Man are you? Would you have a Man fight at all houres all alike.



Do but fight something; but half a blow, and put thy Stomach to't: turn but thy face, and do but make Mouthes at 'em.



And have my Teeth knockt out; I thank ye heartily, ye are my dear Friend.



What a Devil ails thee? Dost long to be hang'd?



Faith, Sir, I make no suit for't: but rather then I would live thus out of Charity, continually in brawling 



Art thou not he? I may be cozn'd 




I shall be discover'd.



That in the midst of thy most hellish pains, when thou wert craw∣ling sick, didst aim at wonders, when thou wert mad with pain?



Ye have found the cause out; I had ne're been mad to sight else: I confess, Sir, the daily torture of my side that vext me, made me as daily careless what became of me, till a kind Sword there wounded me, and eas'd me; 'twas nothing in my valour fought; I am well now, and take some pleasure in my life: methinks now it shews as mad a thing to me to see you 〈◊〉, and kill one another foolishly for Honour, as 'twas to you, to see me play the Coxcombe.



And wilt thou ne're fight more?



Ith' mind I am in.



Nor never be sick again?




I hope I shall not.



Prethee be sick again; prethee, I beseech thee,
Be just so sick again.



I'll just be hang'd first.



If all the Arts that are can make a Collick, therefore look to't: or if imposthumes, mark me, as big as foot-balls 







Or stones of ten pound weight i'th' kidneys through 〈◊〉 and ugly dyets may be gather'd; I'll feed ye up my self Sir, I'll prepare ye, you can∣not sight, unless the devil tear ye, you shall not want provocations, I'll 〈◊〉 ye, I'll have thee have the tooth-ach, and the head-ach.



Good Collonel, I'll do any thing.



No, no, nothing then will I have thee blown with a pair of Smiths bellowes, because ye shall be sure to have a round gale with ye, sil'd full of oyle, o' devil, and 〈◊〉 fortis, and let these work, these may provok.







A coward in full blood; 〈◊〉 be plain with me,


Will Roasting do thee any good?



Nor Basting neither, Sir.



Marry that goes hard.






Where are you Colonel
The Prince expects ye Sir; has hedg'd the Enemy within a straight, where all the hopes and valours of all Men living cannot force a passage, he has 'em now.




I knew all this before Sir,
I chalk'd him out his way: But do you see that thing there;



Nay, good sweet Colonel 〈◊◊〉 a little.








What thing? I see the brave Lieutenant.



Rogue, What a Name hast thou lost?



You may help it; yet you may help it: I'll do ye any Courtesie: I know you love a Wench well.





Look upon him; Do you look too.




What should I look on?
I come to tell ye, the Prince stays your Direction,
We have 'em now ith' Coop, Sir.



Let 'em rest there,
And chew upon their Miseries: but look first 



I cannot sight for all this.



Look on this Fellow.




I know him; 'tis the valiant brave Lieutenant.



Can'st thou hear this, and play the Rogue, steal off quickly,
Behind me quickly, neatly do it,
And rush into the thickest of the Enemy,
And if thou kill'st but two.



You may excuse me, 'tis not my fault: I dare not sight.




I'll beat thee on; go wink and sight: A plague upon your sheeps heart.




What's all this matter?




Nay I cannot shew ye.



Here's Twenty pound, go but smell to 'em.



Alas Sir, I have taken such a cold, I can smell nothing.



I can smell a Rascal, a rank Rascall:
Fye, how he stinks, stinks like a tyred Jade.








Why, that Sir, Do not you smell him?












Stinks like a dead Dog, Carrion There's no such damnable smell under Heaven, as the faint sweat of a Coward: Will ye sight yet?



Nay, now I desie ye; ye have spoke the 〈◊〉 ye can of me, and if 〈◊〉 Man should take what you say to the heart 



God a mercy, God a mercy with all my heart; here I forgive thee; and fight, or fight not, do but go along with us, and keep my Dog.



I love a good Dog naturally.




What's all this stir, Lieutenant?



Nothing, Sir, but a slight matter of Argument.



'Pox take thee. Sure I shall love this Rogue, he's so pretty a Cow∣ard: Come, Gentlemen, let's up now, and if fortune dare play the Slut again, I'll never more Saint her; Come, Play-fellow, come, prithee come up; come Chicken, I have a way shall sit yet: A tame knave  Come, look upon us.



I'll tell ye who does best Boyes.










I saw her coming out.



Who waits 〈◊〉 her?




Tymon, Charinthus, and some other Gentlemen
By me appointed.







Shee's ready to entertain her here Sir; and some Ladies fit for her Lodgings.



How shews she in her trim now?



Oh most divinely sweet.



Prithee speak softly, How does she take her comming?



She bears it bravely; but what she thinks For Heaven's sake
Sir preserve me If the Prince chance to sind this.



Peace ye Old Fool; She thinks to meet him here.



That's all the Project.



Was she hard to bring;




No, she believ'd it quickly, and quickly made her self sit, the Gown a little, and those new things she has not been acquainted with, at least in this place, where she liv'd a Prisoner, troubled and stirr'd her Mind: But believe me, Sir, she has worn as good, they sit so apted to her; and she is so great a Mistriss of disposure: Here they come now: but take a full view of 〈◊〉.





How cheerfully she looks? How she 〈◊〉 all?
And how she views the place? she is very young sure:
That was an admirable Smile, a catching one,
The very twang of Cupids Bow Sung to it:
She has two-edg'd eyes, they kill o'both sides.



She makes a stand, as though she would speak.







Good Gentlemen, trouble your selves no further,

I had thought sure to have met a noble Friend here.



Ye may meet many Lady.



Such as you are I covet few or none, Sir.



VVill you walk this way,
And take the sweets oth' Garden? cool and close, Lady.



Methinks this open Air's far better, tend ye that way.
Pray where's the Woman came along?







The Woman of the House I lay at.



Woman; Here was none came along sure.



Sure I am 〈◊〉 then: Pray where's the Prince?



He will not be long from ye, we are his humble servants.



I could Laugh now, to see how finely I am cozn'd: yet I fear not, for sure I know a way to scape all dangers.



Madam, your Lodgings lye this way.



My Lodgings? for 〈◊◊〉 Sir, what office do I bear here?



The great commander of 〈◊〉 hearts.



You have hit it. I thank your sweet-heart for it. Who are these now?





Ladies that come to serve ye.



Well consider'd, are you my servants?



Servants to your pleasures.



I dare believe ye, but I dare not trust ye: catch'd with a trick? well, I must bear it patiently: methinks this Court's a neat place: all the people of such resin'd a size 



This is no poor rogue.



Were it a Paradice to please your fancy,
And entertain the sweetness you bring with ye;



Take breath; you are fat and many words may melt ye, this is three Bawds beaten into one; bless me heaven, what shall become of me? I am 〈◊〉 pitfal: o' my conscience, this is the old viper, and all these little ones creep every night into her belly; do you hear plump servant, and my little sucking Ladies, you must teach me, for I know you are excellent at carriage, how to behave my self, for I am rude yet, but you say the Prince will come?



Will flie to see you.



For look you if a great man, say the King now should come and visit me?











And offer me a kindness, such a kindness.



I, such a kindness.



True Lady such a kindness, what shall that kindness be now?



A witty Lady, learn little ones, learn.



Say it be all his favour.



And a sweet saying 'tis



And I grow peevish?



You must not be neglectful.



There's the matter, there's the main doctrin now, and I may miss it; Or a kind hansome Gentleman?







They'l count us basely bred.







I'll take thy counsel.



'Tis an excellent woman.



I find a notable volume here, a learned one; which way? for I would fain be in my chamber; in truth sweet Ladies, I grow weary; sie, how hot the air beats on me?







Now by mine honour, I grow wondrons faint too.



Your fans sweet Gentlewomen, your fans.



Since I am foold, 

I'll make my self some sport, though I pay dear for't,
Exit.



You see now what a manner of woman she is Sir.



Thou art an asse.



Is this a fit love for the Prince?




Now by my crown a dainty wench, a sharp wench,
And a matchless spirit: how she Jeer'd 'em?
How carelesly she scoff'd 'em? use her nobly;
I would I had not seen her: wait anon,
And then you shall have more to trade upon.





Enter Leontius, and the 2 Gentlemen.


We must keep a round, and a strong watch to night, the Prince will not charge the Enemy till the morning: but for the trick I told ye for this rascal, this rogue, that health and strong heart makes a coward.




I, if it take.



Ne're fear it, the Prince has it, and if he let it fall, I must not know it; he will suspect me presently: but you two may help the plough.




That he is sick again 



Extreamly sick: his disease grown incurable.
Never yet found, nor touch'd at.






Well, we have it
And here he comes.



The Prince has been upon him, what a flatten face he has now? It takes believe it; how like an asse he looks?




I feel no great pain, at least, I think I do not; yet I feel sensibly I grow extreamely faint: how cold I sweat now?







And now 'tis ev'n too true, I feel a pricking, a pricking, a strang pricking: how it tingles? and as it were a slitch too: the Prince told me, and every one cri'd out I was a dead man; I had thought I had been as well 



Upon him now Boyes, and do it most demurely.








I thank ye Gentlemen.




'Life, how looks this Man?
How dost thou good Lieutenant?




I ever told ye, This Man was never Cur'd, I see it too plain now; How do you feel your self? you look not perfect: How dull his eyes hangs?




That may be discontent.



Believe me Friend, I would not suffer now the tithe of those paines this Man feels; mark his Forehead; What a cloud of cold dew hangs upon't?



I have it, again I have it; How it grows upon me? a miserable Man I am.



Ha, ha, ha, A miserable Man thou shalt be; this is the tamest Trout I ever tickell'd.







This way he went.




Pray heaven we find him living,
He's a brave Fellow, 'tis pitty he should perish thus.




A strong hearted man, and of a notable sufferance.








How now? how is it man?




Never so sull of pain.




Did I not tell ye?



Never so full of pain Gentlemen.





How do you Sir?




Be of good comfort Souldier,
The Prince has sent us to you.



Do you think I may live?




He alters hourely, strangely.




Yes you 〈◊〉 live: but 








Do not discourage him.




He must be told truth,
'Tis now too late to trifle.






Here the Prince comes.








Bewailing Sir a Souldier,
And one I think, your Grace will grieve to part with,
But every living thing 



'Tis true, must perish,


Our lives are but our Martches to our Graves,
How dost thou now Lieutenant?




Faith 'tis true Sir, we are but spans, and candles ends.







Thou art heart whole yet; I see he alters strangely, and that apace too; I saw it this morning in him, when he poor Man I dare swear 



No beleev't, Sir, I never felt it.



Here lies the pain now: How he is swell'd?




The Imposthume, fed with a new malignant Humour now, will grow to such a bigness, 'tis incredible, the compass of a Bushel will not hold it, and with such a Hell of torture it will rise too 



Can you endure me touch it?



Oh, I beseech you Sir:
I feel you sensibly e're you come near me.



He is finely wrought, he must be cut, no cure else,
And suddenly, you see how fast he blowes out.



Good Master Doctor, let me be beholding to you, I feel I cannot last.








But ev'n for half a dozen Cans of good Wine,
That I may drink my Will out: I faint hideously.



Fetch him some Wine; and since he must go Gentlemen.
Why let him take his journey Merrily.
Enter Servant with Wine.



That's ev'n the nearest way.



I could Laugh dead now.



Here, off with that.



These two I give your Grace, a poor remembrance of a dying Man
Sir, and I beseech you wear 'em out,




I will Souldier, these are fine Legacies.



Among the Gentlemen, even all I have left; I am a poor Man, naked, yet something for remembrance: four a peece, Gentlemen, and so my Body where you please.







I make your Grace my Executor, and I beseech ye
See my poor Will fulfill'd: sure I shall walk else.



As full as they can be fill'd, here's my hand, Souldier.




The Wine will tickle him.



I would hear a Drum beat, but to see how I could endure it.



Beat a Drum there.




O Heavenly Musick, I would hear one Sing to't,
I am very full of pain.







Why, then I would drink a Drum full. Where lies the Enemy?




Why, here close by.



Now he begins to 〈◊〉.



And dare ye sight?
Dare ye fight Gentlemen?




You must not cut him: he's gone then in a moment; all the hope left, is to work his weakness into sudden anger, and make him raise his pas∣sion above his pain, and so dispose him on the Enemy; his body then, being stirr'd with violence, will purge it self, and break the sore.








And then my Life for his.




I will not die thus.



But he is too weak to doe 



Dye like a Dog?





I, he's weak, but yet he's heart-whole.















Stronger still, and better.



Hem, hem; ran, tan, tan, tan.
Exit.




How he's i'th' way on't.



Well go thy ways, thou wilt do something certain.



And some brave thing, or let mine Eares be cut off. He's sinely wrought.







I pray Sir; But how Rogue, when this Cloud's melted in him, and all discover'd 



That's for an after Mirth, away, away, away.





Enter Seleucus, Lysimachus, Ptolomy, Souldiers.


Let no man fear to dye: we love to sleep all,
And death is but the sounder sleep; all ages,
And all hours call us; 'tis so common, easie,
That little children tread those paths before us;
We are not sick, nor our souls prest with sorrows,
Nor go we out like tedious tales, forgotten;
High high we come, and hearty to our funerals,
And as the Sun that sets, in blood let's fall.



'Tis true, they have us fast, we cannot scape 'em,
Nor keeps the brow of fortune one smile for us,
Dishonourable ends we can scape though,
And (worse then those captivities) we can dye,
And dying nobly, though we leave behind us
These clods of flesh, that are too massie burthens,
Our living souls flie crown'd with living conquests



They have begun, fight bravely, and fall bravely;
And may that man that seeks to save his life now
By price, or promise, or by fear falls from us,
Never again be blest with name of Souldier.







How now? who charged first? I seek a brave hand to set me off in death.



We are not charg'd Sir, the Prince lies still.



How comes this Larum up then?



There is one desperate fellow, with the devil in him
(He never durst do this else) has broke into us,
And here he bangs ye two or three before him,
There five or six; ventures upon whole companies.



And is not seconded?



Not a man follows.



Nor cut a peeces?



Their wonder yet has staid 'em.



Let's in, and see this miracle?










Fetch him off, fetch him off, I am sure he's clouted;
Did I not tell you how 'twould take?





Enter Lieutenant with colours in his hand, pursuing 3 or 4 Souldiers.




Follow that blow, my friend, there's at your coxcombs,
I fight to save me from the Surgeons miseries.



How the knave curries 'em




Till you have my diseases, flie my furie,
Ye bread and butter rogues, do ye run from me?
And my side would give me leave, I would so hunt ye,
Ye porredge-gutted slaves, ye veale-broth boobies.





Enough, enough Lieutenant, thou hast done bravely.







There's a flag for ye Sir,
I took it out o'th' shop, and never paid for't,
I'll to 'em again, I am not come to th' text yet.



No more my souldier: beshrew my heart he is hurt sore.



Hang him, he'll lick all those whole.




Now will we take him,
And cure him in a trice.



Be careful of him.



Let me live but two years,
And do what ye will with me;

I never had but two hours yet of happiness;
Pray ye give me nothing to provoke my valour,
For I am ev'n as weary of this fighting 




Ye shall have nothing; come to the Princes Tent
And there the Surgeons presently shall search ye,


Then to your. rest.



A little hansome litter
To lay me in, and I shall sleep.








I do believe a Horse begot this Fellow,
He never knew his strength yet; they are our own.




I think so, I am cozen'd else; I would but see now
A way to fetch these off, and save their honours.







Pray ye take no way of Peace now,
Unless it be with infinite advantage.




I shall be rul'd;



Let the Battels now move forward,
Our self will give the Signal:
Now Herold, What's your Message?




This honourable courtesie, a Parley
For half an hour, no more Sir.



Let 'em come on,
They have my Princely word.





They are here to attend ye.



Now Princes, your demands?



Peace, if it may be
Without the too much tainture of our honour:
Peace, and wee'l buy it too.











At all the charge of this War.



That will not do.




Leontius, you and I have serv'd together,
And run through many a Fortune with our Swords
Brothers in wounds, and health; one Meat has fed us,
One tent a thousand times from cold night cover'd us:
Our loves have been but one; and had we died then,
One Monument had held our Names, and Actions:
Why do you set upon your Friends such Prizes?
And Sacrifice to giddy chance such Trophies?
Have we forgot to dye? or are our Vertues
Less in Afflictions constant, than our Fortunes?
Ye are deceiv'd old Soldier.



I know your worths,
And thus low bow in reverence to your Vertues:
Were these my Wars, or lead my power in chief here,
I knew then how to meet your Memories:


They are my Kings imployments; this Man sights now
To whom I owe all duty, faith, and service;
This man that fled before ye; call back that,
That bloody day again, call that disgrace home,
And then an easiy peace, may sheath our swords up.
I am not greedy of your lives and fortunes,
Nor do I gape ungratefully to swallow ye,
Honour the spur of all illustrious natures,
That made you famous Souldiers, and next Kings,
And not ambitious envy strikes me forward,
Will ye unarm, and yield your selves his prisoners?



We never knew what that sound ment: no gives
Shall ever bind this body, but embraces;
Nor weight of sorrow here, till earth fall on me.



Expect our charge then.



'Tis the nobler courtesie:
And so we leave the hand of heaven to bless us.



Stay, have you any hope?



We have none left us,
But that one comfort of our deaths together;
Give us but room to fight.



Win it, and wear it.



Call from the hills those companies hang ore us
Like bursting clouds; and then break in, and take us.



Find such a Souldier will forsake advantage,
And we'll draw off, to shew I dare be noble,
And hang a light out to ye in this darkness,
The light of peace; give up those Cities, forts,
And all those frontire Countryes to our uses.



Is this the peace? traitours to those that feed us,
Our Gods and people? give our Countryes from us?



Begin the knell, it sounds a great deal sweeter.



Let loose your servant death.



Fall fate upon us,
Our memories shall never stink behind us.







The Prince calls Sir.



Thou stock of nobleness, and curtesie,
Thou father of the War 



What means the Prince now?



Give me my Standard here.







You Gentlemen that were his Prisoners,
And felt the bounty of that noble nature,
Lay all your hands, and bear these Colours to him,
The Standard of the Kingdom; take it Soldier.



What will this mean?



Thou hast won it, bear it off,
And draw thy Men home whilst we wait upon thee.



You shall have all our Countries.




Ptol. All by Heaven Sir.




I will not have a Stone, a Brush, a Bramble,
No, in the way of curtesie, I'll start ye;
Draw off, and make a Lane through all the Army,
That these that have subdu'd us, may March through us.



Sir, do not make me surset with such goodness,
I'll bear your Standard for ye; follow ye.



I Swear it shall be so, March through me fairly,
And thine be this days honour, great Seleucus.




Mirrour of noble Minds.



Nay then ye hate me.




I cannot speak now:
Ex. with Drums and Shouts.

Well, go thy wayes, at a sure piece of bravery
Thou art the best, these Men are won by th' necks now:
I'll send a Post away.








NO aptness in her?



Not an immodest motion,
And yet she is as free, and when she is courted,
Makes as wild witty answers.



This more fires me, I must not have her thus.



We cannot alter her.



Have you put the youths upon her?



All that know any thing,
And have been studied how to catch a Beauty,
But like so many Whelps about an Elephant 
The Prince is coming home Sir.



I hear that too,
But that's no matter; Am I alter'd well?



Not to be known I think Sir.




I must see her.






I offer'd all I had, all I could think of,

〈◊〉 her through all the points o'th' Compass, I think.




She studies to undo the Court, to plant here
The enemy to our Age, Chastity?
She is the first, that e're bauked a close Arbour,
And the sweet contents within: She hates curl'd heads too,


And setting up of Beards she swears is Idolatry.




I never knew so fair a Face so froze;
Yet she would make one think 




True by her carriage, for she's as wanton as a kid to th' out side, as full of mocks and taunts: I kiss'd her hand too, walkt with her half an hour.




She heard me sing,
And sung 〈◊〉 self too; she sings admirably;
But still, when any hopes was, as 'tis her trick
To minister enough of those, then presently
With some new 〈◊〉 or other, nothing to th' matter,
And such a frown, as would sink all before her,
She takes her chamber; come we shall not be the last fools.




Not by a hundred I hope; 'tis a strange wench.



This 〈◊〉 me up still higher.
Enter Celia, and Ladies behind her.



Here she comes Sir.



Then be you gone: and take the women with ye,
And lay those Jewels in her way.



If I stay longer
I shall number as many lovers as 〈◊〉 did;
How they flock after me? upon my conscience,
I have had a dozen horses given me this morning,
I'll ev'n set up a troop, and turn she souldier,
A good discreet wench now, that were not hidebound
Might raise a fine estate here, and suddenly:
For these warm things will give their souls I can go no where
Without a world of offering to my excellence:
I am a Queen, a Goddess, I know not what 
And no constellation in all heaven, but I outshine it;
And they have found out now I have no eyes
Of mortal lights, but certaine influences,
Strange vertuous lightnings, humane nature starts at,
And I can kill my twenty in a morning,
With as much ease now 
Ha? what are these; new projects?
Where are my honourable Ladies? Are you out too?
Nay then I must buy the Stock, send me good carding;
I hope the Princes hand, be not in this sport;
I have not seen him yet, cannot hear from him,
And that, that troubles me: all these were recreations,
Had I but his sweet company to Laugh with me:
What Fellow's that? Another Apparition?
This is the 〈◊〉 Age: I should know that face,
Sure I have seen't before, not long since neither.



She sees me now: O 〈◊〉, a most rare creature!



Yes, 'tis the same: I will take no notice of ye,


But if I do not sit ye, let me fry for't;
Is all this Cackling for your egg; they are fair ones,
Excellent rich no doubt too; and may stumble
A good staid mind, but I can go thus by 'em;
My honest friend, do you set off these Jewels?



Set 'em off, Lady?



I mean, sell 'em here, Sir?



She's very quick: for sale they are not meant sure.



For sanctity I think much less: good ev'n Sir.



Nay noble Lady, stay: 'tis you must wear 'em:
Never look strange, they are worthy your best beauty.



Did you speak to me?



To you or to none living:
To you they are sent, to you they are sacrificed.



I'll never look a Horse i'th' mouth that's given:
I thank ye, Sir: I'll send one to reward ye.



Do you never ask who sent 'em?




Nor never care, if it be an honest end,
That end's the full reward, and thanks but slubber it;
If it be ill, I will not urge the acquaintance.



This has a soul indeed: pray let me tell ye 



I care not if ye do, so you do it hansomly,
And not stand picking of your words.



The King sent 'em.



Away, away, thou art some foolish fellow, and now I think thou hast stole 'em too; the King sent 'em? Alas good man, wouldst thou make me believe he has nothing to do with things of these worths, but wantonly to fling 'em? he's an old man, a good old man, they say too: I dare swear full many a year ago he left these gambols: here, take your trinkets.



Sure I do not lye, Lady.



I know thou lyest extreamly, damnably:
Thou hast a lying face.



I was never thus ratled.
(Aside.



But say I should believe: why are these sent me?
And why art thou the Messenger? who art thou?



Lady, look on 'em wisely, and then consider who can send such as these, but a King only? and, to what beauty can they be oblations, but only yours? For me that am the carrier, 'tis only sit you know I am his servant, and have fulfil'd his will



You are short and pithy;
What must my beauty do for these?



Sweet Lady, you cannot be so hard of understanding, when a King's favour shines upon ye gloriously, and speaks his love in these 



O then love's the matter; Sir reverence love: now I begin to feel ye: and I should be the Kings Whore, a brave title: and go as glorious as
  42
the Sun, O brave still: the chief Commandress of his Concubines, hurried from place to place to meet his pleasures.



A deyilish subt il wench, but a rare spirit.




And when the good old spunge has suckt my youth dry, and left some of his Royal aches i' my bones: when time shall tell me I have plough'd my life up, and cast long furrows in my face to 〈◊〉 me.



You must not think so, Lady.



Then can these, Sir,
These precious things, the price of youth and beauty;
This shop here of sin-offerings set me off again?
Can it restore me chaste, young, innocent?
Purge me to what I was? add to my memory
An honest and a noble fame? The Kings device?
The sin's as universal as the Sun is,
And lights an everlasting Torch to shame me.



Do you hold so slight account of a great Kings 〈◊〉,
That all knees bow to purchase?



Prethee peace: If thou knewst how ill favouredly thy tale becomes thee, and what ill root it takes 



You would be wiser.



Could the King sind no shape to shift his pander into,
But reverend Age? and one so like himself too?



She has found me out.



Cozen the world with gravity?
Prethee resolve me one thing, do's the King love thee?



I think he do's.



It seems so by thy Office: he loves thy use, and when that's ended, hates thee: thou seemest to me a Souldier.



Yes, I am one.



And hast fought for thy Country?







May be, commanded too?



I have done, Lady.



O wretched man, below the state of pity!
Canst thou forget thou wert begot in honour?
A sree Companion for a King? a Souldier?
Whose Nobleness dare feel no want, but Enemies?

〈◊〉 thou forget this, and decline so wretchedly,
To eat the Bread of Bawdry, of base Bawdry?

〈◊〉 on the 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉? fling thy Sword from thee?
Dishonour to the noble name that nursed thee?
Go, beg diseases: let them be thy Armour's,
Thy sights, the flames of Lust, and their foul issues.



Why then I am a King, and mine own Speaker.



And I as free as you, mine own Disposer: There, take your Jewels; let them give them lustres that have dark Lives and Souls; wear 'em your
  43
self, Sir, you'l seem a Devil else.



I command ye stay.



Be just, I am commanded.




I will not wrong ye.



Then thus low falls my duty.



Can ye love me? say I, and all I have 



I cannot love ye; without the 〈◊〉 of faith I cannot hear ye; ye hand upon my love, like frosts on Lilies: I can dye, but I cannot love: you are answer'd.





I must find apter means, I love her truly.





Enter Demetr. Leon. Lieu. Gent. Sould. and Host.


Hither do you say she is come?



Yes Sir, I am sure on't: for whilst I waited 'on ye, putting my Wife in trust, I know not by what means, but the King found her, and hither she was brought; how, or to what end 



My Father found her?



So my Wife informs me.




Leontius, pray draw off the Souldiers,

I would a while be private.



Fall off Gentlemen, the Prince would be alone.

Ex. Leo. and Soul.



Is he so cunning? there is some trick in this, and you must know it, and be an agent too: which if it prove so 



Pull me to pieces, Sir.



My Father found her?
My Father brought her hither? went she willingly?



My Wife says full of doubts.




I cannot blame her,
No more: there's no trust, no faith in mankind.





Keep her up close, he must not come to see her:
You are welcome nobly now, welcome home Gentlemen;
You have done a courteour service on the Enemy
Has tyed his Faith for ever; you shall find it;
Ye are not now in's debt Son: still your sad looks?

Leontius, what's the matter?



Truth Sir, I know not.
We have been merry since we went.








Come, what's the matter now? do you want money?
Sure he has heard o'th' wench.



Is that a want, Sir?

I would fain speak to your Grace.



You may do freely.



And not deserve your anger?



That you may too.



There was a Gentlewoman, and sometime my prisoner,
Which I thought well of Sir: your Grace conceives me.



I do indeed, and with much grief conceive ye; with full as much grief as your Mother bare you. There was such a Woman: would I might as well say, there was no such, Demetrius.



She was vertuous, and therefore not unfit my youth to love her: she was as fair 



Her beauty I'll proclaim too, to be as rich as ever raign'd in Woman; but how she made that good, the Devil knows.



She was O Heaven!



The Hell to all thy glories,
Swallow'd thy youth, made Shipwrack of thine honour: she was a Devil.



Ye are my Father, Sir.



And since ye take a pride to shew your follies,
I'll muster 'em, and all the World shall view 'em.



What heat is this? the Kings eyes speak his Anger.



Thou hast abus'd thy youth, drawn to thy Fellowship, instead of Arts and Arms, a Womans kisses, the subtilties, and soft heats of a Harlot.



Good Sir, mistake her not.



A Witch, a Sorceress:
I tell thee but the truth; and hear Demetrius,

Which has so dealt upon thy blood with charms,
Devilish and dark; so lockt up all thy Vertues;
So pluckt thee back from what thou sprungst from, glorious.



O Heaven, that any tongue but his durst say this!
That any heart durst harbour it! Dread Father,
If for the innocent the gods allow us
To bend our knees 



Away, thou art bewitch'd still;
Though she be dead, her power still lives upon thee.



Dead? O sacred Sir: Dead did you say?



She is dead, fool.



It is not possible: be not so angry,
Say she is faln under your sad displeasure,
Or any thing but dead, say she is banished,
Invent a crime, and I'll believe it, Sir.



Dead by the Law: we found her Hell, and her,
I mean her Charms and Spells, for which she perish'd,
And she confest she drew thee to thy ruine,
And purpos'd it, purpos'd my Empires overthrow.



But is she dead? Was there no pity Sir?
If her youth err'd, Was there no mercy shown her?
Did 〈◊〉 look on her Face, when ye Condemn'd her?



I look'd into her heart, and there she was hideous.



Can she be dead? Can vertue fall untimely?



She is dead, deservingly she died.



I have done then. O matchless sweetness, whither art thou vanish∣ed? O thou fair soul of all thy Sex, what Paradise hast thou inrich'd and blest? I am your Son, Sir, and to all you shall command stand most obedi∣ent; only a little time I must intreat you to study to forget her; 'twill not be long, Sir, nor I long after it: Art thou dead Celia? Dead my poor Wench? my joy, pluckt green with violence: O fair sweet flower, farewell? Come thou destroyer Sorrow, thou melter of the Soul, dwell with me; dwell with me solitary thoughts, tears, cryings, nothing that loves the day, love me, or seek me, nothing that loves its own life haunt about me: and Love, I charge thee, never charm mine eyes more, nor ne're betray a Beauty to my curses: for I shall curse all now, hate all, forswear all, and all the brood of fruitful nature yex at, for she is gone that was all, and I nothing 




This opinion must be maintain'd.



It shall be, Sir.



Let him go; I can at mine own pleasure draw him to th' right again: wait your Instructions, and see the Souldier paid Leontius: once more ye are wellcome all.



Health to your Majesty.




Thou wentest along the journey, How canst thou tell?




I did, but I am sure 'tis so: had I 〈◊〉 behind,

I think this had not proved.



A Wench the reason?



Who's that talks of a Wench there?








Where is this Wench; good Colonel?



Prithee hold thy Peace: Who calls thee to Counsel?



Why, if there be a Wench 



'Tis sit thou know her:



That I'll say for thee, and as fit thou art for her,
Let her be mew'd or stopt: How is it Gentlemen?




He's wondrous discontent, he'll speak to no Man.




H'has taken his Chamber close, admits no entrance;
Tears in his eyes, and cryings out.




And now I wish my self half hang'd e're I went this journey.



What is this Woman?







I cannot tell ye,
But handsome as Heaven.



She is not so high I hope, Sir.








I, that would be known.








I cannot show ye neither;
The King has now dispos'd of her.



There lies the matter:
VVill he admit none to come to comfort him?




Not any near, nor, let 'em knock their hearts out,
VVill never speak.



'Tis the best way if he have her;
For look you, a Man would be loth to be disturb'd in's pastime;
'Tis every good Man's case.



'Tis all thy Living, we must not suffer this, we dare not suffer it: for when these tender Souls meet deep 〈◊〉, they are not strong enough to struggle with 'em, but drop away as Snow does, from a Mountain, and in the torrent of their own sighs sink themselves: I will, and must speak to him.



So must I too:
He promis'd me a charge.



Of what? of Children
Upon my Conscience, thou hast a double company,
And all of thy own 〈◊◊〉.



That's all one, I'll raise 'em to a Regiment, und then command 'em, when they turn disobedient, unbeget 'em: knock 'em o'th' head, and put in new.



A rare way; but for all this, thou art not valiant enough to dare to see the Prince now?



Do ye think he's angry?









To the endangering of any Man 〈◊〉 near him.




Yet, if thou couldst but win him out, what e're thy suit were, believe it granted presently.



Yet thou must think though,
That in the doing he may break upon ye,
And 



If he do not kill me.







For half a dozen hurts.



Art thou so valiant?



Not absolutely so neither: no it cannot be, I want my Impostumes, and my things about mt, yet I'll make danger, Colonel.



'Till be rare sport, howe'r it take; give me thy hand; if thou dost this, I'll raise thee up a Horse Troop, take my word for't.



VVhat may be done by humane Man.








Away before he cool: he will relapse else.





Enter Antigonus, Menippus, and〈◊〉.


VVill she not yield?



For all we can urge to her;
I swore you would Marry her, she laugh'd extreamly,
And then she rail'd like Thunder.



Call in the Magician.Enter Magician with a Bowl.


I must, and will obtain her, I am ashes else.
Are all the Philters in? Charms, Powder, Roots?



They are all in; and now I only stay
The Invocation of some helping Spirits.



To your work then, and dispatch.



Sit still, and fear not.




I shall ne'r 〈◊〉 these sights.



Away with the VVoman: go wait without.



VVhen the Devil's gone, pray call me.
(Exit.



Be sure you make it powerful enough.



Pray doubt not He Conjures.

A SONG.RIse from the Shades below,
All you that prove
The helps of looser Love;
Rise and beslow
Vpon this Cup, whatever may compel
By powerful Charm, and unresisted Spell.
A Heart un-warm'd to melt in Loves desires,
Distill into this Liquor all your fires:
Heats, longings, tears,
But keep back frozen fears;
That she may know, that has 〈◊〉 power desy'd,
Art is a power that will not be deny'd.

The ANSVVER.I Obey, I Obey,
And am come to view the 〈◊〉,
Brought along, all may 〈◊〉,
All the Earth has, and our 〈◊〉:
Here's a little, little Flower,
This will make her sweat an hour,
Then unto such slames arise,
A thousand joys will not suffice.
Here's the powder of the Moon,
With which she caught Endymion;

The powerful Tears that Venus cry'd,
When the Boy Adonis dy'd
Here's Medea's Charm, with which

Jason's heart she did bewitch,

Omphale this Spell put in,
When she made the Libyan spin.
This dull root pluckt from Lethe〈◊〉,
Purges all pure thoughts, and good.


These I 〈◊〉 thus, round, round, round,
Whilst our light feet beat the ground.




Now Sir, 'tis full, and whosoever drinks this
Shall violently 〈◊〉 upon your Person,
And never 〈◊◊〉 eat 〈◊〉:
So 〈◊〉 hours 'twill work, and work with Violence;
And those expir'd, 'tis done. You have my art, Sir.





See him rewarded liberally Leucippe,

Here, take this Bowl, and when she calls for Wine next,
Be sure you give her this, and see her drink it;
Delay no time when she calls next.







Let none else touch it on your life.




I am charg'd, Sir.



Now if she have an Antidote Art, let her 'scape me.
(Exeunt.






There's the Door, Lieutenant, if you dare do any thing.



Here's no man waits.




H'as given a charge that none shall,
Nor none shall come within the hearing of him:
Dare ye go forward?



Let me put on my Skull first.
My head's almost beaten into th' pap of an Apple.
Are there no Guns i'th door?



The Rogue will do it.
And yet I know he has no 〈◊〉 to't.



What 〈◊◊〉 when I knock, for stones,
For those may pepper 〈◊◊◊〉 none.








If I be 〈1 line〉









Away, 〈◊◊◊〉 that then? I'll knock softly.
Pray heaven he speaks in a low voice now to comfort me:

I feel I have no heart to't: Is't well, Gentlemen?
Colonel, my Troop 








Here is a window, I will see, stand wide.
By he's charging of a Gun.



There's no such matter.
There's no body in this room.




Now I'll knock louder; if he say who's there?
As sure he has so much manners, then will I answer him
So finely and demurely; my Troop Colonel 
Knocks louder.




Knock louder, Fool, he hears not.



You fool, do you.
Do and you dare now.





I do not undertake it.



Then hold your peace, and mddle with your own matters.



Now he will knock.
(Knocks louder.



Sir, Sir, will't please you hear Sir? your Grace, I'll look again, what's that?



He's there now. Lord! How he stares! I ne'r yet saw him thus, alter'd: Stand now, and take the Troop.



Would I were in't, and a good horse under me: I must knock again, the Devil's at my fingers ends: He comes now. Now Colonel, if I live 



The Troop's thine own Boy.
Enter Demetrius, a Pistol.



What desperate fool, ambitious of his ruine?



Your Father, would desire ye, Sir, to come to dinner.



Thou art no more.



Now, now, now, now.



Poor Coxcomb: why do I aim at thee?
Exit.



His fear 〈◊〉 kill'd him.
Enter Leucippe with a Bowl.




I protest he's almost stiff: bend him and rub him, hold his Nose close, you if you be a woman, help us a little: here's a man near perish'd.



Alas alas, I have nothing here about me. Look to my Bowl; I'll run in presently and fetch some waters: bend him, and set him upwards.
Exit.



A goodly man Here's a brave heart: he's warm again: you shall not leave us i'th' 〈◊〉 so, Sirrah.




Now he breaths too.



If we had but any drink to raise his Spirits. What's that i'th' Bowl? upon my life, good Liquor, she would not own it else.








Look up Boy. And take this Cup, and drink it off; I'll pledge thee. Guide it to his mouth, he swallows heartily.




Oh! fear and sorrow's dry; 'tis off 







Am I not shot?



A way with him, and chear him: thou hast won thy Troop.



I think I won it bravely.



Go, I must see the Prince, he must not live thus; and let me hear an hour hence from ye. Well Sir 






Here, here: where's the sick Gentleman?



He's up, and gone, Lady.



Alas, that I came so late.



He must still thank ye; ye left that in a Cup here did him comfort.



That in the Bowl?



Yes truly, very much comfort, he drank it off, and after it spoke lustily.



Did he drink it all?







The Devil choak him; I am undone: h'as twenty Devils in him; undone for ever, left he none?







No, not a drop: what shall become of me now? had he no where else to swound? a vengeance swound him: Undone, undone, undone: stay, I can lye yet and swear too at a pinch, that's all my comfort. Look to him; I say look to him, and but mark what follows.
Exit.





What a Devil ails the Woman? here comes the Prince again, with such a sadness on his sace, as sorrow, sorrow her self but poorly imitates. Sorrow of Sorrows on that heart that caus'd it.



Why might she not be false and treacherous to me? and found so by my Father? she was a Woman, and many a one of that Sex, young and fair, as full of faith as she, have fallen, and foully.



It is a Wench! O that I knew the circumstance.



Why might not, to preserve me from this ruine, she having lost her honour, and abused me, my father change the forms o'th' coins, and execute his anger on a falt she ne'r committed, only to keep me safe? why should I think so? She never was to me, but all obedience, sweetness and love.



How heartily he weeps now? I have not wept this thirty years, and upward; but now, if I should be hang'd I cannot hold from't: It grieves me to the heart.



Who's that that mocks me?




A plague of him that mocks ye: I grieve truly, truly, and heartily to 〈◊〉 you thus, Sir: and if it lay in my power, gods are my witness, who e'r he be that took your sweet peace from you; I am not so old yet, nor want I spirit 



No more of that, no more Leonitus, revenges are the gods: our part is sufferance: farewel, I shall not see thee long.



Good Sir, tell me the cause, I know there is a woman in't; do you hold me faithful? dare you trust your Souldier? sweet Prince, the cause?




I must not, dare not tell it, and as thou art an honest man, enquire not.



Will ye be merry then?




I am, wondrous 〈◊〉




'Tis wondrous well: you think now this becomes ye. Shame on't, it does not, Sir, it shews not handsomely; If I were thus; you would swear I were an Ass straight; a wooden ass; whine for a Wench?







I will not leave ye for a tit.







For that you may have any where for six pence, and a dear penny worth too.



Nay, then you are troublesome.



Not half so troublesome as you are to your self, Sir; was that brave 〈◊〉 made to pant for a placket: and now i'th' dog-days too, when nothing dare love! That noble Mind to melt away and moulder for a hey nonny, nonny! Would I had a Glass here, to shew ye what a pretty toy ye are turn'd to.







Will ye but let me know her? I'll once turn Bawd: go to, they are good mens offices, and not so contemptible as we take 'em for: and if she be above ground, and a Woman; I ask no more; I'll bring her o' my back, Sir, By this hand I will, and I had as lieve bring the Devil, I care not who she be, nor where I have her; and in your arms, or the next Bed deliver her, which you think fittest, and when you have danc'd your galliard.



Away, and fool to them are so affected: O thou art gone, and all my comfort with thee! Wilt thou do one thing for me?



All things i'th' World, Sir, of all dangers.











Come near me no more then







Come no more near me: thou art a plague-sore to me.
Exit.



Give you good ev'n Sir; If you be suffer'd thus, we shall have 〈◊〉 sport. I will be sorry yet.






How now, how does he?



Nay, if I tell ye, hang me, or any man else that hath his nineteen wits; he has the bots I think, he groans, and roars, and kicks.




Will he speak yet?



Not willingly: shortly he will not see a man; if ever I look'd upon a Prince so metamorphos'd, so juggl'd into I know not what, shame take me; this 'tis to be in love




Is that the cause on't?



What is it not the cause of but bear-baitings? And yet it stinks much like it: out upon't; what giants, and what dwarffs what owls and apes, what dogs, and cats it makes us? men that are possest with it, live as if they had a Legion of Devils in 'em, and every Devil of a several nature; nothing but Hey-pass,, re-pass: where's the Lieutenant? Has he gather'd up the end on's wits again?




He is alive: but you that talk of wonders, shew me but such a wonder as he is now.



Why, he was ever at the worst a wonder.




He is now most wonderful; a Blazer now, Sir.



What ails the Fool? and what Star reigns now Gentlemen we have such Prodigies?




'Twill pose your heaven-hunters; he talks now of the King, no other language, and with the King as he imagines, hourly. Courts the King, drinks to the King, dies for the King, buys all the Pictures of the King, wears the Kings colours.



Does he not lye i'th' King street too?




He's going thither, makes prayers for the King in sundry languages, turns all his Proclamations into metre; is really in love with the King, most dotingly, and swears Adonis was a Devil to him: A sweet King, a most comely King, and such a King 




Then down on's murrow-bones; O excellent King, thus he begins, Thou Light, and Life of Creatures, Angel-ey'd King, vouchsafe at length thy favour; and so proceeds to incision: what thinst ye of this sorrow?




Will as familiarly kiss the Kings horses as they pass by him: ready to ravish his footmen.



Why, this is above Ela? but how comes this?




Nay that's to understand yet, but thus it is, and this part but the poorest, 'twould make a man leap over the Moon to see him act these.




With sighs as though his heart would break: cry like a breech'd boy, not eat a bit.



I must go see him presently, for this is such a gig, for certain Gentle∣men, the Fiend rides on a Fiddle-stick.








Can ye guide me to him for half an hour? I am his to see the miracle.




We sure shall start him.
Exeunt.





Enter Antigonus and Leucippe.


Are you sure she drank it?



Now must I lye most considently. Yes Sir, she has drunk it off.



How works it with her?



I see no alteration yet.



There will be, for he is the greatest Artist living made it. Where is she now?



She is ready to walk out, Sir.



Stark mad, I know she will be.



So I hope, Sir.



She knows not of the Prince?



Of no man living 



How do I look! how do my cloaths become me? I am not very grey.



A very youth, Sir, upon my maiden-head as 〈◊〉 as April: heaven bless that sweet face, 'twill undo a thousand; many a soft heart must sob yet, 〈◊〉 that wither, your Grace can give content enough.
Enter Celia with a Book.







Here she comes, Sir.



How shall I keep her off me? go, and perfume the room: make all things ready.
Exit. Leu.



No hope yet of the Prince! no comfort of him! they keep me mew'd up here, as they mew mad folks, no company but my afflictions. This royal Devil again! strange, how he hants me! how like a poyson'd potion his eyes fright me! has made himself handsome-too.



Do you look now, Lady? you will leap anon.
(Aside



Cnrl'd and Perfum'd? I smell him; he looks on's Legs too, sure he will cut a Caper; God a Mercy dear December.



O do you smile now; I knew it would work with you; come hither pretty one.







I like those Court'sies well; come hither and kiss me.



I am reading, Sir, of a short Treatise here, that's call'd the Vanity of 〈◊〉: Has your Grace seen it? He says here, that an Old Man's loose de∣sire, 〈◊〉 like the Glow-worms light, the Apes so wondr'd at: which, when they gather'd Sticks, and laid upon't, and blew, and blew, turn'd Tail, and went out presently: And in another place he calls their Loves, 〈◊〉 smells of dying Flowers, carry no comforts; they'r doting, stinking Foggs, so thick and muddy, 〈◊〉 with all his beams cannot beat through 'em.



How's this? 〈◊◊〉 the 〈◊〉? you but foole still I know you love me.



As you are just and honest? I know I love and honour you: admire you.



This makes against me, fearfully against me.



But as you bring your power to 〈◊〉 me, your Traps to catch mine 〈◊〉 to 〈◊◊〉; as you 〈◊〉 out your 〈◊〉 to overwhelm me, Hell never haved good, as I 〈◊〉 you, Sir; and I dare tell it to your Face: What
  53
glory now, after all your Conquests got, your Titles, the ever-living Memo∣ries rais'd to you; Can my defeat be? my poor 〈◊〉, What triumph? and when you crown your swelling Cups to Fortune, What honourable Tongue can sing my Story? Be as your Emblem is, a glorious Lamp set on the top of all, to light all perfectly: Be as your office is, a god-like Justice, into all shed∣ding equally your Vertues.



She has drencht me now; now I admire her goodness; so young, so nobly strong, I never tasted: Can nothing in the power of Kings per∣swade ye?



No, nor that power command me.



Say I should force ye? I have it in my will.



Your Will's a poor one; and though it be a King's Will, a despised one. Weaker than Infants legs, your Will's in Swadling-Clouts; a thousand ways my will has found to 〈◊〉 ye; a thousand doors to 'scape ye, I dare die, Sir; as suddenly 〈◊〉 die, as you can offer: Nay, say you had your Will, say you had ravish'd me, perform'd your lust, What had you pur∣chas'd by it? What Honour won? Do you know who dwells above, Sir, And what they have prepar'd for Men turn'd Devils? Did you never hear their Thunder? start and tremble, Death sitting on your blood, when their sires visit us. VVill nothing wring you then do you think? sit hard here, and like a Snail curl round about 〈◊〉 Conscience, biting and stinging: VVill you not roar too late then? then when rou shake in horrour of this Villa∣ny, then will I rise a Star in Heaven, and scorn ye.



Lust, how I hate thee now! and love this sweetness! VVill you be my Queen? Can that price purchase ye?



Not all the VVorld, I am a Queen already, Crown'd by his Love, I must not lose for Fortune; I can give none away, sell none away, Sir, can lend no love, am not mine own Exchequer; for in anothers heart my hope and peace lies.



Your fair hands, Lady? for yet I am not pure enough to touch these Lips, in that sweet Peace ye spoke of. Live now for ever, and I to serve your Vertues 



VVhy now you show a god! now I kneel to ye: This Sacrifice of Virgins Joy send to ye: Thus I hold up my hands to Heaven that touch'd ye, and pray 〈◊〉 Blessings dwell about ye.



Vertue commands the Stars: rise more than Vertue; your present comfort shall be now my business.



All my obedient service wait upon ye.





Enter Leontius, Gentlemen, and Lieutenant.


Hast thou clean forgot the VVars?




〈◊〉 hold thy peace.




His mind's much elevated now.








I am 〈◊◊〉 with this Fellow



He will call me 〈◊〉 anon.




'Tis ten to one else.



O King that thou knew'st I lov'd thee, how I lov'd thee, and where, O King, I barrel up thy beauty.



He cannot leave his Sutlers trade, he VVoo's in't.







By this hand, when I consider 



My honest friend, you are a little sawcy.




I told you you would have it.



VVhen mine own worth 



Is flung into the ballance, and found nothing.




And yet a Soldier.



And yet a sawcy one.




One that has followed thee.



Fair and far off.




Fought for thy Grace.



'Twas for some 〈◊〉, you lye Sir.




He's the Son of a Whore denies this: VVill that satisfie ye?







Shall then that thing that honours thee? How miserable a thing soever, yet a thing still; And though a thing of nothing, thy thing ever.



Here's a new thing.




He's in a deep 〈◊〉 now.



I'll 〈◊〉 him our 〈◊〉 VVhen's the King's Birth-day?



VVhen e're it be, 〈◊〉 day I'll dye with Ringing. And there's the resolution of a Lover.




A goodly resolution sure I take it. He is 〈◊〉, or moop'd, or his brains 〈◊〉, Could he find no body to fall in Love with but the King, the good old 〈◊〉, to doat upon him too? Stay, now I remember, what the Fat Woman warn'd me, bad me remember, and look to him to: I'll hang if she have not a hand in this: he's conjur'd, go after him, I pity the poor Rascal; In the mean time I'll wait occasion to work upon the Prince.




Pray do that seriously.





Enter Antigonus, Menippus, Lords.






I am very sorry for't, and much asham'd I have wrong'd his Inno∣cence; Menippus, guide her to the Princes Lodgings, there leave her to his love again.



I am glad, Sir.



He will speak to none.



O I shall break that silence; Be quick, take fair attendance.








He will find his Tongue, I warrant ye; his health too;
(Exit.

I send a Physick will not fail.







We hear the Princes mean to visit us in way of truce.







Come; let's in then, and think upon the noblest ways to meet em.








There's no way now to get in: all the Light stopt too; nor can I hear a sound of him, pray Heaven he use no violence: I think he has more Soul, stronger, and I hope nobler: VVould I could but see once this Bea∣ty he groans under, or come to know but any circumstance. What noise is that there? I think I heard him groan: here are some coming; a VVoman too, I'll stand aloof, and view 'em.





Well, some of you have been to blame in this point, but I forgive ye: The King might have pickt out too some sitter VVoman to have tri'd his Valour.



'Twas all to the best meant, Lady.



I must think so, for how to mend it now: he's here you tell me.



He's Madam, and the joy to see you only will draw him out.



I know that VVomans Tongue, I think I have seen her Face too: I'll go nearer: If this be she, he has some cause of Sorrow: 'Tis the same Face; the same, most excellent VVoman.



This should be Lord Leontius: I remember him.



Lady, I think ye know me.



Speak soft, good Souldier:
I do, and know ye worthy, know ye Noble;
Know not me yet openly, as you love me;
But let me see ye again, I'll satisfie ye:

I am wondrous glad to see those eyes.



You have charg'd me.



You shall know where I am.



I will not off yet: She goes to knock at's Door: This must be she the 〈◊〉 told me of: right glad I am on't, he will bolt now for certain.



〈◊◊◊〉 Sir? I'll trouble ye no more: I thank your courtesie, 〈◊◊◊◊〉.









So now my 〈◊〉 are off: Pray Heaven he be here! Master, my Roy∣al Sir Do 〈◊◊〉 who calls ye! Love, my Demetrius.




〈◊◊◊〉 Quail-pipes, the Cock will Crow anon.




〈◊◊◊〉, when I call at your VVindow?



I 〈◊〉 him stirring: now he comes wondring out.





〈◊◊〉 sound sure: the sweetness of that Tongue draws all 〈◊〉 to it 〈◊◊〉 the shape too.




How 〈◊◊〉 upon her?



〈◊◊◊〉 eyes abuse me? 'tis she, the living Celia: your hand Lady?



VVhat 〈◊〉 this mean?



The very 〈◊〉 same Celia.




How do ye Sir?



Only turn'd brave. I heard you were dead my dear one, compleat, She is wondrous brave, a wondrous Gallant Courtier.



How he surveys me round? Here has been foul play.



How came she thus?



It was a kind of Death, Sir, I suffer'd in your absence, mew'd up here, and kept conceal'd I know not how.



'Tis likely: How came you hither Celia? wondrous Gallant: Did my Father send for ye?



So they told me, Sir, and on command too.



I hope you were obedient?



I was so ever.



And ye were bravely us'd?



I wanted nothing: My Maiden-head to a mote i'th' Sun, he's jealous: I must now play the Knave with him, tho' I dye 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 in my nature.



Her very eyes are alter'd: Jewels, and rich ones too, I never saw yet  And what were those came for ye?



Monstrous Jealous: Have I liv'd at the rate of these scorn'd questi∣ons? they seem'd of good sort, Gentlemen.







They were wondrous kind: I was much beholding to 'em; There was one 〈◊〉 Sir.







One 〈◊〉, a notable merry Lord, and a good Companion.



And one 〈◊〉 too?



Yes, there was such a one.












And thou most treacherous: my Fathers bawds by they never miss course; and were these 〈◊〉 with ye?







And was there not a Lady, a fat Lady?



O yes; a notable good wench.



The Devil fetch her.



'Tis ev'n the merriest wench 



Did she keep with ye too?



She was all in all; my bed fellow, eat with me, brought me acquainted.



You are well known here then?



There is no living here a stranger I think.



How came ye by this brave gown?



This is a poor one: alas, I have twenty richer: do you see these jewels? why, they are the poorest things, to those are sent me, and sent me hourly too.



Is there no modestie? on faith in this fair Sex?



What will this prove too? for yet with all my wits, I understand not.



Come hither; thou art dead indeed, lost tainted; all that I left thee fair, and innocent, sweet as thy youth, and carrying comfort in't; all that I hoped for vertuous, is fled from thee, turn'd back, and bankrupt.



By'r Lady, this cuts shrewdly.



Thou art dead, for ever dead; sins surfeit 〈◊〉 thee; the ambition of those wanton eyes betrai'd thee; go from me, grave of honour; go thou foul one, thou glory of thy sin; go thou despis'd one, and where there is no vertue, nor no virgin; where Chastity was never known, nor heard of; where nothing reigns but impious lust, and looser faces. Go thither, child of blood, and 〈◊〉 my doating.



You do not speak this seriously I hope Sir; I did but jest with you.



Look not upon me, there is more hell in those eyes, than hell harbours; and when they flame, more torments.



Dare ye trust me? you durst once even with all you had: your love Sir? by this fair light I am honest.



Thou subtle Circe, cast not upon the maiden light eclipses: curse not the day.



Come, come, you shall not do this: how fain you would seem angry now, to fright me; you are not in the field among your Enemies; come, I must cool this courage.



Out thou impudence, thou ulcer of thy Sex; when I first saw thee, I drew into mine eyes mine own destruction, I pull'd into my heart that sudden poyson, that now consumes my dear content to cinders: I am not now Demetrius, thou hast chang'd me; thou woman, with thy thousand wiles hast chang'd me; thou Serpent with thy angel-eyes hast slain me; and where, be∣fore I touch'd on this fair ruine, I was a man, and reason made, and mov'd me, now one great lump of grief, I grow and wander.



And as you are noble, do you think I did this?



Put all the Devils wings on, and flie from me.



I will go from ye, never more to see ye. I will flie from ye, as a plague hangs o're me; and through the progress of my life hereafter; where ever I shall sind a fool, a false man, one that ne're knew the worth of polish'd vertue; a base suspecter of a virgins honour, a child that flings away the wealth he cry'd for, him will I call Demetrius: that fool Demetrius, that mad man a Demetrius; and that false man, the Prince of broken faiths, even Prince Demetrius. You think now, I should cry, and kneel down to ye, petition for my peace; let those that feel here the weight of evil, wait for such a favour, I am above your hate, as far above it, in all the actions of an innocent life, as the pure Stars are from the muddy meteors, cry when you know your folly: howl and curse then, beat that unmanly breast, that holds a false heart, when ye shall come to know, whom ye have flung from ye.



Pray ye stay a little.



Not your hopes can alter me. Then let a thousand black thoughts muster in ye, and with those enter in a thousand doatings; those eyes be never shut, but drop to nothing: my innocence for ever haunt and fright ye: those arms together grow in folds; that tongue, that bold bad tongue that barks out these disgraces. When you shall come to know how nobly vertuous I have preserv'd my life, rot, rot within ye.



What shall I do?



Live a lost man for ever. Go ask your Fathers conscience what I suffered, and through what seas of hazards I sayl'd through: mine honour still advanced in spight of tempests, then take your leave of love; and con∣fess freely, you were never worthy of this heart that serv'd ye, and so farewel ungratefull 
Exit.







I'le follow her, and will sind out this matter. 
Exit.





Are ye pleas'd now? have you got your heart again? have I restor'd ye that?



Sir even for Heaven 〈◊〉, and sacred truth 〈◊〉, tell me how ye found her.



I will, and in few words. Before I try'd her, 'tis true, I thought her most unfit her fellowship, and fear'd her too: which fear begot that story I told ye first: but since, like gold I toucht her.



And how dear Sir?



Heavens holy light's not purer: the constancy and goodness of all women that ever liv'd, to win the names of worthy, this noble Maid has doubled in her: honour, all promises of wealth, all art to win her, and by all tongues imploy'd, wrought as much on her as one may do upon the Sun at noon day by lighting Candles up: her shape is heavenly, and to that heavenly shape her thoughts are angels.



Why did you tell me Sir?



'Tis true, I err'd in't: but since I made a full proof of her vertue, I find a King too poor a servant for her. Love her, and honour her; in all observe her. She must be something more than time yet tells her: and certain I believe him best, enjoyes her: I would not lose the hope of such a Daughter, to add another Empire to my honour. 
Exit.



O wretched state! to what end shall I turn me? and where begins my penance? now, what service will win her love again? my death must do it: and if that sacrifice can purge my follies, be pleas'd, O mighty Love, I dye thy servant 
Exit.










I Know he do's not deserve ye; h'as us'd you poorly: and to redeem himself 








I know it there's no way left.



For Heavens sake do not Name him, do not think on him, Sir, he's so far from me in all my thoughts now, methinks I never knew him.



But yet I would see him again.







I do not mean to lend him any comfort; but to asslict him, so to tor∣ture him; that even his very Soul may shake within him; to make him know, though he be great and powerful, 'tis not within his aim to deal dis∣honourably, and carry it off, and with a Maid of your sort.



I must confess, I could most spightfully asslict him; now, now, I could whet my anger at him; now, arm'd with bitterness, I could shoot through him; I long to vex him.



And do it home, and bravely.



Were I a Man?



I'll help that weakness in ye: I honour ye, and serve ye.



Not only to disclaim me, when he had seal'd his Vowes in Heaven, sworn to me, and poor believing I became his servant: but most maliciously to brand my Credit, stain my poor Name.



I would not suffer it: see him I would again, and to his teeth too: Od's precious, I would ring him such a Lesson 



I have done that already.



Nothing, nothing: It was too poor a purge; besides, by this time he has found his fault, and feels the Hells that follow it. That, and your urg'd on anger to the highest, why, 'twill be such a stroak 



Say he repent then, and seek with tears to soften, I am a Woman; a Woman that have lov'd him, Sir, have honour'd him: I am no more.



Why, you may deal thereafter.



If I forgive him, I am lost.



Hold there then, the sport will be to what a poor submission but keep you strong.



I would not see him.



Yes, you shall ring his Knell.



How if I kill him?



Kill him? why let him dye.



I know 'tis sit so. But why should I that lov'd him once, destroy him? O had he scap't this sin, what a brave Gentleman 



I must confess, had this not faln, a nobler, a handsomer, the whole VVorld had not show'd ye: And to his making such a mind 



Tis certain: But all this I must now forget.



You shall not if I have any art: go up sweet Lady, and trust my truth.



But good Sir bring him not.



I would not for the honour ye are born to, but you shall see him, and neglect him too, and scorn him.



You will be near me then.



I will be with ye; yet there's some hope to stop this gap, I'll work hard.





 Enter Antigonus, Menip. two Gent. Lieutenant, and Lords.


But is it possible this Fellow took it?




It seems so by the violence it wrought with, yet now the fits ev'n off.



I beseech your Grace.



Nay, I forgive thy Wife with all my heart, and am right-glad she drank it not her self, and more glad that the vertuous Maid escap't it, I would not for the VVorld 'thad hit: but that this Souldier, Lord how he looks, that he should take this Vomit; Can he make Rimes too?




H'as made a thousand, Sir, and playes the burthen to 'em on a Jews-trump.



He looks as though he were Bepist: Do you love me Sir?



Yes surely even with all my heart.



I thank ye; I am glad I have so good a subject: But pray ye tell me, How much did ye love me, before ye drank this matter?



Even as much as a sober Man might; and a Souldier that your Grace owes just half a years pay to.



Well remembred; And did I seem so young and amiable to ye?



Methought you were the sweetest youth 








I truly Sir: and ever as I thought on ye, I wished, and wished 



What didst thou wish prithee?



Lv'n, that I had been a Wench of Fifteen for ye, a handsom Wench Sir.



Why? God a Mercy Souldier: I seem not so now to thee.



Not all out: and yet I have a grudging to your Grace still.



Thou wast never in love before.



Not with a King, and hope I shall never be again: Truly Sir, I have had such plunges, and such bickrings, and as it were such runnings atilt within me, for whatsoever it was provok't me toward ye.







I had it with a vengeance, it plaid his prize.




I would not have been a wench then, though of this age.



No sure, I should have spoil'd ye.



Well, go thy ways, of all the lusty lovers that e're I saw  wilt have another potion?



If you will be another thing, have at ye.



Ha, ha, ha: give me thy hand, from henceforth thou art my souldier, do bravely, I'll love thee as much.



I thank ye; but if you were mine enemy, I would not wish it ye: I beseech your Grace, pay me my charge.




That's certain Sir; h'as bought up all that e're he found was like ye, or any thing you have lov'd, that he could purchase; old horses, that your Grace has ridden blind, and foundr'd; dogs, rotten kawks, and which is more than all this, has worn your Graces Gauntlet in his Bonnet.



Bring in your Bills: mine own love shall be satisfi'd; and sarrah, for this potion you have taken, I'll point ye out a portion ye shall live on.



'Twas the best draught that e're ye drunk.








Are the Princes come toth' Court?



They are all, and lodg'd Sir.



Come then, make ready for their entertainment, which presently we'l give: wait you on me Sir.




I shall love drink the better whilst I live boyes.




Enter Demetrius, and Leontius.


Let me but see her, dear Leontius; let me but dye before her.



Would that would do it: if I knew where she lay now, with what honesty, you having flung so main a mischief on her, and on so innocent and sweet a Beauty, dare I present your visit?



I'll repent all: and with the greatest sacrifice of sorrow, that ever Lover made.



'Twill be too late Sir: I know not what will become of you.



You can help me?



It may be to her sight: What are you nearer? She has Sworn she will not speak to ye, look upon ye, and to Love ye again, O she cries out, and thunders, she had rather love  there is no hope 



Yes 〈◊〉, there is a hope, which though it draw no Love to it, at least will draw her to lament my fortune, and that hope shall relieve me.



Hark ye Sir, hark ye: say I should bring ye 



Do not trifle with me?



I will not trifle; both together bring ye, you know the wrongs ye' done.




I do confess 'em.



And if you should then jump into your fury, and have another Querk in your head.







You must say nothing to her; for 'tis certain, the nature of your crime will admit to excuse.




I will not speak, mine eyes shall tell my Penance.



You must look wondrous sad too.



I need not look so, I am truly sadness self.



That look will do it: stay here, I'll bring her to you instantly: but take heed how you bear your self: sit down there, the more humble you are, the more she'll take compassion. Women are per'lous thing to deal upon.




What shall become of me? to curse my fortune were but to curse my Father; that's too impious; but under whatsoever fate I suffer, bless I beseech thee, Heaven, her harmless goodness.





Now arm your self.



You have not brought him?



Yes Faith, and there he is: you see in what poor plight too, now you may do your will, kill him, or save him.



I will go back.



I will be hang'd then Lady, Are ye a Coward now?



I cannot speak to him.







There was a Sigh to blow a Church down; So, now their eyes are fixt, the Small-shot plays, they will come toth' Battery anon.







Rail at him now.








I am glad on't.



Nor dare believe his Tears.



You may, blest Beauty, for those thick streams that troubled my Repentance, are crept out long ago.



You see how he looks.



What have I to do how he looks? How lookt he then, when with a poison'd Tooth he bit mine honour? It was your Counsel too, to scorn and slight him.



I, if ye saw sit cause; and you confest too, except this sin, he was the bravest Gentleman, the sweetest, noblest. I take nothing from ye, nor from your anger; use him as you please: for to say truth, he has de∣serv'd your Justice; but still consider what he has been to you.



Pray do not blind me thus.



O Gentle Mistriss, If there were any way to expiate a sin so great as mine, by intercession, by prayers, by daily tears, by dying for ye: O what a joy would close these eyes that love ye.



They say Women have tender hearts, I know not, I am sure mine melts.



Sir, I forgive ye heartily,
And all your wrong to me I cast behind me,
And wish ye a sit beauty to your Vertues:
Mine is too poor, in peace I thus part from you:
I must look back: gods keep your grace: he's here still.




She has forgiven me.



She has directed ye: Up, up, and follow like a Man: away Sir, She lookt behind her twice: her heart dwells here Sir, ye drew tears from her too: she cannot freeze thus; the Door's set open too, Are ye a Man? are ye alive? Do ye understand her meaning? Have ye blood and spirit in ye?



I dare not trouble her.



Nay, and you will be nipt i'th' head with nothing,
Walk whining up and down; I dare not, I cannot:
Strike now or never: faint heart, you know what Sir 
Be govern'd by your fear, and quench your fire out.
A Devil on't, stands this door ope for nothing?
So get ye together, and be naught: now to secure all,
Will I go fetch out a more soveraign Plaister.





Enter Antigonus, Seleucus, Lysimachus, Ptolomy, Lieutenant, Gentlemen, Lords.


This peace is fairly made.



Would your Grace wish us to put in more: take what you please, we yield it; the honour done us by your Son constrains it, your noble Son.



It is sufficient, Princes; and now we are one again, one mind, one body, and one sword shall strike for us.



Let Prince Demetrius but lead us on: for we are his vowed servants; against the strength of all the World we'll buckle.



And even from all that strength we'll catch at Victory.



O had I now recover'd but the fortune I lost in Antioch, when mine Unckle perish'd; but that were but to surfeit me with blessings.



You lost a sweet Child there.



Name it no more Sir; this is no time to entertain such sorrows; Will your Majesty do us the honour, we may see the Prince, and wait upon him?



I wonder he stays from us:


How now Leonitus, Where's my Son?











Your Graces are welcome: your son and't please you Sir, is new cashiered yonder, cast from his Mistris favour: and such a coil there is; such fending, and such proving; she stands off, and will by no means yield to composition: he offers any price; his body to her.



She is a hard Lady, denyes that caution.



And now they whine, and now they rave: faith Princes, 'twere a good point of charity to piece 'em; for less than such a power will do just nothing: and if you mean to see him, there it must be, for there will he grow, till he be transplanted.



Beseech your grace, let's wait upon you thither, that I may see that beauty dares deny him, that scornful beauty.



I should think it worse now; ill brought up beauty.



She has too much reason sor't; which with too great a grief, I shame to think of, but we'll go see this game.







Be you our guide Leontius, here's a new peace.





Enter Demetrius and Celia.


Thus far you shall perswade me, still to honour ye, still to live with ye, Sir, or near about ye; for not to lye, you have my first and last love but since you have conceiv'd an evil against me, an evil that so much concerns your honour, that honour aim'd by all at for a pattern: and though there be a false thought, and confest too, and much repentance faln in showrs to purge it; yet, whilest that great respect I ever bore ye, dwells in my blood, and in my heart that duty; had it but been a dream, I must not touch ye.



O you will make some other happy?



Never, upon this hand I'll seal that faith.



We may kiss, put not those out o'th' peace too.



Those I'll give ye, so there you will be pleas'd to pitch your 〈◊〉 ultra, I will be merry with ye; sing, discourse with ye, be your poor Mistriss still: in truth I love ye.





Stay, who are these?



A very handsome Lady.



As 〈◊〉 you saw.



Pity her heart's so cruel.



How does your Grace? he stands still, will not hear us.



We come to serve ye, Sir, in all our fortunes.



He bows a little now; he's strangely alter'd.



Ha? pray ye a word Leontius, pray a word with ye, Lysimachus?  64
you both knew mine Enanthe, I lost in Antioch, when the Town was taken, mine Uncle slain, Antigonus had the sack on't?



Yes, I remember well the Girl.



Methinks now that face is wondrous like her: I have her picture, the same, but more years on her; the very same.



A Cherry to a Cherry is not liker.



Sook on her eyes.



Most certain she is like her: many a time have I dandled her in these arms, Sir, and I hope who will more.



What's that ye look at, Princes?



This Picture, and that Lady, Sir.



Ha! they are near: they only err in time.



Did you mark that blush there? that came the nearest.



I must speak to her.



You'll quickly be resolved.



Your name sweet Lady?




Enanthe, Sir: and this to beg your blessing.



Do you know me?



If you be the King Seleucus, I know you are my Father.



Peace a little, where did I lose ye?



At the Sack of Antioch, where my good Uncle dy'd, and I was taken, by a mean Souldier taken: by this Prince, this noble Prince, redeem'd from him again, where ever since I have remain'd his Servant.



My joys are now too full: welcome Enanthe, mine own, my dearest, and my best Enanthe.



And mine too desperate.



You shall not think so, this is a peace indeed.



I hope it shall be, and ask it first.



Most Royal Sir, ye have it.




I once more beg it thus.



You must not be deny'd, Sir.



By me, I am sure he must not: sure he shall not; kneeling I give it too; kneeling I take it; and from this hour, no envious spight e're part us.



The gods give happy joyes; all comforts to ye.








Come, beat all the Drumes up, and all the noble instruments of War: let 'em sill all the Kingdom with their sounds: and those the brazen Arch of Heaven break through, while to the Temple we conduct these two.



May they be ever loving, ever young, and ever worthy of those lines they sprung; may their fair issues walk with time along.




And hang a Coward now; and there's my song.
Exeunt

