


Harcourt tying up his stockings, and Belville sitting by him.


HA, ha, ha! and so you are in love, nephew, not reasonably and gallantly, as a young gentleman ought, but sighingly, miserably so not content to be ankle-deep, you have sous'd over head and ears ha, Dick?







Nay, never blush at it when I was of your age, I was asham'd too; but three years at College, and half a one at Paris, methinks should have cur'd you of that unfashionable weakness modesty.



Could I have releas'd myself from that, I had, perhaps, been at this instant happy in the possession of what I must despair now ever to obtain heigho!



Ha, ha, ha! very foolish indeed.



Don't laugh at me, uncle; I am foolish, I know; but, like other fools, I deserve to be pitied.



Prithee don't talk of pity; how can I help you? for this country girl of yours is certainly married.



No, no I won't believe it; she is not married, nor she shan't, If I can help it.



Well said, modesty; with such a spirit you can help yourself, Dick, without my assistance.



But you must encourage, and advise me too, or I shall never make any thing of it.



Provided the girl is not married; for I never, never encourage young men to covet their neighbours wives.



My heart assures me, that she is not married.



O to be sure, your heart is much to be rely'd upon but to convince you that I have a fellow-feeling of your distress, and that I am as nearly ally'd to you in missortunes as in relationship you must know 



What, uncle? you alarm me!



That I am in love too.















And my mistress is just going to be married to another.







I knew my fellow-sufferings would please you; but now prepare for the wonderful wonder of wonders!







My mistress is in the same house with yours.







Well said, jealousy. No, no, set your heart at rest. Your Peggy is too young, and too simple for me I must have one a little more knowing, a little better bred, just old enough to see the difference between me and a coxcomb, spirit enough to break from a brother's engagements, and chuse for herself.



You don't mean Alithea, who is to be married to Mr. Sparkish?



Can't I be in love with a lady that is going to be married to another, as well as you, Sir?



But Sparkish is your friend.



Prithee don't call him my friend; he can be
  7
nobody's friend, not even his own He would thrust himself into my acquaintance, would introduce me to his mistress, tho' I have told him again and again that I was in love with her, which instead of ridding me of him, has made him only ten times more troublesome and me really in love He should suffer for his selfsufficiency.



'Tis a conceited puppy! And what success with the lady?



No great hopes, and yet, if I could defer the marriage a few days, I should not despair; her honour, I am confident, is her only attachment to my rival she can't like Sparkish, and if I can work upon his credulity, a credulity which even popery would be asham'd of, I may yet have the chance of throwing sixes upon the dice to save me.



Nothing can save me.



No, not if you whine and sigh, when you should be exerting every thing that is man about you. I have sent Sparkish, who is admitted at all hours in the house, to know how the land lies for you, and if she is not married already.



How cruel you are you raise me up with one hand, and then knock me down with the other.



Well, well, she shan't be married.  This is Sparkish, I suppose; don't drop the least hint of your passion to him; if you do, you may as well advertise it in the publick papers.



I'll be careful. 




An odd sort of a person, from the country I believe, who calls himself Moody, wants to see you, Sir; but as I did not know him, I said you were not at home, but would return directly; and so will I too, said he, very short and surly! and away he went, mumbling to himself.



Very well, Will. I'll see him when he comes.  Moody call to see me! He has something more in his head than making me a visit 'tis to complain of you, I suppose.



How can he know me?



We must suppose the worst, and be prepared for him tell me all you know of this ward of his, this Peggy Peggy what's her name?







Ay, ay, Sir Thomas Thrift's daughter, of Hampshire, and left very young, under the guardianship of my old companion and acquaintance, Jack Moody.



Your companion! he's old enough to be your father.



Thank you, nephew he has greatly the advantage of me in years, as well as wisdom When I first launched from the university, into this ocean of London he was the greatest rake in it; I knew him well, for near two years, but all of a sudden he tooka freak (a very prudent one) of retiring wholly into the country.



There he gain'd such an ascendency over the odd disposition of his neighbour, Sir Thomas, that he left him sole guardian to his daughter, who forfeits half her fortune, if she does not marry with his consent there's the devil, uncle.



And are you so young, so foolish, and so much in love, that you would take her with half her value? ha, nephew?



I'll take her with any thing with nothing.



What! such an unaccomplish'd, aukward, silly creature he has scarce taught her to write she has seen nobody to converse with, but the country people about 'em; so she can do nothing but dangle her arms, look gawky, turn her toes in, and talk broad Hampshire.



Don't abuse her sweet simplicity had you but heard her talk, as I have done, from the garden-wall in the country, by moon-light.



Romeo and Juliet, I protest, ha, ha, ha! Arise fair sun, and kill the envious ha, ha, ha! How often have you seen this fair Capulet?



I saw her three times in the country, and spoke to her twice; I have leap'd an orchard-wall, like Romeo, to come at her, play'd the balcony-scene, from an old summer-house in the garden; and if I lose her, I
  9
will find out an apothecary, and play the tomb-scene too, for I cannot bear to be cross'd in love.



Well said, Dick! this spirit must produce something but has the old dragon ever caught you sighing at her?



Never in the country; he saw me yesterday kissing my hand to her, from the new tavern-window that looks upon the back of his house, and immediately drove her from it, and fasten'd up the window-shutters.




Very well, Will. I'll go up to 'em.



I hear Sparkish coming up take care of what I told you not a word of Peggy; hear his intelligence, and make use of it, without seeming to mind it.








O, my dear Harcourt, I shall die with laughing I have such news for thee ha, ha, ha! What, your nephew too, and a little dumpish or so you have been giving him a lecture upon oeconomy, I suppose you, who never had any, can best describe the evils that arise from the want of it. I never mind my own affairs, not I. I hear, Mr. Belville, you have got a pretty snug house, with a bow-window that looks into the Park, and a back-door that goes out into it. Very convenient, and well imagin'd no young handsome fellow should be without one you may be always ready there, like a spider in his web, to seize upon stray'd women of quality.



As you us'd to do you vain fellow you prithee don't teach my nephew your abandoned tricks he is a modest young man, and you must not spoil him. 



May be so; but his modesty has done some mischief at our house my surly, jealous brother-in-law saw that modest young gentleman casting a wishful eye at his forbidden fruit from the new tavern window.



You mistake the person, Mr. Sparkish, I don't know what young lady you mean.



Explain yourself, Sparkish, you must mistake Dick has never seen the girl.



I don't say he has; I only tell you what Moody says. Besides, he went to the tavern himself, and enquir'd of the waiter, who din'd in the backroom, No. 4, and they told him it was Mr. Belville, your nephew that's all I know of the matter, or desire to know of it faith.



He kiss'd his hand, indeed, to your lady, Alithea, and is more in love with her than you are, and very near as much as I am; so look about you, such a youth may be dangerous.



The more danger the more honour, I defy you both win her and wear her, if you can Dolus an virtus in love as well as in war tho' you must be expeditious, faith; for I believe, if I don't change my mind, I shall marry her to-morrow or the day after. Have you no honest clergyman, Harcourt, no fellow-collegian to recommend to me to do the business?



Nothing ever sure was so lucky.  Why, faith, I have, Sparkish my brother, a twinbrother, Ned Harcourt, will be in town to day, and proud to attend your commands I am a very generous rival, you see, to lend my brother to marry the woman I love?



And so am I too, to let your brother come so near us But Ned shall be the man; poor Alithea grows impatient I can't put off the evil day any longer I fancy the brute, her brother, has a mind to marry his country ideot at the same time.



How, country idiot, Sir!



Taisez vous bete.  I thought he had been married already.



No, no, he's not married, that's the joke of it.



No, no, he is not married.








Not he I have the finest story to tell you by the by, he intends calling upon you, for he ask'd me where you liv'd, to complain of modesty there He pick'd up an old raking acquaintance of his, as we came along together Will. Frankly, who saw him with his girl, sculking and mu••led up, at the play last night he plagu'd him much about matrimony, and his
  11
being asham'd to shew himself; swore he was in love with his wife, and intended to cuckold him; do you, cry'd Moody, folding his arms, and scouling with his eyes thus You must have more wit than you us'd to have Besides, if you have as much as you think you have, I shall be out of your reach, and this profligate metropolis, in less than a week Moody would feign have got rid of him, but the other held him by the sleeve, so I left 'em; rejoic'd most luxuriously to see the poor devil tormented.



I thought you said, just now, that he was not married is not that a contradiction, Sir?





Why, it is a kind of a one but considering your modesty, and your ignorance of the young lady, you are pretty tolerably inquisitive methinks, ha, Harcourt! ha, ha, ha!



Pooh, pooh! don't talk to that baby, tell me all you know.



You must know, my boody of a brother-in-law hath brought up this ward of his (a good fortune let me tell you) as he coops up, and fattens his chickens, for his own eating he is plaguy jealous of her, and was very sorry that he could not marry her in the country, without coming up to town; which he could not do on account of some writings or other; so what does my gentleman, he persuades that poor silly girl by breaking a six-pence, or some nonsense or another, that they are to all intents married in heaven; but that the laws require the signing of articles, and the church service to compleat their union so he has made her call him husband, and bud, which she constantly does, and he calls her wife, and gives out she is married, that she may not look after younger fellows, nor younger fellows after her, egad; ha, ha, ha! and all won't do.



Thank you, Sir what heav'nly news, uncle!



What an ideot you are nephew! And so then you make but one trouble of it; and are both to be tack'd together the same day?



No▪ no, he can▪t be married this week; he damns the lawyers for keeping him in town; besides
  12
I am out of favour; and he is continually snarling at me, and abusing me, for not being jealous.  There he is I must not be seen with you, for he'll suspect something; I'll go with your nephew to his house, and we'll wait for you, and make a visit to my wife that is to be, and, perhaps, we shall shew young Modesty here a sight of Peggy too.




Sir, here's the strange odd sort of a gentleman come again, and I have shewn him into the fore-parlour.



That must he Moody! well said, Will, an odd sort of a strange gentleman indeed; we'll step into the next room 'till he comes into this, and then you may have him all to yourself much good may do you.  Remember that he is married, or he'll suspect me of betraying him.





Shew him up Will. Now must I prepare myself to see a very strange, tho' a very natural metamorphosis a once high-spirited, handsome, welldress'd, raking prodigal of the town, sunk into a surly, suspicious oeconomical, country sloven le voila.





Mr. Harcourt, your humble servant have you forgot me?



What, my old friend Jack Moody! by thy long absence from the town, the grumness of thy countenance, and the slovenlyness of thy habit, I should give thee joy you are certainly married.



My long stay in the country will excuse my dress, and I have a suit of law, that brings me up to town, and puts me out of humour besides, I must give Sparkish ten thousand pounds to-morrow to take my sister off my hands.



Your sister is very much obliged to you being so much older than her, you have taken upon you the authority of a father, and have engaged her to a coxcomb.



I have, and to oblige her nothing but coxcombs, or debauchees are the favourites now-a-days, and a coxcomb is rather the more innocent animal of the two.



She has sense, and taste, and can't like him; so you must answer for the consequences.



When she is out of my hands, her husband must look to consequences. He's a fashionable fool, and will cut his horns kindly.



And what is to secure your worship from consequences I did not expect marriage from such a rake one that knew the town so well: fye, fye, Jack.



I'll tell you my security I have married no London wife.



That's all one that grave circumspection in marrying a country wife, is like refusing a deceitful, pamper'd, Smithfield-jade, to go and be cheated by a friend in the country.







Well, never grumble about it; what's done can't be undone; is your wife handsome and young?



She has little beauty but her youth, nothing to brag of but her health, and no attraction but her modesty wholesome, homely, and housewifely that's all.



You talk as like a grazier, as you look, Jack why did you not bring her to town before to be taught something?



Which something I might repent as long as I live No, no, women and private soldiers should beignorant.



But prithee why wouldst thou marry her, if she be ugly, ill-bred, and silly? She must be rich then.



As rich, as if she had the wealth of the mogul she'll not ruin her husband, like a London baggage, with a million of vices she never heard of then because she's ugly, she's the likelier to be my own; and being ill-bred, she'll hate conversation; and since silly and innocent, will not know the difference between me and you; that is, between a man of thirty, and one of forty.



Fifty, to my knowledge  But see how you and I differ, Jack wit to me is more necessary than beauty: I think no young woman ugly, that has it; and no handsome woman agreeable without it.



'Tis my maxim He's a fool that marries; but he's a greater that does not marry a fool. I know the town, Mr. Harcourt; and my wife shall be virtuous in spite of you or your nephew.



My nephew! poor sheepish lad he runs away from every woman he sees he saw your sister Alithea at the opera, and was much smitten with her He always toasts her and hates the very name of Sparkish; I'll bring him to your house and you shall see what a formidable Tarquin he is.



I have no curiosity, so give yourself no trouble. You have heard of a wolf in sheep's cloathing, and I have seen your innocent nephew kissing his hands at my windows.



At your sister, I suppose; nor at her unless he was tipsy How can you, Jack, be so outragiously suspicious? Sparkish has promis'd to introduce him to his mistress.







Nay, prithee, Jack, leave me in better humour Well, I'll tell him, ha, ha, ha! poor Dick, how he'll stare. This will give him a reputation, and the girls won't laugh at him any longer. Shall we dine together at the tavern, and send for my nephew to chide him for his gallantry? ha, ha, ha! we shall have fine sport.



I am not to be laught out of my senses, Mr. Harcourt I was once a modest, meek young gentleman myself, and I never have been half so mischievous before or since, as I was in that state of innocence And so, old friend, make no ceremony with me I have
  15
much business, and you have much pleasure, and therefore, as I hate forms, I will excuse your returning my visit; or sending your nephew to satisfy me of his modesty and so your servant.




Ha, ha, ha! poor Jack! what a life of suspicion does he lead! I pity the poor fellow, tho' he ought, and will, suffer for his folly Folly! 'tis treason, murder, sacrilege! When persons of a certain age will indulge their false, ungenerous appetites, at the expence of a young creature's happiness, dame nature will revenge herself upon them for thwarting her most heavenly will and pleasure.









PRAY, sister, where are the best fields and woods to walk in, in London?



A pretty question! why, sister, Vauxhall, Ranelagh, and St. James's Park, are the most frequented.



Pray, sister, tell me why my Bud looks so grum here in town, and keeps me up close, and will not let me go a walking, nor let me wear my best gown yesterday.



O, he's jealous, sister.







He's afraid you should love another man.



How should he be afraid of my loving another man, when he will not let me see any but himself?



Did he not carry you yesterday to a play?



Ay; but we sat amongst ugly people: he would not let me come near the gentry, who sat under us, so that I could not see 'em. He told me none but naughty women sat there but I would have ventured for all that.



But how did you like the play?



Indeed I was weary of the play; but I lik'd hugeously the actors; they are the goodliest, properest men, sister.



O, but you must not like the actors, sister.



Ay, how should I help it, sister? Pray, sister when my guardian comes in, will you ask leave for me to go a walking?






But here comes my brother, I'll ask him, tho' I'm sure he'll not grant it.



O my dear, dear Bud, welcome home; why dost thou look so sropish? who has nanger'd thee?








Faith, and so she is, for crying for no fault poor tender creature!



What, you would have her as impudent as yourself, as arrant a gilflirt, a gadder, a magpye, and, to say all, a mere notorious town-woman!



Brother, you are my only censurer; and the honour of your family will sooner suffer in your wife that is to be, than in me, tho' I take the innocent liberty of the town.



Hark you, Mistress, do not talk so before my wife: the innocent liberty of the town!



Pray, what ill people frequent my lodgings? I keep no company with any woman of scandalous reputation.



No, you keep the men of scandalous reputation company.



Would you not have me civil, answer 'em at public places, walk with 'em when they join me in the Park, Ranelagh, or Vauxhall?



Hold, hold; do not teach my wife where the men are to be found: I believe she's the worse for your town ducuments already. I bid you keep her in ignorance, as I do.



Indeed, be not angry with her, Bud, she will tell me nothing of the town, tho' I ask her a thousand times a-day.



Then you are very inquisitive to know, I find?



Not I, indeed, Dear; I hate London: our place-house in the country is worth a thousand of't; would I were there again.



So you shall, I warrant. But were you not talking of plays and players when I came in? you are her encourager in such discourses.



No, indeed, Dear, she chid me just now for liking the player-men.



Nay, if she is so innocent as to own to me her liking them, there is no hurt in't.  Come, my poor Rogue, but thou likest none better than me?



Yes, indeed, but I do; the player-men are finer folks.



But you love none better than me?



You are my own dear Bud, and I know you; I hate strangers.



Ay, my Dear, you must love me only; and not be like the naughty town-women, who only hate their husbands, and love every man else, love plays, visits, fine coaches, fine cloaths, fiddles, balls, treats, and so lead a wicked town-life.



Nay, if to enjoy all these things be a town-life, London is not so bad a place, Dear.



How! if you love me, you must hate London.







But, Bud, do the town-women love the player-men too?



Yes, I warrant you.



Ay, I warrant you.



Why, you do not, I hope?



No, no, Bud; but why have we no player-men in the country?



Ha! Mrs. Minx, ask me no more to go to a play.



Nay, why, Love? I did not care for going: but when you forbid me, you make me as 'twere desire 〈◊〉.







Pray let me go to a play, Dear?



Hold your peace, I won't.







Why, I'll tell you.











First, you like the actors; and the gallants may like you.



What, a homely country girl? No, Bud, no body will like me.



I tell you, yes, they may.



No, no, you jest I won't believe you: I will go.



I tell you then, that one of the most raking fellows in town, who saw you there, told me he was in love with you.



Indeed, who, who, pray, who was't?







Was it any Hampshire gallant, any of our neighbours? Promise you, I am beholden to him.



I promise you, you lye; for he wou'd but ruin you, as he has done hundreds.



Ay, but if he loves me, why should he ruin me? answer me to that. Methinks he shou'd not; I wou'd do him no harm.







'Tis very well; but I'll keep him from doing you any harm, or me either. But here comes company, get you in, get you in.



But pray, husband, is he a pretty gentleman, that loves me?









What, all the libertines of the town brought to my lodging, by this easy coxcomb! 'Sdeath, I'll not suffer it.



Here, Belville, do you approve my choice? Dear little rogue, I told you, I'd bring you acquainted with all my friends, the wits.



Ay, they shall know her as well as you yourself will, I warrant you.



This is one of those, my pretty rogue, that are to dance at your wedding to morrow, and one you must make welcome, for he's modest.  Harcourt makes himself welcome, and has not the same foible, tho' of the same family.



You are too obliging, Sparkish.



And so he is indeed the fop's horns will as naturally sprout upon his brows, as mushrooms upon dunghills.



This, Mr. Moody, is my nephew you mentioned to me; I would bring him with me, for a sight of him will be sufficient, without poppy or mandragora, to restore you to your rest.



I am sorry, Sir, that any mistake, or imprudence of mine, should have given you any uneasiness; it was not so intended, I assure you, Sir.



It may be so, Sir, but not the less criminal for that My wife, Sir, must not be smirk'd and nodded at from tavern windows; I am a good shot, young gentleman, and don't suffer magpyes to come near my cherries.



Was it your wife, Sir?



What's that to you, Sir, suppose it was my grandmother?



I would not dare to offend her, permit me to say a word in private to you.




Now old surly is gone, tell me, Harcourt, if thou lik'st her as well as ever My dear, don't look down, I should hate to have a wife of mine out of countenance at any thing.



For shame, Mr. Sparkish.



Tell me, I say, Harcourt, how dost like her? thou hast star'd upon her enough to resolve me.



So infinitely well, that I could wish I had a mistress too, that might differ from her in nothing but her love and engagement to you.



Sir, Mr. Sparkish has often told me, that his acquaintance were all wits and railers, and now I find it.



No, by the universe, Madam, he does not rally now; you may believe him; I do assure you he is the honestest, worthiest, true-hearted gentleman;
  20
a man of such perfect honour, he would say nothing to a lady he does not mean.



Sir, you are so beyond expectation obliging, that 



Nay, egad, I am sure you do admire her extremely, I see it in your eyes. He does admire you, Madam, he has told me so a thousand and a thousand times have not you, Harcourt? You do admire her, by the world, you do don't you?



Yes, above the world, or the most glorious part of it, her whole sex; and till now, I never thought I should have envied you or any man about to marry: but you have the best excuse to marry I ever knew.



Nay, now, Sir, I am satisfied you are of the society of the wits, and railers since you cannot spare your friend, even when he is most civil to you; but the surest sign is, you are an enemy to marriage, the common butt of every railer.



Truly, Madam, I was never an enemy to marriage till now, because marriage was never an enemy to me before.



But why, Sir, is marriage an enemy to you now? because it robs you of your friend here? for you look upon a friend married, as one gone into a monastery, that is dead to the world.



'Tis indeed, because you marry him; I see, Madam, you can guess my meaning: I do confess heartily and openly, I wish it were in my power to break the match; by heavens, I wou'd.







Wou'd you be so unkind to me?



No, no, 'tis not because I wou'd be unkind to you.



Poor Frank, no, egad, 'tis only his kindness to me.







Come, dear Frank, for all my wise there, that shall be, thou shalt enjoy me sometimes, dear rogue: by my honour, we men of wit condole for our deceased brother in marriage, as much as for one dead
  21
in earnest: I think that was prettily said of me, ha, Harcourt? But come, Frank, be not melancholy for me.



No, I assure you, I am not melancholy for you.



Prithee, Frank, do'st think my wife, that shall be, there, a fine person?



I cou'd gaze upon her, till I became as blind as you are.



How, as I am? how?



Because you are a lover, and true lovers are blind, stock blind.



True, true; but, by the world, she has wit too, as well as beauty: go, go with her into a corner, and try if she has wit; talk to her any thing, she's bashful before me.







Nay, nay, Madam, let me have an earnest of your obedience, or go, go, Madam.






How, Sir, if you are not concern'd for the honour of a wife, I am for that of a sister; be a pander to your own wife, bring men to her, let e'm make love before your face, hust 'em into a corner together, then leave 'em in private! is this your town wit and conduct?



Ha, ha, ha! a silly wise rogue wou'd make one laugh more than a stark fool, ha, ha, ha! I shall burst. Nay, you shall not disturb'em; I'll vex thee, by the world. What have you done with Belville?





Shewn him the way out of my house, as you should to that gentleman.



Nay, but prithee let me reason with thee.





The writings are drawn, Sir, settlements made, 'tis too late, Sir, and past all revocation.



Them so is my death.



I wou'd not be unjust to him.



Then why to me so?



I have no obligation to you.







I had his before.



You never had it; he wants, you see, jealousy, the only infallible sign of it.



Love proceeds from esteem; he cannot distrust my virtue; besides, he loves me, or he would not marry me.



Marrying you, is no more a sign of his lo ve, than bribing your woman, that he may marry you, is a sign of his generosity. But if you take marriage for a sign of lo ve, take it from me immediately.



No, now you have put a scruple in my head; but in short, Sir, to end our dispute, I must marry him; my reputation wou'd suffer in the world else.



No; if you do marry him, with your pardon, Madam, your reputation suffers in the world.



Nay, now you are rude, Sir Mr. Sparkish, pray come hither, your friend here is very troublesome, and very loving.







D'ye hear that; senseless puppy!



Why, d'ye think I'll seem jealous, like a country bumkin?



No, rather be dishonour'd like a credulous driv'ler.



Madam, you would not have been so little generous as to have told him?



Yes, since you could be so little generous as to wrong him.



Wrong him, no man can do't, he's beneath an injury; a bubble, a coward, a senseless idiot, a wretch so contemptible to all the world but you, that 



Hold, do not rail at him, for since he is like to be my husband, I am resolv'd to like him: nay, I think I am oblig'd to tell him, you are not his friend Mr. Sparkish, Mr. Sparkish!



What, what; now, dear rogue, has not she wit?







Mr. Sparkish, do you bring people to rail at you?







How! no; but if he does rail at me, 'tis but in jest, I warrant: what we wits do for one another, and never take any notice of it.



He spoke so scurrilously of you, I had no patience to hear him.



And he was in the right on't.



Besides, he has been making love to me.



And I told the fool so 







Pshaw, to shew his parts We wits rail and make love often, but to shew our parts; as we have no affections, so we have no malice, we 



Did you ever hear such an ass!



He said you were a wretch below an injury.



























A senseless drivelling idiot.



True, true, true; all true.























If Harcourt would but kill Sparkish, and run away with my sister, I shou'd be rid of three plagues at once.



Hold, hold; indeed, to tell the truth, the gentleman said, after all, that what he spoke, was but out of friendship to you.



How! say, I am a fool, that is, no wit, out of friendship to me?



Yes, to try whether I was concern'd enough
  24
for you; and made love to me only to be satisfy'd of my virtue, for your sake.







Nay, if it were so, my dear rogue, I ask thee pardon; but why wou'd not you tell me so, faith?



Because I did not think on't, faith!



Come, Belville is gone away; Harcourt, let's be gone to the new play Come, Madam.



I will not go, if you intend to leave me alone in the box, and run all about the house as you use to do.



Pshaw, I'll leave Harcourt with you in the box, to entertain you, and that's as good; if I sat in the box, I shou'd be thought no critick I must run about, my dear, and abuse the author Come away, Harcourt, lead her down. B'ye, brother.




B'ye, driv'ler; well, go thy ways, for the flower of the true town fops, such as spend their estates before they come to 'em, and are cuckolds before they're married. But let me go look to my free-hold.
Enter a Servant Boy.
Master, your worship's servant here is the lawyer, counseller gentleman, with a green bag full of papers, come again, and would be glad to speak to you.



Now, here's some other damn'd impediment, which the law has thrown in our way I shall never marry the girl, nor get clear of the smoke and wickedness of this cursed town; where is he?




He's below in a coach, with three other lawyer, counseller gentlemen.








What ails you, Miss Peggy? you are grown quite melancholy.



Would it not make any one melancholy to see your mistress Alithea go every day fluttering about abroad to plays and assemblies, and I know not what, whilst I must stay at home, like a poor lonely sullen bird in a cage?



Dear Miss Peggy, I thought you chose to be confin'd: I imagin'd that you had been bred so young to the cage, that you had no pleasure in flying about, and hopping in the open air, as other young ladies who go a little wild about this town.



Nay, I confess, I was quiet enough, 'till somebody told me what pure lives the London ladies lead, with their dancing meetings, and junketings, and dress'd every day in their best gowns; and I warrant you play at nine-pins every day in the week, so they do.



To be sure, Miss, you will lead a better life when join'd in holy wedlock with your sweet temper'd guardian, the chearful Mr. Moody.



I can't lead a worse, that's one good thing but I must make the best of a bad market, for I can't marry nobody else.



How so, Miss? that's very strange.



Why we have a contraction to one another so we are as good as married, you know 



I know it! Heav'n forbid, Miss 







Don't sigh, Miss Peggy if that young gentleman, who was here just now, would take pity on me, I'd throw such a contract as yours behind the fire.



Lord bless us, how you talk!



Young Mr. Belville would make you talk otherwise, if you knew him.



Mr. Belville! where is he? when did you see him? you have undone me, Lucy where was he? did he say any thing?



Say any thing! very little, indeed he's quite distracted, poor young creature. He was talking with your guardian just now.



The duce he was! but where was it, and when was it?



In this house, five minutes ago, when your guardian turn'd you into your chamber, for fear of your being seen.



I knew something was the matter, I was in such a sluster but what did he say to my Bud?



What do you call him Bud for? Bud means husband, and he is not your husband yet and I hope never will be and if he was my husband, I'd bud him, a surly unreasonable beast.



I'd call him any names, to keep him in good humour if he'd let me marry any body else (which I can't do) I'd call him husband as long as he liv'd But what said Mr. Belville to him?



I don't know what he said to him, but I'll tell you what he said to me, with a sigh, and his hand upon his breast as he went out of the door If you ever were in love, young gentlewoman, (meaning me) and can pity a most faithful lover tell the dear object of my affections 







Yes, you, to be sure. Tell the dear object of my affections, I live but upon the hopes that she is not married; and when those hopes leave me she knows the rest then he cast up his eyes thus gnash'd his teeth struck his forehead would have spoke again, but could not fetch'd a deep sigh, and vanish'd.



That is really very fine I'm sure it makes my heart sink within me, and brings tears into my eyes O he's a charming sweet but hush, hush, I hear my husband!



Don't call him husband. Go into the Park this evening, if you can.









Come, what's here to do? you are putting the town pleasures in her head, and setting her a longing.



Yes, after nine-pins: you suffer none to give her those longings you mean, but yourself.



Come, Mrs. Elippant, good precepts are lost when bad examples are still before us: the liberty your mistress takes abroad makes her hanker after it, and out of humour at home: poor wretch! she desired not to come to London; I would bring her.



O yes, you surfeit her with pleasures.



She has been this fortnight in town, and never desired, till this afternoon, to go abroad.



Was she not at the play yesterday.



Yes; but she ne'er ask'd me: I was myself the cause of her going.



Then if she ask you again, you are the cause of her asking, and not my mistress.



Well, next week I shall be rid of you all, rid of this town, and my dreadful apprehensions. Come, be not melancholy, for thou shalt go into the country very soon, dearest.







Pish, what d'ye tell me of the country for.



How's this! what, pish at the country?



Let me alone, I am not well.



O, if that be all, what ails my dearest?



Truly, I don't know; but I have not been well since you told me there was a gallant at the play in love with me.







That's my mistress too.



Nay, if you are not well, but are so concern'd, because a raking fellow chanced to lye, and say he lik'd you, you'll make me sick too.







O, of that which is worse than the plague, jealousy.



Pish, you jeer: I'm sure there's no such disease in our receipt book at home.



No, thou never met'st with it, poor innocent.



Well, but pray, Bud, let's go to a play tonight.



No, no; no more plays But why are you so eager to see a play?



Faith, Dear, not that I care one pin for their talk there; but I like to look upon the player-men, and wou'd see, if I could, the gallant you say loves me: that's all, dear Bud.



Is that all, dear Bud?



This proceeds from my mistress's example.



Let's go abroad however, dear Bud, if we do't go to the play.



Come, have a little patience, and thou shalt go into the country next week.



Therefore I would see first some sights, to tell my neighbours of: nay, I will go abroad, that's once.



What, you have put this into her head?



Heav'n defend me, what suspicions! somebody has put more things into your head than you ought to have.



Your tongue runs too glibly, Madam, and you have liv'd too long with a London lady, to be a proper companion for innocence I am not overfond of you, mistress.



There's no love lost between us.



You admitted those gentlemen into the house, when I said I wou'd not be at home; and there was the young fellow too that behav'd so indecently to my wife at the tavern window.



Because you wou'd not let him see your handsome wife out of your lodgings.



Why, O Lord! did the gentleman come hither to see me indeed?



No, no, you are not the cause of that damn'd question too.



Come, pray, Bud, let's go abroad before 'tis late; for I will go, that's flat and plain only into the Park.



So! the obstinacy already of the town-wife; and I must, whilst she's here, humour her like one.  How shall we do, that she may not be seen or known?



Muffle her up with a bonnet and handkerchief, and I'll go with her to avoid suspicion.



And run into more danger. No, no, I am obliged to you for your kindness, but she shan't stir without me.



What will you do then?



What, shall we go? I am sick with staying at home: if I don't walk in the Park, I'll do nothing that I am bid for a week I won't be mop'd.



O, she has a charming spirit! I could stand your friend now, and would, if you had ever a civil word to give me.



I'll give thee a better thing, I'll give thee a guinea for thy good advice, if I like it; and I can have the best of the ollege for the same money.



I despise a bribe when I am your friend, it shall be without fee or reward.



Don't be long then, for I will go out.



The taylor brought home last night the clothes you intend for a present to your godson in the country.



You must not tell that, Lucy.



But I will, Madam When you were with your lawyers last night, Miss Peggy, to divert me and herself, put 'em on, and they fitted her to a hair.



Thank you, thank you, Lucy 'tis the luckiest thought! Go this moment, Peggy, into your chamber, and put 'em on again and you shall walk with me into the Park, as my godson Well thought of, Lucy I shall love you for ever for this.



And so shall I too, Lucy, I'll put 'em on directly.  Suppose, Bud, I must keep on my petticoats, for fear of shewing my legs?



No, no, you fool, never mind your legs.



No more I will then, Bud This is pure.




What a simpleton it is! Well, Lucy, I thank you for the thought, and before I leave London, thou shalt be convinc'd how much I am obliged to thee.




And before you leave London, Mr. Moody, I hope I shall convince you how much you are oblig'd to me.











AND the moment Moody left me, and before I left his lodgings, I took an opportunity of conveying some tender sentiments thro' Lucy to Miss Peggy, and it was Lucy advis'd me to strole here this evening; and here I am in expectation of seeing my country goddess.



And so to blind Moody, and take him off the scent of your passion for this girl, and at the same time to give me an opportunity with Sparkish's mistress, (and of which I have made the most) you hinted to him with a grave melancholy face, that you were dying for his sister gad-a-mercy, nephew! I will back thy modesty against any other in the three kingdoms It will do, Dick.



What could I do, uncle? it was my last stake, and I play'd for a great deal.



You mistake me, Dick, I don't say you could do better I only can't account for your modesty's doing so much; you have done such wonders, that I, who am rather bold than sheepish, have not yet ceas'd wondering at you. But do you think that you impos'd upon him?



Faith, I can't say I am rather doubtful, he said very little, grumbled much, shook his head, and shew'd me the door. But what success have you had with Alithea?



Just enough to have a glimmering of hope, without having light enough to see an inch before my nose. This day will produce something; Alithea is a woman of great honour, and will sacrifice her happiness to it, unless Sparkish's absurdity stand my friend, and does every thing that the fates ought to do for me.



Yonder comes the prince of coxcombs, and if your mistress and mine should, by chance, be tripping this way, this fellow will spoil sport let us avoid him you can't cheat him before his face.



But I can tho', thanks to my wit, and his want of it; a foolish rival, and a jealous husband, assist their rivals designs, for they are sure to make their women hate them, which is their first step to their love for another man.



But you cannot come near his mistress but in his company.



Still the better for me, nephew, for fools are most easily cheated, when they themselves are accessaries, and he is to be bubbled of his mistress, or of his money (the common mistress) by keeping him company.





Who's that is to be bubbled? faith, let me snack; I han't met with a bubble since Christmas. 'Gad, I think bubbles are like their brother woodcocks, go out with the cold weather.








Come, you bubbling rogues you, where do we sup? O Harcourt, my mistress tells me, you have made love, fierce love to her last night, all the play long, ha, ha, ha! but I 



I make love to her!



Nay, I forgive thee, and I know her, but I am sure I know myself.







O, your servant, Sir, you are at your raillery, are you? You can't oblige me more I'm your man He'll meet with his match Ha! Harcourt! Did not you hear me laugh prodigiously at the play last night?



Yes, and was very much disturb'd at it. You put the actors and audience into confusion and all your friends out of countenance.



So much the better I love confusion and to see folks out of countenance; I was in tip top spirits, faith, and said a thousand good things.



But I thought you had gone to plays to laugh at the poet's good things, and not at your own?



Your servant, Sir: no, I thank you. 'Gad I go to a play, as to a country treat: I carry my own wine to one, and my own wit to t'other, or else I'm sure I should not be merry at either: and the reason why we are so often louder than the players, is, because we hate authors damnably.



But why should you hate the poor rogues? you have too much wit, and despise writing, I'm fure.



O yes, I despise writing. But women! women, that make men do all foolish things, make 'em write songs too. Every body does it: 'Tis e'en as common with lovers, as playing with fans; and you can no more help rhyming to your Phillis, than drinking to your Phillis.



But the poets damn'd your songs, did they?



O yes, damn the poets; they turn'd them into burlesque, as they call it: That burlesque is a hocus pocus trick they have got, which by the virtue of hictius doctius, topsey turvey, they make a clever witty thing absolute nonsense; do you know, Harcourt, that they ridicul'd my last song, twang, twang, the best I ever wrote?



That may be, and be very easily ridicul'd for all that.



Favour me with it, Sir, I never heard it.



What, and have all the Park about us?



Which you'll not dislike, and so prithee begin.



I never am ask'd twice and so have at you.


I.Tell not me of the roses, and lilies,
Which tinge the fair cheek of your Phillis,
Tell not me of the dimples, and eyes,
For which silly Corydon dies;
Let all whining lovers go hang,
My heart would you hit,
Tip your arrow with wit,
And it comes to my heart with a twang, twang,
And it comes to my heart with a twang.

II.I am rock to the handsome, and pretty,
Can only be touch'd by the witty;
And beauty will ogle in vain,
The way to my heart's thro' my brain.
Let all whining lovers go hang,
We wits, you must know,
Have two strings to our bow,
To return them their darts with a twang, twang,
And return them their darts with a twang.



At the end of the song Harcourt and Belville steal away from Sparkish, and leave him singing He sinks his voice by degrees at the surprise of their being gone; then
Enter Harcourt and Belville.



What the deuce did you go away for?



Your mistress is coming.
















Pray first take me, and reconcile me to her.



Another time: faith, it is to a lady, and one cannot make excuses to a woman.



You have need of 'em I believe.



Pshaw, prithee hide me.


Moody, Peggy, and Alithea appear.


Your servant, Mr. Moody.








Lau! what a sweet delightful place this is!



Come along, I say don't stare about you so you'll betray yourself 




He does not know us 



Or he won't know us 



So much the better 




Who is that pretty youth with him, Sparkish?



Some relation of Peggy's, I suppose, for he is something like her in face and gawkyness.










Be quiet, or you'll spoil all. They return Alithea has seen you, Sparkish, and will be angry if you don't go to her: besides, I wou'd fain be reconcil'd to her, which none but you can do, my dear friend.



Well, that's a better reason, dear friend: I wou'd not go near her now for her's or my own sake; but I can deny you nothing: for tho' I have known thee a great while, never go, if I do not love thee as well as a new acquaintance.



I am obliged to you indeed, my dear friend: I wou'd be well with her, only to be well with thee still; for these ties to wives usually dissolve all ties to friends.



But they shan't tho' come along.




Re-enter Moody and Peggy in man's clothes, Alithea following.


Sister, if you will not go, we must leave you  The fool her gallant and she will muster up all the young saunterers of this place. what a swarm of cuckolds and cuckold-makers are here? I begin to be uneasy.  Come, let's be gone, Peggy.



Don't you believe that I han't half my bellyful of sights yet?



Then walk this way.







Come along; what are you a muttering at?



There's the young gentleman there, you were so angry about that's in love with me.







I'm glad to hear that perhaps I may fit you tho'.



Sparkish, Harcourt, Alithea, come forward.


Come, dear Madam, for my sake you shall be reconciled to him.



For your sake I hate him.



That's something too cruel, Madam, to hate me, for his sake.



Ay, indeed, Madam, too, too cruel to me, to hate my friend for my sake.



I hate him, because he is your enemy; and you ought to hate him too, for making love to me, if you love me.



That's a good one! I hate a man for loving you! If he did love you, 'tis but what he can't help; and 'tis your fault, not his, if he admires you.



Is it for your honour, or mine, to suffer a man to make love to me, who am to marry you tomorrow?



But, why, dearest Madam, will you be more concern'd for his honour than he is himself? Let his honour alone for my sake and his. He has no honour.







But what, my dear friend, can guard himself.



O ho that's right again.



You astonish me, Sir, with want of jealousy.



And you make me giddy, Madam, with your jealousy and fears, and virtue and honour: 'Gad, I see virtue makes a woman as troublesome as a little reading or learning.



Come, Madam, you see you strive in vain to make him jealous of me: my dear friend is the kindest creature in the world to me.







But his kindness only is not enough for me, without your favour, your good opinion, dear Madam: 'tis that must perfect my happiness. Good gentleman, he believes all I say: wou'd you wou'd do so. Jealous of me! I wou'd not wrong him nor you for the world.



Look you there: hear him, hear him, and not walk away so. Come back again.




I love you, Madam, so 



How's that! nay now you begin to go too far indeed.



So much, I confess, I say, I love you, that I wou'd not have you miserable, and cast yourself away upon so unworthy and inconsiderable a thing, as what you see here.





No, faith, I believe thou wou'dst not; now his meaning is plain; but I knew before thou wou'dst not wrong me, nor her.



No, no, heav'ns forbid the glory of her sex shou'd fall so low, as into the embraces of such a contemptible
  37









No, no, dear friend, I knew it: Madam, you see he will rather wrong himself than me in giving himself such names.



Do not you understand him yet?



Come, come, you shall stay till he has saluted you; that I may be assur'd you are friends, after his honest advice and declaration: come, pray, Madam, be friends with him.




You must pardon me, Sir, that I am not yet so obedient to you.



What, invite your wife to kiss men? Monstrous! Are you not asham'd? I will never forgive you. Let's be gone, sister.



Are you not asham'd, that I shou'd have more confidence in the chastity of your family, than you have? You must not teach me, I am a man of honour, Sir, tho' I am frank and free; I am frank, Sir 








No impertinence shall drive me away.



Because you like it But you ought to blush at exposing your wife as you do.



What then? It may be I have a pleasure in't, as I have to shew fine clothes at a play-house, the first day, and count money before poor rogues.



He that shews his wife, or money, will be in danger of having them borrowed sometimes.



I love to be envy'd, and wou'd not marry a wife, that I alone cou'd love. Loving alone is as dull as eating alone; and so good night, for I must to Whitehall Madam, I hope, you are now reconcil'd to my friend; and so I wish you a good night, Madam, and sleep if you can; for to-morrow you know I must visit you early with a canonical gentleman. Good night, dear Harcourt remember to send your brother.





You may depend upon me. Madam, I hope you will not refuse my visit to-morrow, if it should be earlier, with a canonical gentleman, than Mr. Sparkish.












Yes, Sir, she is my sister.



'Tis well she is, Sir for I must be her servant, Sir. Madam 



Come away, sister, we had been gone if it had not been for you, and so avoided these lewd rakehells, who seem to haunt us.



I see a little time in the country makes a man turn wild and unsociable, and only fit to converse with his horses, dogs, and his herds.



I have business, Sir, and must mind it: your business is pleasure, therefore you and I must go diff'rent ways.



Well, you may go on; but this pretty young gentleman  shall stay with us, for I suppose his business is the same with ours, pleasure.







Pray let him go, Sir.







Had you not rather stay with us?  Prithee who is this pretty young fellow?







Who is he? I never saw any thing so pretty in all my life.







Here, nephew let me introduce this young gentleman to your acquaintance You are very like, and of the same age, and should know one another Salute him, Dick, a la Francoise.








I am out of my wits What do you kiss me for, I am no woman.



But you are ten times handsomer.



Nay, now you jeer one; and pray don't jeer me.



Kiss him again, Dick.








Why, what haste are you in? Why won't you let me talk with him?



Because you'll debauch him, he's yet young and innocent. How she gazes upon him! The devil!  Come, pray let him go, I cannot stay fooling any longer; I tell you my wife stays supper for us.



Does she? Come then, we'll all go sup with her.



No, no now I think on't, having staid so long for us, I warrant she's gone to bed I wish she and I were well out of your hands.  Come, I must rise early to-morrow; come 



Well then, if she be gone to bed, I wish her and you a good night. But pray, young gentleman, present my humble service to her.











And mine too, Sir.












O heavens! what do I suffer?



And this for me.







O the idiot now 'tis out Ten thousand cankers gnaw away their lips. Come, come, Driv'ler.








A little too much I fear.









Harcourt and Belville return.


What, not gone yet? Nephew, shew the young gentleman Rosamond's Pond, while I speak another word to this lady.



Shall I have that pleasure?



With all my heart and soul, Sir.





I cannot consent to it indeed.



Let 'em look upon the place where so many despairing lovers have been destroy'd You must indulge them and me too in a few words.




My brother will go distracted tho' he deserves to be vex'd a little for his brutality.



My nephew is a very modest young man, you may depend upon his prudence.









Where! How! what's become of gone whither? 



He's only gone with the young gentleman to see something.



Something! see something! with a plague where are they?



In the next walk only, brother.



Only, only, where, where? 




What's the matter with him? Why so much concerned? But, dearest Madam 



Pray let me go, Sir; I have said and suffered enough already.



Then you will not look upon, nor pity my sufferings?



To look upon 'em, when I cannot help 'em, were cruelty, not pity; therefore I will never see you more.





Gone, gone, not to be found; quite gone; ten thousand plagues go with 'em; which way went they?



But in t'other walk, brother.



T'other walk t'other devil! You are so full of vanity, and fond of admiration, that you'll suffer your own honour and mine to run any risque, rather than not indulge your inordinate desire of flattery. Where are they, I say?



You are too abusive, brother, and too violent about trifles; therefore let your jealousy search for them, for I know nothing of 'em.



You know where they are, you infamous wretch, eternal shame of your family; which you do not dishonour enough yourself, you think, but you must help her to it too, thou legion of 







False, false sister 
Exit Moody.




Shew me to my chair, Mr. Harcourt His scurrility has overpower'd me I will get rid of his tyranny and your importunities, and give my hand to Sparkish to-morrow morning.









No disguise could conceal you from my heart; I pretended not to know you, that I might deceive the dragon that continually watches over you but now he's asleep, let us fly from misery to happiness.



Indeed, Mr. Belville, as well as I like you, I can't think of going away with you so and as much as I hate my guardian, I must take leave of him a little handsomely, or he will kill me, so he will.



But, dear Miss Peggy, think of your situation;
  42
if we don't make the best use of this opportunity, we never may have another.



Ay, but Mr. Belville I am as good as married already my guardian has contracted me, and there wants nothing but church ceremony to make us one I call him husband, and he calls me wife already: He made me do so; and we had been married in church long ago, if the writings could have been finished.



That's his deceit, my sweet creature He pretends to have married you, for fear of your liking any body else You have a right to chuse for yourself, and there is no law in heaven or earth that binds you before marriage to a man you cannot like.



I'fack, no more I believe it does; sister Alithea's maid has told me as much she's a very sensible girl.



You are in the very jaws of perdition, and nothing but running away can avoid it the law will finish your chains to-morrow, and the church will rivet them the day after Let us secure our happiness by escape, and love and fortune will do the rest for us.



These are fine sayings, to be sure, Mr. Belville; but how shall we get my fortune out of Bud's clutches? We must be a little cunning, 'tis worth trying for We can at any time run away without it.



I see by your fears, my dear Peggy, that you live in awe of this brutal guardian; and if he has you once more in his possession, both you and your fortune are secur'd to him for ever.



Ay, but it shan't, tho' I thank him for that.







Ifackins, but we won't Your fine talk has bewitch'd me.



'Tis you have bewitch'd me thou dear inchanting sweet simplicity Let us fly with the wings of love to my house there, and we shall be safe for ever.



And so we will then there squeeze me again by the hand; now run away with me, and if my guardy follows us, the devil take the hindmost, I say.  Boo! here he is.








O! there's my stray'd sheep, and the wolf again in sheep's cloathing! Now I have recover'd her, I shall come to my senses again Where have you been, you puppy?



Been, Bud? We have been hunting all over the Park to find you.







But not where I was to be found, you young devil you Why did you start when you saw me?







But I'll take care you don't.



This gentleman has a favour to beg of you, Bud.




I am not in the humour to grant favours to young gentlemen, tho' you may. What have you been doing with this young lady? Gentleman I would say, blisters on my tongue!



Fie, Bud, you have told all.







As my guardian pleases.



No, no, it does not please me whatever I think he ought to see, I shall show him myself You may visit Rosamond's Pond if you will and the bottom of it, if you will And so, Sir, your humble servant.




What cursed luck!  to be prevented at the very instant of my carrying off the golden fleece! We have now rais'd his suspicions to such a degree, that he'll lock her up directly sign articles this night marry her in the morning and away from the church into the country. What a miserable situation am I in! I have love enough to be a knighterrant in the cause I will lose my life, or rescue my Dulcinea. I have hopes in her spirit too for at the worst she can open her window, throw herself into my arms, from thence into a post-chaise, and away for the Tweed as fast as love and four post-horses can carry us.



