


HAVE you deliver'd the cards as I order'd?


Yes, Sir but the one for Lady Brainless could hardly gain admittance.







Why, that formal cautious domestic, Mr. Timothy, said he would introduce me to his master, but that honour, from a knowledge of Sir Barnaby, I prudently declin'd.







Because, Sir, I have no great affection for bruised flesh, or broken bones.



Ha! ha! ha! a pretty fellow for a soldier, truly, to be afraid of a feeble old citizen.



Ah, Sir, you dont know the force and activity of his crab-tree crutch; besides, this love silences every other consideration; and runs us into as many hazards as war do you forget our midnight adventure, when the great tan-yard dog eased your coat of a skirt, and was very near pruning my body of a leg?



All the better, as in war so in love, dangers and difficulties beget glory and pleasure.



Very likely, Sir, but to hazard life and limb without hopes of a pension, is to be mere knights-errant.



Patience and perseverance may gain a pen+sion beyond thy utmost wishes.



There, Sir, you speak to the purpose; and I hope your honour wont think me the worse servant for having an eye to the main chance; as every day shows us that interest rules all ranks, from the general to the centinel; from the dutchess to the chamber-maid.



True; and you have a right to all the favour I can show, for rescuing me from those whisker'd hussars at Warbourg: what think you therefore of being provided with a good wife?



And a good fortune too, Sir.



Certainly: suppose Sir Scrapeall's sister, old mother Busy?



And a sad supposition, too Sir, I think, for if she had lived in Scotland, some century ago, her looks would have brought her to the faggot for a witch.



What I suppose nothing will go down with you but the roses and lillies of youth? don't you know, numscull, that beauty is one of the most fading and perishable commodities in the world? now old Busy, having received most of the injuries that time can do human nature, will be as engaging at last as at first: besides, you need not fear a rival.



Really I believe not, Sir, unless the devil himself turns gallant.



Besides, she has five hundred a year jointure.



Has she so, Sir? that makes a very great alteration, why she is not half so disagreeable as she was your honour's humble servant is not so nice,
  3
but he can find roses and lillies in the solemn hue of old gold, and the harmony of the spheres from chinking of guinea; sbut, Sir, there's one rub still, if I should make prize of this old crazy galleon, I must try to keep her above water, as the cargo is to sink with her; if I could but keep the gold, and send her to the bottom, it would be making a good cruise of it.



I warrant she has an old chest that will afford good spoil, and I have no doubt of your success.



Ah, Sir, I must be a dull scholar, indeed, not to have learned from you how to tickle female ears; and the view of a snug retreat, will make me encounter wrinkled cheeks, sunk eyes, toothless gums, and grey hairs, with as much alacrity as if youth and beauty were the prize.



On that will depend your success mother Sly shall prepare the way for a proper introduction.



But, Sir; there's another rub we had like to forget your honour knows that I have been forced to make some advances to Mrs. Ruelle, Lady Brainless's woman; now what shall I do to quiet her? she is a good friend, and may be a bitter foe.



Well observed, she is a necessary agent, and must not be lost; should she know you in your disguise, you must have recourse to your old method of lying; and if that won't prevail, my purse shall produce some irresistable arguments; she is a politic jade, and seems to know the value of a few guineas extremely well.



Yes, truly, I believe she does, Sir, and tho' possessed of a nimble tongue, can always be silent when interest tips her the wink.



Retire, I see Sir Charles I shall furnish you with necessary materials, and full instruction after dinner.
Exit Fusee.





Colonel, good-morrow, is not my visit unfashionably early?



Not at all, Sir Charles; an agreeable companion can never come unseasonably, save a wench in the case; as to fashion, she is a capricious jade, and below the regard of a sensible man.



How can that be? when no body, in general, pays a stricter regard to her rules than my friend?



you must not imagine that every custom I conform to commands my approbation; but as peculiarities, however rational, are rather offensive to the general eye, why should a man render himself disagreeably wiser than his neighbours; it is a peevish characteristic of age, to idolize the modes of its youth, for my part, I think revolutions in taste necessary; and cannot suppose, that either the morals, or understandings of mankind are injured by a social conformity.



Most certainly they are not.



So far then I am the voluntary subject, but never can become the slave of fashion.



To be free, Colonel, does not this sensible compliance proceed chiefly from the influence of the ladies.



To confess the truth I believe it may; and among us soldiers it is no more than duty; by our commissions we are ranked under the banners of fame and beauty, to render the cause of the former service, and the dictates of the latter obedience.



In which light, you have happily distinguished yourself; and if report speaks true, the ladies have not prov'd insensible to your merit; what fame may do 



Gives me very little concern; she is, an empty airy glittering bubble, as the song says; when   5
my country calls, my best endeavours are at her service, but for a mistress, let me have warm flesh and blood; lips to melt, and eyes to fire the heart.



Like those of Emmeline Fairlove.



Right, my friend; what were the glory of an Alexander to possession of such charms?



A mere aerial phantoms but prithee Frank, has that lady had the power to touch your heart in reality?



Touch, why she has shot it through and through with Cupid's arrows; made a perfect riddle of it, and, notwithstanding my love of freedom, I begin to think that matrimony alone can work its cure.



Ha! ha! ha! what the gay, gallant, and universal lover Colonel Parapet monopolized by a single happy fair one? after all, my friend, I am afraid that roving, dissipated heart of thine will hardly bear limitation.



Why so, Sir Charles; when that limitation proceeds from choice; gallantry is a pretty agreeable amusement for some years, at a man's first entrance into life; but like other light appendages of youth, should give place to more serious enjoyments.



So then you have at last determin'd to become a grave, city-like fellow.



Not that neither; a husband may have spirit without running at large; and a wife gaiety without indiscretion.



Dear Colonel, you have perfectly expressed pressed my opinion; should one happy day give Lady Charlotte to my arms, and Emmeline to yours, I have no more to ask of fortune.



Nor I; but you, my friend, have much the nearer prospect: however, fortune favours the bold; and having laid siege I am determined to carry on my operations with vigour; could I but
  6
secure the outworks I should have no doubt of the town.



By the outworks, I presume, you mean Lady Brainless and the amiable Mrs. Busy?



You are right and sure no mortal had ever greater contrast's to deal with; as to the former, being young, handsome, sprightly, and good natured, it is not a disagreeable point to flatter her vanity; but the old beldam is quite intolerable: however I have warm hopes of getting her off my hands immediately.







That you shall know hereafter the hour calls me at my agent's to sign some accounts; if you'll take a place in my chariot, and accompany me thither, I shan't detain you above five minutes, then I am yours as you please?



With all my heart.









LADY CHARLOTTE meeting EMMELINE.


Good morning to my dear Emmeline.



Lady Charlotte, your servant.



Oh, Emmy, I begin to think quality a sad incumbrance; so much ceremony, such fatigue, and so little society; that inexhaustable spirits, and very pliant reason are necessary to go through the whimsical round, why last night, now, at Lady Ombre's route, was I obliged to stay till the tell-tale sun rendered flambeaux unnecessary; and had not your Colonel gallanted me most pleasantly, I should have made a very humdrum, pitiful figure.







Nay, nay, don't change colour, child, every honest heart, like yours, speaks through the
  7
eyes, therefore you may as well confess; but you are diffident, and require help in these cases, so let me say for you, that Colonel Parapet is a pretty fellow.



Dear Lady Charlotte, your cordial regard commands my utmost confidence, and obliges me to acknowledge I have always thought him a man of merit.



Very well my dear, and when a woman of sense, in the single state, allows a batchelor merit, take my word for it, love is not far off; but I hope you have not betrayed your good opinion to his knowledge; for the men, like us, Emmy, grow vain upon being admired.



I hope, and believe, no word or action has revealed my opinion.



So much the better; hope kept at a distance, in the affairs of love, causes a more eager pursuit; there's my swain, Sir Charles Prudent, has paid his addresses to me these twelve months; yet has arrived at no point of certainty; nor do I know when he will; notwithstanding he has an exalted place in my esteem.



Your Ladyship's caution is the effect of good sense, and I flatter myself with considerable advantage from so prudent an example oh, I see my agreeable tutoress approaching.



Mercy deliver us from the nauseous wretch.




My dear Lady Charlotte, your very obedient humble servant; I profess it is such an age since I had the pleasure of seeing your Ladyship, that I quite languish'd to salute you.



You are infinitely obliging madam  odious creature.
(aside.)



Emmeline, your sister desires to see
  8
you 

and how does your good Ladyship; our little family is never so happy as when graced with your presence.



Such a profusion of compliments, madam, prevents all reply.



Your Ladyship flatters me, how should such a one as me that has never been at court but once to taste the Queen's caudle, cope with dear Lady Charlotte; tho' we see some good things in the city when Mr Alderman Busy was alive I never miss'd the ball on Lord Mayor's day, and I danced with such an air, that Mr. Deputy Stiffrump always chose me for his partner I might have been a Lady too, if my husband had my spirit but its no matter, there are so many paltry creatures with titles now a-days, I give myself very little concern about it.



You are certainly right, madam, it is better to deserve a title, than to wear one without merit.



Most infinitely polite I warrant your Ladyship hears a great deal of news, at the court end of the town



Really, madam, I seldom bend my attention that way.



No! suprizing! we in the city always love to know what stirring now I talk of stirrings, has your Ladyship heard that Sir John Rampant, carried off sukey Tallow-•akes?









Why I believe it has been in the news paper  I d•nt love to speak ill of any one; but I always said Sukey was a forward minx I am sorry for the mother, bec•use she is a nieghbour •d friend tho', between ourselves, there was odd 〈◊〉 of talk about her, when she was a girl as 〈…〉 dont •ovet•ttle-tattle scand I let other 〈◊〉•nswer for themselves but one must hear
  9
when things are talked of ah, there are sad doings in the world would your Ladyship believe it, a cousin of my own over the way but I shant say all I know neither.



You are perfectly right, madam, your humanity does not at all check my curiosity.



Nay its no secret, only one does not love to repeat such things but well I could have as soon suspected myself, never did she miss church, of prayer days, and twice of a Sunday: yet for all this sanctity 'tis not a week since a gallant was found as I live; found in her bedchamber.





perhaps, madam, there may be more scandal than truth in the story.



No, no, its true enough I thought I saw something suspicious a long time past; but I am good natured, and think the best; besides, being a relation, your Ladyship knows that 



I must change the subject
(aside)
pray, madam, has Colonel Parapet visited here lately?



Oh dear, yes we could not do without the Colonel; he is here three or four times a week, and is always pleased to say he finds more charms here, then throughout the whole circle of his acquaintance besides: oh he's a most engaging sensible man so grave, so prudent none of your feather-sculled fops: I assu•e your Ladyship, the Colonel and I have many a trate a trate conversation, as the French call it.



I shall laugh in her ignorant face  oh, Emmeline comes happily to my relief.
(aside)




Lady Charlotte, my sister begs to see you at her toilette.



I attend her madam, your humble servant.



Dear Lady Charlotte your most obedient  may I hope to see your Lad ship soon again?



With the first conve•ience, madam.



I shall insist upon it I shall be quite unhappy till then, as there is not a person upon earth, I more respect than dear, dear, dear, Lady Charlotte.



You quite overwhelm me, madam.



Nothing equal to your ladyship's deserts.



You oblige me to fly besides Lady Brainless expects me.



Since we must part so soon, I am your Ladyship's most obedient humble servant
(curtsies after Lady Charlotte to the door)
what a proud conceited piece of stuff it is dont you think so Emmeline?







That's so stange now because madam has got some quality blood in her veins, and wears some trinkumbob jewels, there's no-body so good as her I warrant; but for ought I know she is no better than her neighbours it is not for nothing that Sir Charles Prudent has dangled after her, and a swarm of fellows besides; but as the proverb says, a blot's no blot till it is hit.



Nay, madam, such innuendo's are too severe; for the world allows Lady Charlotte wit, beauty and virtue.



The world what world pray? and how come you to know the world; mind your needle child, that becomes you better than to contradict your elders her Ladyship, I suppose, would make you as great a rantipole as herself, and bring fellows about you, there's her virtue; but I'll take care my brother shall look sharp go order a pen and ink to my chamber
(Exit Emme.)
I'll
  11
write to the Colonel, such a dear man is not to be missed; and when I get him fast, I'll shew the young gill-flirts that I can hold my head as high as the best of them.
Exit.SIR SCRAPEALL discover'd perusing Accompts.
Hum hum hum let me see, gain'd by variations of stocks within the last six months, five thousand pounds ah, a good, a very good article that: this same Change-Alley, to men of true knowledge, is a second Mexico or Peru, what are your Oxford's and Cambridge's to it for education  what, indeed, but to go on lost by cargo of the ship Luckless coming to a bad market  fifteen hundred pounds a terrible article yet, mercy on us, what are the losses in trade to matrimonial cares ever since I married this fine, fashionable wife of mine, neither my head, my heart, nor my purse have had any rest  visiters distract my ears, cuckoldom haunts my sleep, and, while I am awake, my forehead feels a constant pain, as if it was breeding horns well, I have no body to blame for it but myself; I could not be satisfied while I was well, and now mercy on us! repentance comes too late  
ENTER TIMOTHY.
now, Timothy, what has all this knocking at the door been about this morning?



About compliments to her Ladyship, an like your worship; and here is a pack of cards they have left her.



Pox on their compliments and cards too gilt edges!  extravagant wretches!  like themselves fine without nothing within; eh Timothy?



To be sure, an like your worship all that glitters is not gold, as the old proverb says.



Right, Timothy, right  ah those old proverbs they are as much beyond your modern wit as let's see let's see what nonsensical stuff is written on them umph! ay Lady Fussoc's compliments to Lady Brainless; begs to be excused from her engagement, having got cold returning from the King's Theatre in the Haymarket last night I'm glad of it I'm glad of it; and I wish my hopeful wife had got one too, that would confine her to the house these three months eh Timothy?



Yes, Sir, that would do rarely, tho', lack aday, Sir, there would be such a croud of nurses, and visiters, and doctors, and surgeons, and apothecaries, that 



Say no more, Timothy, the horrid catalogue thrills through my blood, like the cold fit of an intermitting no, no, we'll have no pills, draughts and bolus's, in this house: so heav'n preserve her health or take her all together eh Timothy?



A very good prayer an like your worship.



Come, let's see another Colonel Parapet offers compliments, and how! what! have I got the military so near my citadel?



Oh, Sir, that must be the handsome, sprightly young gentleman, in scarlet and gold, that comes here so often.



A handsome, sprightly young gentleman, in scarlet and gold three dangerous articles in the way of five and twenty, wedded to such a husband as I am eh Timothy,



Very true, Sir and I am afraid there is something more than common; for last week, as he was going out, I saw him give Mrs Ruelle, my Lady's woman, half a guinea ay I saw him kiss her, and slip it into her hand at the same time.



Did you so, Timothy? then there's fine work in this family of mine; ah, these confounded red coats they strip our pockets of money, our wives of honesty, and our hearts of rest eh Timothy?




Ruelle, see if the chariot be almost ready so my dear, you and your prime minister, Timothy, have been in close consultation ha! ha! ha! never was master and man better paired; so much wisdom, such gravity; and then for appearance, our sagacious domestic might make a good figure amongst the curiosities of the Antiquarian Society; ha! ha! ha!



I wish, madam, I had been as prudent in the choice of all my family, as I was in taking this domestic, as you call him.



So my dove, that's a compliment for me well, certainly no woman ever had a more polished lord and master than mine; and that too, after eighteen comfortable months of marriage.



Eighteen months of slavery I say  galloping abroad or rioting at home is all the business of the female part of this family here now are a parcel of nonsensical messages enough to fright reason out of doors.




Nay, but Sir Scrapeall, in compassion to those delicate features of your's don't frown  Mrs. Rattlers compliments I suppose my love you have been perusing these little billets; now was that so polite when they are addressed to me? do I peep into your papers? do I scrutinize your affairs?



No truly, madam, my purse is the only affair of mine you dive into.



Well, Sir, and that I do for your credit, you love to get money and I to spend it▪
  14
how could you expect to make a figure in the world, if I was not to give some shining proofs abroad, of your industry at home?



Very hopeful reasoning indeed.



Most certainly my dear, you act with oeconomy, I with spirit; so that our affairs shine forth with respect and brilliance: but I know this is a subject you are not fond of, therefore to show myself a polite wife, I shall give it up and peruse my cards.




Mighty condescending truly so all my comfort for becoming a beggar is that I am made one politely ay, now madam is in her element  there smile; that must be from the handsome young fellow in scarlet and gold.



Do you know Colonel Parapet, Sir Scrapeall?



Ay, I thought as much
(aside)
no, not I.



Oh dear its a great pity, he's one of the most sensible, polite, gallant young fellows about town; a little conversation with him would be of infinite service, and so polish your contracted city notions positively you shall be acquainted with him.



Positively but I will not, madam.



Nay, that's so unkind, when the Gentleman is impatient to be intimate with you.



A cuckold making son of a whore 
(aside)
look you, my lady, few words are best, so in plain terms, I wont have such doings nor such visiters in my house; flesh and blood can't bear them, so determine upon a reformation, or madam  madam 



There is really too much of the spirituoso in your expression, Sir Scrapeall, it wounds my ear: had you politely attended our opera's, you would have attained a more melodious modulation; but since you are obstinate, and won't go
  15
to public places; what think you my dove if I should engage some of the best hands and voices, to perform once a week in our own room: you know as the poet says 

Music has charms to sooth a savage breast,
To soften rocks and bend the knotted oak.

and who knows what effect it may have upon you, my Adonis, ha! ha! ha! ha!



I am very much obliged to your ladyship, and am glad to see you so merry; but I'll have no tweedledum, tweedledum, in my house; if I catch any of the catgut tribe within my doors, I'll try which, their empty noddles or my cane is hardest.



I never knew before that cudgel-playing was an accomplishment for a city knight, ha! ha! ha!



Very well, madam, very well; but I'll do as I say for all your yah, yah, yah, music, quotha! if you are so fond of that can't you go to church, and hear three or four tunes upon the organ for nothing.



Church music! barbarous! worse than the sermon! and as bad as the humstrum of a rustic •iddle at a country wake what a solecism in taste to mention it!




Madam, the chariot is ready and the Countess of Rantipole is at the door in her sedan; and desires to speak three words to your ladyship.



Oh dear, I'll wait on her instantly.

Let me see, I have ten visits to pay, besides calling at Grogram the mercer's, and Dresden the millener's; so that I can't dine 'till five o'clock I know that's something late for your city appetite, Sir Scrapeall; but if you can't wait, your right-hand man, Timothy, can help you to a slice in your own polite way I have a world of
  16
business, and that must apologize for leaving such delightful company, ha! ha! ha!
Exit.



Business! pretty business, truly!  ten visits, besides calling at Grogram's the mercer, and Dresden's the millener; why at this rate my horses will never come home alive, eh Timothy?



Why an they don't, Sir, its no great matter, your worship need not buy any more, so there will be keeping and a coachman saved.



Right admirably said. Timothy!  so let her rattle them out as soon as she pleases  but five o'clock to dinner well, that's not amiss neither, for a late dinner may save a supper then this Colonel, this Colonel; I shall have swords flashing in my eyes, and drums beating in my ears constantly; every colour will turn scarlet before me; and tormenting imagination will fortify my head with horns ah, Timothy, Timothy, what a terrible blunder did I make;
How did I study to procure a curse, 



The day you said, for better and for worse.








SIR SCRAPEALL and TIMOTHY.


SO, Timothy, by this letter I find I am like to have another plague shortly.



Marry, heaven forbid, Sir!



You shall hear, Timothy, you shall hear
(Reads)"Brother Brainless, this is to let you know, that after a voyage of twelve weeks, from Jamaica, I cast anchor this morning at Deptford, where I am lying too at the punch house; when I have knocked off a cann or two of my old landlady's grog, I'll stretch right a-head with a merry gale, for Thames-street; and salute you, old heart of oak, with a broadside of affection, which is all at present from your brother, till death, Dick Starboard."



Mercy deliver us, Sir! this is the West-India captain that used to drink three bottles of rum at a sitting, when he was here last; and gave your worship the gout for three months, by cutting a caper on your great toe.



Ay, ay, the very same; and now, I suppose, out of friendship he intends to finish me.




Who's a board, yo ho.



Strait forward, Sir, strait forward.
ENTER STARBOARD.
What cheer, what cheer, brother 〈…〉 Spring my bowsprit he seems in a 〈…〉 back your sails, heave out an anchor, and bring too with your head to the sea, or you'll be upon the shallows next trip.



Oh, brother Starboard, I did not see you.



You might have heard me then, for I hail'd you loud enough for a league's distance; but you land-lubbers are always in one d•stress or another; now we at sea mind nothing while we have beef, biscuit, and slip, but a strong gale, a heavy tide, and a lee-shore.



Ah, you are happy mortals.



Mess, and so we are but how are your timbers? not crazy, I hope; for I hear as how you have made a matrimonial voyage since I saw you; and strike my flag that station requires a sound bottom, good rigging, an able stee•sman, and a stout helm.



Yes, yes, I am married.



Well, and what sort of a frigate have you got? is she French or Dutch built? crank or broad bottomed? will she ride out a squall of flattery, or is she apt to turn keel upwards? have you found out her trim?



No, truly; but she has found out mine, and trimmed me with a vengeance.



And who's fault's that? you was old enough to be your own pilot, wan't you?



Ay, very true I have nobody to blame but myself why just now I had an impudent, bag-wigg'd villain, came to demand five hundred pounds she had lost to him at cards.



Say you so? board me an she makes many more such trips to the land of the Four Kings, you'll be stranded on the shore of poverty.



Ay, it must be so; yet what can I do  advise me, brother, pray do advise me
(a loud squall of women)
Mercy deliver us! what's that?



Burst my guns, it seems the signal for s•ri•ing on a rock, and eight feet water in the hold.





Timothy, why this haste?



I am going for half a dozen doctors.
Exit



Half a dozen doctors! why Timothy,  Ruelle.




I can't stop a moment, Sir.
Exit.



Not stop a moment why? how  I am in such confusion I know not what to think
(Ruelle returns across)
Ruelle Ruelle not a word  what in the name of wonder can possess them all oh, I see my hopeful wife.



What is that there your pleasure-barge? Strike my slag she shows a snug built thing, and only wants an able seaman to navigate her she carries a signal of distress in her poop tho'.




Reach me a chair this unexpected stroke has quite en•eebled me.



What stroke, pray, madam?



Oh, Sir Scrapeall, the most fatal 



What is Zorobabel run away?



Oh worse, worse, the most irreparable accident.



How! worse! is the government bankrupt?



More dreadful still let one of these, whose hearts are not so susceptible of tender impressions, nor so nearly interested as mine, relate the dismal tale, while I indulge my tears oh  oh oh
(the three women cry)



Harkee, brother, the squall can't last long with such showers.



If I am kept a moment longer in suspense
  20
I shall run distracted tell me, Ruelle, tell me, thi• dr••dful accident, and make me cry too.



Cry! hark•e, young woman, could not you toss up a tankard of punch for brother Brainless and I, we shall weather the gale better.



Don't talk so, don't talk so, when perhaps I am ruined.



Oh, Sir, we are all ruined; a heart of ••int would melt at so pitiful a case I have scarce power to tell you; but my lady's, Sir my lady's  la la lap dog's dead oh h h h
(the three women cry again).



A lap-dog ho! ho! ho!



La, lal, laral, lal derol positively we'll have the punch, brother.



Oh, cruel wretch, to make my grief your sport poor little charmer the sprightliest companion, the politest of the four-footed kind; then so delicate, he could not drink his tea unsweetened, nor eat bread without butter was not he a most engaging creature, Ruelle?



Ye ye yes, madam, I'm sure I shall never forget him, because I think the pretty rogue broke his heart for love.



Do you really think so, Ruelle?



I do indeed, madam; for the sweet creature has never been himself since lady Doublechin took away her Dido.



Ah, cruel Dido barbarous Doublechin well, I am resolved that Meagre, the physician, and Julep, the apothecary, shall never come near me again, since they could not save little charmer.



How! a doctor and an apothecary! would they were buried with their patient, and their bi•l along with them.



You have often complained of my lit•le favourite, Sir Scrapeall, but he'll trouble
  21
you no more he's out of this troublesome world; however, in respect of his merits, I must desire to have an epitaph, and a neat marble monument dedicated to his dear memory.



What! an epitaph! and a marble monument for a dog! Did you ever hear the like, brother?



What, Sir Scrapeall, is that man your brother?



Yes, woman, that man is his brother; I'm sure I took his sister in tow a voyage of seven years, and as good a sea-boat she was as ever cut water, till death started a plank and sunk her.



What jargon the creature utters; why, friend, you are as rough and boist'rous as the element you belong to.



And what then? mayhap, mistress, though I have no palaver, nor flippaty flappets about me, I'm better than your painted butterflies, that only live while the sun shines; now all weather's alike to me.



Keep a little farther off your tar's offensive, friend.



My tar's better than your musk; and if you can't bear me along-side, you must strike; no frenchified engagements for me, yard-arm and yard-arm's Dick Starboard's trim, I can tell you.



Ah, well said, brother give her a little more of it she talks too fast for me.



Well, Sir Scrapeall, I congratulate you upon having a relation equally polite with yourself; but that we may not lay aside all decency, I change the subject Ruelle, you must assist me to lay the plan of charmer's funeral.



Funeral! smite his limbs, give him a sea funeral; stitch up his carcass in the reef of an old hammock, clap in some ballast, and heave him overboard into the next horse-pond.



Ay, and too good for him ah, brother, if she would but listen to your advice, if you would undertake to direct her, some good might be expected.



What! such a porpuss direct me!



Avast, mistress, avast, I don't like the birth so well strike my flag, brother, I had rather navigate my ship, the Charming Kate, to Jamaica, without compass or helm, than go master of her for a month but what provisions have you got  I have taken in nothing but two red herrings, and three tankards of grog since I came on shore; so bear a hand.




So, there g• a hopeful 〈◊〉; a most natural alliance: by the he•p of this sea-brute. I suppose, Sir Scrap•all intends to usu•p an au•hority; yet, weak as I am, they shall find some h••dship in attaining a superiority oh I see the Col•nel coming most luckily to relieve my fatigued sp•rit: Ruelle and you retire.
Ex•unt.




Madam your most obedient servant.



Oh, Colonel, you are come in happy time to my relief; do you know that I have just now been in the condition of poor Androm•da; on the point of being devour'd by a sea-monster.







Yes, truly, the polite brother-in-law of my polite husband: I assure you, Colonel, the brute threw me into a horrid palpitation.



I presume it was the person I met with Sir Scrapeall, madam, who talked somewhat of a rasher on the coals, and a bucket of flip as he passed by.







Truly an uncouth appearance to address to a Lady; but perhaps, madam, his externals injure
  23
conceal'd merit: intrinsic value lies often hid under such rough outside.



Well, Colonel, I must say your good nature and delicacy are remarkable for reconciling inconsistencies, and placing persons, or things, in the most amiable light. But, Colonel I have met a most melancholly accident since I saw you sure poor charmer is dead.



Indeed! I am perfectly concern'd that your Ladyship should lose such an engaging little animal.



Ay, Colonel, you know, and valued his amiable qualifications well, since his fate was inevitable, it is some comfort to find such genteel sympathy in the breast of a friend; but that care is not single, Sir Scrapeall takes pains to mortify my concerns.



Truly, madam, I have often blamed fortune in private, which could lavish such a profusion of beauty and merit, as you are possessed of, upon avarice and insensibility 



Oh, Sir, you are infinitely obliging.



And have been sorry to think, that your Ladyship should be exiled into a kind of matrimonial Siberia.



'Tis too true, Colonel; but you know my condition, and charitably sooth it with agreeable conversation.



Rather say, madam, I do myself both honour and pleasure, when I render you the smallest satisfaction.



Sir, so refin'd a compliment would prove my inability of return, but that my sister-in-law's ap•r••ch saves me.



The devil •t does
(as•de)



She will amuse you, Colonel, for some minutes, while I give Ruell• directions about poor Charmer; which done I shall return to assist you against the violence of a never-ceasing tongue.



Madam, you are particularly obliging 
(exit L. Brain.)
I must endeavour to retreat tho' before she returns, for it would be almost an impossibility to please such contrarieties at once; and, on Emmeline's account, I must, if possible, keep fair with both.




Colonel, your most obedient humble servant I profess you are grown a great stranger: methinks it is an age since your last visit, and yet I believe it is but three days neither; but expectation makes time long, as the saying is, and you have particular good wishes from this family, I assure you, Colonel.



It is the pride and pleasure of my heart, madam, to deserve them.



Most elegantly expressed was not that my sister left the room as I came in?



Yes, madam, it was her ladyship.



Her Ladyship! humph! these feathers in the cap make people hold their heads so high, forsooth; but you and I, Colonel, know better.



Most certainly, madam; as you say, titles are mere feathers.



And pray now, Colonel, do you really think this sister of mine, so fine a woman as the world says?



Really, madam, it is hard to say; beauty is not universal; and that which pleases one •ye palls upon another; Lady Brainless is not without her attractions; but I must confess there are charms in this house, of milder, steddier natu••, which more powerfully command my approbation.



Infinitely discreet I profess ah, Colonel, if every fine Gentleman was as prudent, we should not have so many minx presume upon their doll-dousy faces.







Good houswifery would then take place of rambling and cards; and idle routes give way to the dear society of kind, sober husbands.



And if all the fine ladies had such prudential notions as yours, madam, sense, as well as passion, must own their influence.



How happy do I esteem myself, Colonel, that my notions so particular agree with yours; I wish her Ladyship was here to be convinced, I am not quite so ignorant as she is pleased to imagine.



Heav'n forbid, till I am gone however.
aside



And here she comes, I profess now for it, Colonel.



Would I were gone, I shall most certainly disoblige one of them.
(aside)




Well, Colonel, I have settled poor Charmer's funeral procession; he's to be interred under a rose tree, and I am to be chief mourner.



Lord, sister, I am amazed you can be so unpolite as to trouble the Colonel with that little ugly creature.



Really, madam, I did not come into the city to learn politeness.



If your Ladyship had, perhaps you might have met some useful instructions 



So, so, now it begins.
(asi•e.)



And persons who would have informed you, that prudence is preferable to all the finical airs of quality.



Prudence ha! ha! ha! really, madam, you oblige me to trespass upon my present concern, and laugh at your mechanical notions  ha! ha! ha! ha!



Mechanical notions if your Ladyship
  26
is confident of your cause, what if we refer ourselves to the Colonel.



Ay now it comes.
(aside)



You could not have proposed a more agreeable judge; I know he must despise the wretch.
(aside)



Your ladyship's good opinion does me honour.



Then madam, we are both pleased  for I know he'll be of my side.
(aside)



Now then, Colonel, please to let us know if you was to chuse a lady, which you would have her, polite or prudent, according to our opinions of those terms.



Oons! what shall I say?
(aside)
undoubtedly, madam, politeness is one of the most agreeable qualifications of human nature.



What say you to that, madam?



But, Colonel, did not you say that a prudent behaviour was the most amiable?



Ye ye yes, madam, I did, to be sure; and I think so still that is I think bless me! I'm afraid we shan't have time for the necessary disquisition I was to have met Sir Charles Prudent, and I find I have slip'd my time a quarter of an hour therefore if you please some other opportunity
(going)
 



No, no, Colonel, you shall determine now.



Ay, ay, positively you shan't go.



Then I must stand buff I find; I'll try to confuse and so escape
(aside)
why then, ladies, since you insist upon it, I shall endeavour to clear up the point politeness ay, we'll consider that first  politeness is a vivifying ray, which animates and enlightens social intercourse; facilitating expression, harmonizing temper, and regulating deportment: as the natural sun influences and animates
  27
the vegetable world, so this beautous child of art, polishes, adorns, and dignifies society.



Infinitely fanciful: what think you now madam?







Prudence, I take to be that kind and gentle moderator, whom reason deputes to assist us against the impulse of irregular passions; a cool friend, an infallible guide, to lead with safety through the labyrinth of life.



And pray what does your ladyship think now?



Nay, ladies, I absolutely declare against any pre-eminence; being throughly convinced that they are highly essential to each other, by seeing them so happily united before me.




Delicately complaisant his look gave me the preference.
(aside)



Charming man his eyes spoke in my favour.
(aside)




Colonel, one of your servants desires to speak with you.






(Ruelle whispers Mrs. Busy and gives her a letter)
your Ladyship might observe I was cautious of putting the old Lady out of temper.
(to Lady Brainless)



I did observe, and commend your humanity.
(Ruelle goes and whispers Lady Brainless)



I was obliged, madam, to favour her Ladyship's opinion somewhat; to prevent appearing too particular.
(to Mrs. Busy)



Most engagingly discreet I perceived and admired your caution.
exit. Ruelle.



Ladies, you find I am under a necessity of forcing myself from your agreeable company.
going



It's we, Sir, that are the sufferers.



Yes, Colonel, 'tis we that are unhappy.



I wish I was gone
(aside)
oh ladies 
(going)



Your Ladyship may spare that trouble, for I'll see the Colonel down stairs.



Heav'ns! you overwhelm me ladies!



I must and will wait upon you, Colonel.



Consider, madam, you are the elder, and not so fit to bear fatigue.



Nay, then, 'tis time to fly
(exit Lady Brainless after him)



The elder! an impudent young minx, to twit me with age and before the Colonel too  I'll see if I can't take madam a peg lower, with her taunts, and her sneers but he's my own for all her  I see the dear man loves me I'll take a chair and go to mother Sly's this instant she's a notable contriver in such matters, and since I have determined to marry, why should I lose the opportunity of a handsome, sweet, agreeable young fellow: no, no.

Unpractis'd girls, indeed, with bliss may dally,
But sprightly widows ne'er stand shilly, shally.









FUSEE dress'd as CAPTAIN SPONTOON.
WELL, if what I have heard the Colonel say be true, that the outside of a man is mostly considered, I am in a fair way of being as much respected as my betters: so Monmouth-Street I thank thee for this gaudy title page; I wish the volume of my brain, like many modern pieces, may not fall short of what is promised if that should be the case,
  29
I shall be still the more like a fine gentleman, and at worst may make a brazen front stand for the unfurnished inside, that's some comfort, however; and has been the road to preferment of many an enterprising blade, Soft, let me recollect my instructions, for what is a military man without his plan of operations. Fusee, says my master, I know women, and he that courts a widow must throw aside modesty I know that too, Sir, says I, for I have courted, ah, and married, several of your honours oceasional widows. Well, no matter for that, Fusee, this mother Busy must be taken off at all events; she has received a letter to prepare her for your reception; praise her beauty, be very fond, and the business is done ay, and when it is done, a hopeful bargain I shall have; there will be no need of any death's head but her face; I shall never see it in a morning but it will put me in mind of the other world; and, to say the truth, I have not much inclination to think that way yet; but, damn it, the hopes of plunder have made many a man run his head against cannon balls; then why should I be afraid of a witch? so most engaging, glib-tongued ancient Lady have at you.
Exit Fusee.



COLONEL PARAPET meeting SIR CHARLES.


Well met, Sir Charles why this unusual anxiety in your countenance? It is not philosophical I assure you.



Nay, Frank, all our resolution, natural and speculative, must give way upon particular occasions I am miserable.



Marry! heaven forbid! why, man, your acres are not swallowed up by an earthquake.



Pshaw! that were a trifle I could bear any thing calmly but the disappointment of my heart. I fear Lady Charlotte has a tincture of that inconstancy which is charged against her sex in general.



How so? whence your suspicion? has she started a rival to amuse you?



Not that I know of, tho' I may fear it I was to have paid her a visit as this hour, but calling at her house, a servant told me she had set off for her brother's, the Earl of Greenhill's, two hours ago; and that without leaving any apology, or the slightest hint of return.



And this is the mighty source of care! oh love, love, what a capricious deity are thou, who can so turn our wits the seamy side without, as Shakespeare has it. Prithee, my friend, don't take trifles to heart; this flight of Lady Charlotte's is only the whim of a fine lady, who has the prerogative of custom to give herself as many affected and inconsistent airs as she pleases.



Nay, dear Colonel, don't be too severe; I can't think her good sense descends to so trifling a character as you mean, by a fine Lady; she has spirits without wildness, good-nature without weakness, dignity without affectation, and humility without meanness: therefore this unaccountable behaviour surprizes me the more.



Unaccountable behaviour! not at all  your gravity is an excellent subject for wit and vivacity to play upon come, come, Sir Charles, rest assured, that he who so palpably devotes himself to a single object, will be liable to such rubs; I love one, yet gallant half a dozen at a time; had you taken the same course, ten to one but her volat•le ladyship had long, ere now, flown into your arms upon the wings of jealousy.



Well Frank, I acknowledge your superiority
  31
in the affairs of love; what then would you advise upon the present case?



Faith, Sir Charles, there seems to be but a limited choice of proceedings; you have an excellent set of nags, and if you wish for an immediate ecclaircissement, e'en pursue, and tell her you won't be treated with such indifference for the future; or rather take no notice of the matter 'till her ladyship chuses to come back, which, if I am any judge of woman, she very shortly will.



Your latter opinion shall guide me  her servant mentioned the arrival of Lord Frederic Bloom, her younger brother, could I obtain an intimacy with him it might be useful.



Most certainly, as you would thereby know the motions of the enemy.




Lord Frederic Bloom's compliments, and this letter, Sir.



Very well, wait a moment Lord Frederic's compliments! this is somewhat odd, as I never knew any of the family but Lady Charlotte  eh, what have we here? Charlotte Bloom! suppose this should be a love-letter? upon my honour, Sir Charles, I never made any advances.



Dear Colonel, you have alarmed my curiosity; and if the purport is not very particular, your communication will oblige me.



Purport gad you shall have it all you shall read it, kiss it, and take it as a relique for adoration if you will there.



(Reads)"Sir, meeting my brother, Lord Frederic, on the road, and knowing after three years travel, commenced upon his leaving the university, that he must be rather deficient of acquaintance; I have taken the liberty of introducing him to you as a gentleman highly
  32
deserving his observation and regard. Your most, &c. Charlotte Bloom."
 This may be a lucky hit for me, Colonel.



Right, Sir Charles; my interest may be of some use, as the lady honours me with so kind an opinion here, friend, is his Lordship at Lady Charlotte's?



He is, Sir, and desires to know what time will be most convenient for his Lordship to wait on you?



Oh, my compliments, and I'll save the trouble, by waiting upon him immediately
(Exit Servant)
Well, my friend, I am a notable spy, I assure you; and if any thing falls in my way you may depend upon diligence.



I can never doubt or repay your friendship; but as I know your disposition, I shall refer you to the delicate pleasure which results to a generous mind from good-natured actions I won't detain you from this visit when it is over shall I see you at my house?



You shall; so adieu but harkee, Charles, in the mean time, I desire, for philosophy's sake, that you'll sigh as little as you possibly can.



(dressed as Lord Frederic)
and EMMELINE.


Well, Lady Charlotte, there is somewhat so unexpected, and so romantic in this metamorphose of yours, that positively I can't help laughing, even at the expence of good manners  ha! ha! ha! ha! you'll excuse me.



Excuse, ha! ha! ha! I'll laugh with you, my dear; I am never better pleased than when laughing at myself; and certainly I was never a better subject for it than at present but come, give me your opinion, don't I make a tolerable
  33
smart figure in this masculine outside? a little upon the coxcomb or so eh?



Not at all; you have a much better right to the title of a fine gentleman, than many who claim it but, after all, to what extraordinary purpose have you done this? is it merely to torment poor Sir Charles bless us what confusion the poor man seemed in, on hearing you had left town so abruptly.



Why ay, I grant you Sir Charles has all the appearance of an Arcadian swain, and I believe him sincere; but this is only surmise; and when all the happiness of life depends upon a single choice, that one should certainly be well grounded; my disguise is an endeavour at this, and for my friend Emmeline's sake, as well as my own.



For my sake! in what shape pray?



In short, child, I want to see you a happy wife as well as myself; and to be plain, I have always imagined your Colonel to be as suspicious a piece of gallantry, as any within the sphere of my observation; now in this form I shall be able to sound the very bottom of his heart, which is more than you could ever be able to do, until it was perhaps too late.



I have always thought myself under infinite obligations to dear Lady Charlotte's good-nature; but this extraordinary instance of friendship, makes gratitude blush for its poverty.



Not at all, Emmeline, you would put on a pair of breeches to oblige me, and then the account is ballanced.
ENTER a SERVANT.
Colonel Parapet to wait on your Lordship.



Very well conduct him up
(Exit. Servant)
So, his complaisance anticipates my intention of visiting him; and I am glad of it, for
  34
if you'll step into my dressing room, there you may hear how I play my part.
(Exit. Emmeline)
I hope this Colonel may stand proof for poor Emmeline's sake; however, at any rate, 'fore knowledge is better than late repentance.




My Lord, your most obedient humble servant.



Colonel, your servant, I am extremely concerned to give you this trouble.



'Tis a pleasure, my Lord, to wait upon so near a relation to Lady Charlotte; and I hope to merit the very favourable opinion her Ladyship has indulged me with.



When there is so much prepossession as I feel, a small share of attention must certainly effect that; besides I know my sister is not apt to flatter but come, Colonel, as I have been upon my travels these three years, I must trespass upon you for some account of matters here at home.



Faith, my Lord, I imagine them to be just the same they always were; and the uncharitable spirit of ridicule, as prevalent among persons of different dispositions as ever; scarce any thing spoken of but the follies and vices of our neighbours; while the censors themselves are hourly committing greater enormities than those they stigmatize; as to the polite and trading world, the first are endeavouring to ruin each other at cards and horse-racing; and the latter are studying to over-reach one another by deceitful bargains and paper-currency: in short, reputations and circumstances are a general prey for scandal and knavery to hunt through the world, while poor honesty is thrown out of the chace.



A very comfortable prospect truly; but I presume, Colonel, you are more attached to,
  35
and better acquainted with the sphere of gallantry than any other?



Why, my Lord, it is part of a soldier's profession; the indulgence of peace for his fatigues in war, and it would be ungrateful to reject the blessing; besides, Mars and Venus should never be divorced; for whatever may be said of glory's charms, I believe there is more courage derived from the influence of corporeal beauty, than from the love of fame; nor can any better reason be offered, why Britons are the bravest of men, than that nature has blessed them with the fairest of women.



The ladies are obliged to you, Colonel; and since we have touched upon them, pray do you know Emmeline Fairlove, Sir Scrapeall Brainless's ward?



Yes, my Lord, I have seen the lady very often.



I am glad of it, since I must presume you are a better judge of female merit than my sister; but she has possessed me with so high an idea of the lady, that I am in love with her before I see her.





in love with her, my Lord?



Yes, truly; and if she answers the description my sister gave of her, I really don't know how far I may go in the road to matrimony.



Confusion! a rival! and a Lord too! I must throw some rubs in the way if possible
(aside)
Matrimony! ha! ha! ha! I presume your Lordship will hardly drop so soon into a domestic life.



Why 'tis somewhat early, as you observe, Colonel, but beauty and merit joined, are irresistable; therefore I am quite impatient to hear your opinion; and I don't doubt its being impartial, as I flatter myself with your friendship.








Your question, my Lord, is somewhat peculiar; however, to be ingenuous, I think the Lady might make a tolerable decent kind of a citizen's wife; but I am afraid that quality would sit very aukwardly upon her.



A very hopeful beginning, truly.



You surprize me, Colonel!



Besides, she lives in such a queer odd sort of a family, that your Lordship would find any approaches very disagreeable, unless there was a much greater share of beauty to reward your pains.



Beyond bearing! deceitful villain!



So then she's not handsome?



But very middling, I assure your Lordship.







How could my sister be so egregiously mistaken?



So the bait will take, I hope;
(aside)
why, my Lord, I imagine Lady Charlotte's good-nature, here got the better of her judgement; I have heard her profess a strict friendship for Emmeline; besides, your Lordship knows that beauty is not a recommendation of one female to another.







Well, Colonel, as the case is so, I shall just pay her a ceremonious visit to deliver my sister's letter.



Oons! if he sees her all's over
(aside)
letter, my Lord?



Yes, one of introduction if you will favour me with your company to her guardians, Colonel, I shall get away the sooner?



To her guardian's to be sure, my Lord  you honour me but then, as I told your Lordship, it is such a motley, unaccountable family, that you'll undoubtedly meet a very unpolite reception.



Pray what are they who compose this extraordinary family?



Why, my Lord, there's the old knight, made up of avarice, jealousy, and rudeness his Lady, Emmeline's sister, a scatter-brained piece of inconsistent affectation 



So, so, my sister has her share too.



And, ha! ha! ha! ha! an old widow, Sir Scrapeall's sister, who fancy's herself a blooming beauty, and torments every thing in breeches that goes near the house; tho' she's more like an antiquated tapestry figure than any animal of the present age.



Ha! ha! ha! ha! a most hopeful society indeed.



So that I believe, if your Lordship would send Lady Charlotte's letter, it would do better than a visit.



Oh, by no means, for I promised to deliver it; besides, I love curiosities I presume the citizen won't set his great dog at me, as to any thing else I can enjoy it for once here get the chariot ready.



So, I have been lying so long to no purpose  this affair must end in a scrape, I see
(aside)



Well, Colonel, shall I have the honour of your company to Sir Scrapeall's?



I must beg your Lordship's excuse; I am to call upon Sir Charles Prudent about this hour.



Sir Charles Prudent if I don't mistake, I have heard of that gentleman's paying his addresses to my sister; if he is seriously in love with her I pity him; for she is now gone into the country upon a treaty of marriage.



A treaty of marriage!



Yes; and I believe it is entirely settled.



So here's comfort for my friend too
(aside)
my Lord I'll take my leave.



Well, Colonel, I shall depend upon seeing you often.



Certainly, my Lord but it must not be as a rival.
(aside)



Give me leave to wait on you Colonel.



'Tis needless ceremony, my Lord.



Nay, I insist upon it.
Exit.
EMMELINE sola.
False man! how unguarded, how credulous are we women to take in the poison of flattery this discovery of his baseness, unexpected, and mortifying as it is, I must esteem fortunate.
ENTER LADY CHARLOTTE.
Well, Emily, what think you of the Colonel now?



Think! why that he's like all men, treacherous and base.



Come, child, I see this trial has put your heart into a horrid palpitation; but be comforted, I entertain a better opinion of your favourite than I did.



How, Lady Charlotte! after he could treat me so disrespectfully, so rudely; and in every article contradict what he has a thousand times vowed and swore to me.



Come, you must not judge unfavourably; if I can read countenances right, the thoughts of a rival alarm'd him more than a battery of cannon would.



But what could be the cause of his treating me so lightly?



A stroke of policy to secure you to himself; 'tis very common in those affairs, as well as those of love, to affect an indifference for, or
  39
even to dispraise those things we like best but come, I must be an assiduous lover of yours, so make haste home, that I may visit you in form  keep good spirits, and fear nothing.



My lord, your most obedient.



Madam, your devoted slave nay I must gallant you to your chair.



Ha! ha! ha! ha!
Exeunt.




Four bottles of rum in punch, already! you astonish me Timothy!



And well I may, an like your worship, but, lackaday, Sir, how can it be otherwise, when that black fellow, the captain's mate, knocked off three pints of punch at a tip, as he called it.



Would he had been tip'd into the sea before he came here but where's my wife eh Timothy?



In the drawing-room, an like your worship, and has a poor, thin, shabby fellow in black with her.



A poor, thin shabby fellow in black; what the mischief business can she have with him; by the description, he's neither a gamester, nor a horn-planter eh Timothy?



Marry, I believe not Sir; but whatever the man is I fancy he's a little mad, for when I opened the door, the hinges creeking for want of oil, he started thus 



Take care of my gout, Timothy.



Stared in my face wildly, and cried, hark!
Hark! how the grating hinges croak despair!



Hinges and despair! mad indeed!  and what has such a creature to do here? we are all mad enough without him eh Timothy?



Ah, Sir, it was not so in my good old Lady's time no such rantipole-doings; we might
  40
go to bed then at ten o'clock, and mind church twice of a Sunday, besides all holidays; but now we are up five nights a week, and never see a church; I am made a slave in my old days, and am destroying both soul and body in your worship's service; but you are a kind indulgent master, and if my old mi mi mistress had lived I ca ca cant help weeping when I think of her oh h h.



It is very true Timothy, very true; and tho' I did not shed a tear when Cicely died, I ca  ca cant help it now oh h h but what does all this signify; while we are weeping for grief, the cormorants, on ev'ry side, are devouring me up eh what fellow's this Timothy?



Oh, 'tis the madman, an like your worship.




Mirror of knighthood I am trebly yours.



Quite lunatic, Timothy; well honest friend, what would you say to me?



That royal sword ne'er dubb'd a worthier knight.



Very likely, friend, very likely.



In short, Sir, as common conversation sounds more natural in prose than blank verse, though not so lofty; I shall give respite to the muse, and tell you, Sir, in plain English, that I am a poet.



A poet! what's that friend?



How, Sir! don't you know what a poet is?



No truly do you Timothy?



Lackaday, Sir, not I.



Astonishing! then pray Sir what is it you do know!



Why the nine figures, friend, the nine figures.



Low and mechanical, what are the nine
  41
figures to the nine muses, from whom a poet descends? a poet, who gives life to inanimate things; harmonizes language; realizes ideas; calls back past time; constitutes heroes; immortalizes fame; destroys thousands, rattles drums, sounds trumpets, points spears, whets swords, springs mines, storms towns, rouses tempests, wrecks fleets, launches thunder, wings lightening 
(during this rhapsody Sir Scrapeall and Timothy traverse the stage, Crambo pursuing.)



Stand between us, Timothy the fit's on him.



In short Sir, a poet is is the most complicate, comprehensive, and exalted character upon earth; and, Sir, I am the greatest poet of the present age.



If that is the case, I see plainly by your dress, what kind of a trade it is.



Ah, nothing at all, Sir; the immortal Homer begged his bread, yet is richer in fame than the opulent Croesus but to my business here, Sir; having been informed that a fav'rite domestic of your Lady's died lately, and that she wished to have an epitaph 







Yes, Sir, and I assure you it was originally written for a very promising young nobleman; but his avaricious parents not chusing to pay the proper price, I have adapted it to Lady Brainless's domestic.



Domestic! why I have had no death in my family these seven years, but a lap-dog.



And he, Sir, is the subject of my piece  her Ladyship approves it highly I'll read it to you.



You need not trouble yourself, friend  I wish he was gone, Timothy.



And I too, Sir.



Let me see here no that's my poem for
  42
the first son of Lord Stately, when he happens to be born and this is my copy of verses on beau Feathertop's mistress, to pass as his own oh, here, here's the epitaph now, now, Sir, be pleas'd to mind.

Stop passenger, who e'er thou art,
And taste of grief the bitter smart;
While to your wounded ears I tell,
(mind, Sir, Prosopopoeia, the monument speaks)
That Charmer's dead of dogs the belle!
Truly pathetic!
Of nicest judgement purest taste,
With every canine virtue graced;
The desart world now cannot boast,
Such merit as in him is lost.

there, Sir, there's an epitaph, might serve the greatest man in the land, and the price no more than five guineas.



How! what! five guineas!



Yes, Sir, and it's richly worth twenty; nor would I take less, but that I hope to have the honour of writing epitaphs for you, Sir, and all your family.



How! before we are dead!



Oh, Sir, nothing commoner; we never wait for events we are prepar'd for every thing; I have occasional panagerics by me to serve all the victories, heroes, beauties, and patriots of a whole century; I have an excellent stock I assure you.



Go, go, I have no business for a scribbler.



A scribbler! ha! oh most indignant term.



Timothy, shew the man out.



Is this for one, that treads Parnassus hill?
That quaffs of Helicon's inspiring streams?
Melpomene, Apollo, and Calliope;

  43Urania: all the tuneful tribe, unite
In just revenge of your insulted bard.



Hey day! Parnassus hill! that I suppose is a cant phrase for Ludgate hill, where they pick pockets; and these are his accomplices who are to cut our throats, perhaps a terrible dog  Timothy, turn him out.



He'll mind your worship most; besides, Sir, suppose he should bite, and make a poet of me too.



Then call brother Starboard, he'll do it at once and that will bring him from the punch too.



Say shall the guineas be produced or not?
Tremble, Sir Knight, at an incensed muse,
That brandishes a pen full fraught with gall.



Ay, ay, 'tis so; I thought the fellow wanted to rob me.
ENTER STARBORD
(singing)
with a punch bowl.

Early in the morning, the ninetenth of may,
For ever be recorded the glorious ninety-two:

yo, ho; what squall now, brother Brainless?



Why here's an impudent fellow won't go out of my house, and I want you to turn him out.



What this here weather-beaten thing?  strike my topsails he looks as if he had been on short allowance a whole West-India voyage: why you would not have me give such a crazy yawl as this a broadside? that would be just the same, as thof a first rate should fire into a dung-boat.



Ah, he's a terrible fellow for all that.



Say you so? mess then he must have something concealed under hatches; he must depend upon close quarters, like a Newcastle cat; he has nothing above board but the ensigns of
  44
poverty: I'll hail him yo, ho, what cheer, what cheer, mess-mate.



Who e'er thou art, most inconsid'rate man,
By thus intruding on my reverie,
Thou hast depriv'd me of the noblest thought.



What thought spring my bowsprit I never think at all; but here's brother Brainless says as how you loom like one of those small craft, that lie under the land to see what they can surprize.



Ay, I do say so; now tell brother Starboard what and who you are?



Truth cannot hurt where innocence defends
And the foul breath of scandal I defy,
Though belch'd from Erebus and Stygian gloom;
Therefore be told, since you desire to know,
Crambo's my name, and poetry my trade.



Zoons! brother! don't make so many tacks when you may sail right a-head Poetry, that's writing of ghosts, bloody murthers, and ballads.



In lyric verses I have written songs.



Say you so; slice me but I like a good song; I had a poet on board my ship once, I can't say he was able, for he could scarce hand, reef, and steer; but he was a damn'd rum duke: so we used to clap him on the capstern, as they do monkeys on board East-India ships, to play tricks and make us merry here, mess-mate, stow in some punch.



Punch is the earthly nectar that I like.




So, so, here's fine work, another cormorant introduced.
(aside)



Hark you, brother poet, could not you make a good joculous song upon my fat landlady
  45
at the punch-bowl? or upon my ship the Charming Kate?



It may be done, altho' a barren theme.



Enough, enough, put it upon the stocks, rigg it with a merry tune, and we'll launch it in ten gallons of flip, to wash down some good beef and biscuit, or a dish of bubble and squeek: what say you to that, heart of oak? mess, you seem to want some ballast in your hold go to brother Brainless's locker, and take in some, or you'll overset the first sharp gale.



The epitaph, Sir Knight, you will not have?



Begone, sirrah, you and your balderdash together.



Avast, avast, what epitaph?



Why truly one for my wife's lap-dog; and the unconcionable knave would have five guineas for it.



Five guineas! mess, that's top and top-gallant no, no, brother, must not carry too much head-sail neither; however, if you can make it serve my wife, who lies at anchor in Stepney church-yard, and me, when I steer to the same port, I'll tip you one piece towards getting a better main-sheet, than this here tattered piratical flag.



To what an ebb, oh genius art thou come?
It shall be done what is thy consort's name?



Consort, prithee keep thy helm steady, and don't veer out more cable than needs: my wife's name was Margery, and mine Dick Starboard.



Horridly dissonant to-morrow's sun
Shall not to Thetis liquid lap descend,
Ere you receive the epitaph and song.
going




Harkee, bring too at the pantry, and take in some sea-store yo ho, Timothy, here fill the bucket again but not so much water Sblood,
  46
if this last tift had been in Greenland, we should have had nothing to swallow but gobbets of ice in five minutes.



Oh, mercy upon me!
(aside)



Come, brother, steer this course; we'll make a Virginia trip, take in some pipes of tobacco; touch at Jamaica for a few gallons of rum, and then make sail for the land of Nod. I expect my boatswain here in less than half a glass; he shall crack some forecastle jests, and haul up our hearts with a bowling of sea-wit to the top-gallant mast of jocularity come, you being a heavy sailer I'll take you in tow.




Softly, softly, good brother Starboard, I'll follow.



Nay, nay, an we don't make way a-head we shall lose the tide so bear a hand.
Exit.



I shall have no head, hand, heart, or any thing else to bear soon, at this rate ay, I have it of all sides my precious wife is fashion mad, my doating sister courting mad, my sea brother punch mad, my ward husband mad, and I myself horn mad sure as pretty a set as ever met in one family; and for our comforts, I believe all incurable: lackaday what a miserable wretch am I! I want nothing to compleat me but poverty and the tooth-ach.








SIR CHARLES and the COLONEL.
DEAR Colonel, this unexpected rival of yours adds to my own perplexity; but from the idea I have of your mistress, I think your happiness in no danger.


There it is; every man thinks his own case worst; mischief on it, I am chiefly vexed, that after such experience I should let any attachment have power to perplex me however I threw what objections I could in the way.







Why I gave as unfavourable an idea as I could of the family nay, went so far as to contradict my heart in regard of Emmeline's beauty and merit but, Sir Charles, in my confusion I had forgot to tell you that Lady Charlotte's expedition into the country is upon a treaty of marriage.



A treaty of marriage! with who?



That his Lordship did not particularize, but said the affair was settled.



Sdeath! it cannot be! what, after permitting my addresses with most engaging condescension; after intimating I was not disagreeable to her, and giving delicate hopes of a happy issue; after all this to change without the smallest pretext of offence, or assigning the slightest reason.



So, my friend, it appears at present you know the brother could not have any view, and he mentioned it with a tender sense of your disappointment.



My disappointment! he should rather have felt for his sister's most egregious falshood
  48
 if she has jilted me I'll expose her publickly.



I am afraid, Sir Charles, that revenge will light upon yourself fashion and spirit will only laugh at your sincere easy disposition.



Shall I therefore tamely bear such an insult to my heart and affections? if I can't prevent the match I'll at least render it as disagreeable as may be; I'll take post for the Earl's tomorrow morning, lay my previous claim before him, upbraid her inconstancy, and, if the new lover should have spirit enough to appear, convince him I am not that commodious passive utensil she would make of me.



I applaud your resolution; and if you have any occasion for an auxiliary sword you know where to find it: in the mean time I think you had better find Lord Frederic and receive fuller information from him; besides, if you can detain him for the evening it may be of singular service to me.



The latter motive alone is sufficient to excite my diligence; for, rest assured, dear Colonel, that whatever my cross stars design for me, I heartily wish your affairs may feel the influence of a propitious planet.



And be satisfied, Sir Charles, my happiness must be incomplete without yours; therefore let us hope the best on both sides.
Exeunt severally.




Please to come this way, Sir, and Mrs. Busy will wait on you immediately.



Very well, I shall attend the lady's leisure, child, la, la, la,
(sings)



What an impudent fellow is this
(aside)
your honour won't be angry if I ask a question?



No, not at all, my dear.



Pray did your honour ever hear of a brother of mine, one Thomas Ruelle, a soldier?



No, child; nor was it at all likely I should, unless he had been in my own company; we officers seldom know any thing of the private, but that they are men, or look like such; we who bear commissions are entirely among ourselves, my dear, la, la, la, la
(sings)



Ha! ha! ha! ha! I can hold no longer  well said captain Fusee; why, sirrah, could you imagine that fine cloaths, a bag wig, and quality airs, could hide that sweet gunpowder face from my knowledge?



Pox o'this discerning jade, I shall infallibly be blown up
(aside)



Bless me, Captain! does your well-tried assurance fail you pray what scheme, what military trick is your honour upon in this disguise?



Since 'tis in vain to dissemble, I'll e'en tell you my master wanting to get the old lady of this house off his hands, has put me into masquerade  I have had but one conference, and yet, by the help of mother Sly, want nothing but a parson to finish the affair.



Mighty well! and what then becomes of all your fine spun protestations to me, Mr. Saucebox?



Why you know, Mrs. Ruelle, Pyramus and Thisbe never loved so well; but you was allways throwing dependance and poverty in my teeth, so I thought it high time to mend myself.



A very fine come-off indeed; but I'll spoil your master's project, and your's, Mr. Impudence, I will, and discover all this moment.



Nay, dear Ruelle, don't be so cruel as that neither.



Dear Ruelle not so much familiarity, puppy, you and your master are a couple of deceitful
  50
forsworn rakehells, and ought to be exposed.



What will nothing pacify you? nothing bridle that harmonious tongue?



No, wretch not all the eloquence you have.



Why then let my master speak he desired me to present his compliments and this
(gives a purse)
the first I had no scruple to give, but the latter I thought to have saved.



Very honest indeed, noble captain, and like the rest of your tricks let me see hum  hum ten guineas! why ah, these are compliments worth receiving, and shows the Colonel knows how to speak most feelingly Yet, after all, must I not only lose so sweet a swain, but, as I have read in some play, be made myself the instrument? must I not only die, but plunge the dagger in my heart myself? this is indeed refining on calamity.



Tender loving soul I never thought her so fond as this poor pretty soft rogue, let me kiss off thy tears.



Tears! ha! ha! ha! ha! not so foolish as that neither, good Mr. Captain; and since your sincerity is brought to light, I'll show you that I was prepared against it.



What does the jade mean?



Mean, why I mean there's a sea captain, worth ten thousand pounds, my master's brother-in-law, whose heart I have so engaged, by helping him to some bowls of punch more than Sir Scrapeall allowed, that he has given me several kind glances, squeezed my hands almost to a jelly; and sworn, if I have a mind, he'll get a parson to splice us together to-morrow morning.



Oh, snap him by all means; and when we have made the double match, you and I can be on better terms than ever, Mrs, Ruelle.



Stand off, jackanapes, and learn a proper distance to your betters you and your old madam, must not put yourself on a footing with a real Captain's Lady; for my mess-mate, as he calls himself, though he's but a scurvy original, has the recommendation of a fine gilded frame to set him off I shall so gall madam Fusee by taking place of her for I am resolved, when once Mrs Starboard, to hold my own; to pay as many visits, to wear as fine cloaths, and have as grand a route as any city lady of them all.



Hoity toity! what whirligigs fortune has planted in the wench's head already.



Captain, to your arms, the General's at hand.
Exit.



Sblood! this mistress of mine has the same effect upon me that a labelled bottle has upon the stomach of a sick man; but I must take the dose to cure the consumptive state of my pockets.
ENTER MRS. BUSY.
Captain, your very most humble servant.



Madam, your eternal slave.



Lard, Captain, I am most infinitely concerned at the rudeness of having made you wait so long, and scarce know how to apologize; but my poor neighbour, Mrs. Dolefull, who has a sad fellow of a husband, came to consult me, and would not let me stir.



Madam, though your absence to me is worse than riding the wooden horse, standing upon the picket, being tied up to the halberts, or even running the gantelope, upon so good-natured an occasion of delay as comforting a distressed neighbour, I must be not only satisfied, but pleased also at the beauty of your mind, as much as I am captivated with the beauty of your person, madam.



Bless me, Sir, the force and delicacy of your compliment, makes me blush; I profess it does yet who would ever trust a man after what my good friend Mrs. Sly related of the Colonel.



Oh, name him not, madam, the young fellow is indeed plausible enough, but nothing of a soldier except the title good friends, no merit; and as to gallantry, I know he makes it his business to boast of favours from the ladies.



Nay, Sir, I defy him there, he could never boast of favours from me but in an honourable way I don't flaunt about with profligate young fellows no I act with discretion I have an unsullied character to support ay, ay if some forward flirting minx's of the age, would take half so much care of reputations as they do of complexions, there would not be such wicked and sensual doings.



Very true, madam ravishing sentiments  killing eyes let me swear by the horrors of war, that though I have had my hat taken off by a four and twenty pounder; though my beard has been close singed by the flash of a cannon; tho' my teeth have been picked with bayonets; though a whole platoon of musquet balls has passed thro' my body; and though I have been three times blown up on the forlorn hope; yet never did my heart feel such palpitation as those charms have caused.



Oh dear, that's a most powerful impression  well, military gentlemen undergo great hardship and I presume you are forced to kill people in your own defence, Sir?



Certainly, madam why now in the battle of of pshaw, pox, I have been in so many I don't know which it was but this single arm demolished two French Marqui's, four Counts,
  53
and above a dozen rank and file; but such bloody deeds are at an end; the promise of your fair hand, madam, has made me determine to throw up my commission.



Obliging and tender to the last degree.



But I shan't quit the service of my country entirely; I have a borough waiting for me, and I believe I shall accept of it but, madam, say when shall the special licence, I have obtained, take effect.



You are so zealous, Sir, but since you are determined e'en when you please.



To-morrow morning then, my fair, the chaplain of our regiment shall attend, and I'll fly upon the wings of love to give you notice.



Dear Sir, you are so irresistably persuading  I shall certainly attend your call.







Bless me, I hear somebody coming; and I would keep all snug till things are done.



Madam your words plant silence on my lips ten thousand soft adieus.



The same let me return remember to-morrow
Exeunt severally.

LADY BRAINLESS meeting the COLONEL.


Colonel you are welcome.



Your Ladyship's most obedient pray, madam, was not that Lord Frederic who parted from you just now?







So then here's anticipation against me.
(aside)



I profess, Colonel, your coming has given me great pleasure; I began to almost despair of you; and my route would have been as insipid in your absence as a humdrum society of country-folks set to cards in a winter's evening.



Your Ladyship does me particular honour.



Well, after all this matrimony is a very sad thing   Siberia, I think you called it, did not you, Colonel? notwithstanding which, my sister I believe will shortly travel to that desart clime well, I hope she may find it a pleasanter spot than I have done.







Yes, truly Lord Frederic, tho' his first visit, I find has hinted something that way, and my sister seems to have no objection.



'Sdeath! 'tis as I feared
(aside)
 this is a very sudden affair indeed, madam; but perhaps the match may not be so agreeable to Sir Scrapeall, and she can't marry without his consent.



That's true, as you say, Colonel; but I believe his generous worship considers her as a saleable piece of goods, and would be glad to make a profitable affair of his consent.



That hint may be of use to me
(aside)
I should hardly have supposed your Ladyship's sister capable of so precipitate a compliance.



Why its a little out of the common course, but the impressions of love are lightning-winged, and very variable in their flight witness those tender expressions, and the profusion of regard you have lavished upon me, Colonel  though any woman might be vain of the conquest, yet I never sought it: however I am really concerned you should be so much in love with me; but what can I possibly do?



A hopeful theme for my perplexity
(aside)
I am much debtor to your Ladyship's humanity, and must be content to sigh away my passion in absence.



Absence; nay that looks like absolute despair  and despair is a very sad thing I should grieve to be the cause of it come, who
  55
knows, Colonel, my agreeable lord and master can't live always, and when he's gone 



I wish I was gone with all my heart
(aside)
your Ladyship is so much in the right, that hope, tho' ever so distant, beams cheering rays; but if Lord Frederic should prevail, and blast 



Lord Frederic! why you know Colonel, he addresses my sister.



True, madam he does so I I mistook  you'll excuse my confusion.



Poor man, I protest I pity him, I never saw him so much affected before, but I can't help the bewitching power of my eyes
(aside)
  nay, Colonel, be comforted, within the bounds of honour you may command me.



I can't in the least doubt your Ladyship's goodness, but ardent love is impatient of delay and fearful of defeat, therefore if your sister should resolve to check my wishes and favour a rival.



My sister you don't imagine she shall direct my choice.



No, madam I did not mean that but then in case I say that if your Ladyship a  oons, I don't know what to say.



I see my staying does but perplex him the more humanity instructs me to withdraw that he may have time to recover well, Colonel, perhaps the company will compose your spirits and banish the train of impertinent thoughts which so busily intrude upon your quiet I'll leave you with Lord Frederic till we sit down to cards, and I must positively insist upon your being of my party.
Exit.



Pox o'party, cards, and company; every moment till I see Emmeline is torture.




Well, Colonel, I must say you are a gentleman of very difficult taste, for, as I remember,
  56
you told me that Emmeline was very middling in point of beauty, now I think her exquisite•y charming.



It may be so, my Lord.



may be so nay it is so, Colonel  I profess myself the Lady's champion, my sword is devoted to her service as well as my heart, and I shall esteem any insinuation against her charms as high treason against the queen of beauty.



Your Lordship is very rapturous upon the occasion, and I don't doubt but your sword is as ready as you speak it; however, since matters are come so far, I must take the liberty to inform you that the Lady does not stand in need of your knight errantry, for I have professed my service, which having been accepted, I cannot now decline.



Hey day! why certainly we are got to cross purposes; what a person of Colonel Parapet's taste interfere with such an odd family as this, and devote himself to a young Lady who can only make a tolerable citizen's wife, on whom quality would sit very aukwardly? ha! ha! ha! ha! now I shall take the pains to polish this rough diamond.



Your Lordship is facetious, but to dash your lordship's hopes, know that a previous claim to the Lady's favour has been made by me, and countenanced by her, which I presume, my Lord, will put an end to your pretensions.



Put an end to my pretensions! as soon to my life, Colonel.



If that be your resolution, my Lord, I know but of one decision you have, in appearance, an excellent sword, and I cannot doubt either your Lordship's skill or courage in the use of it.



A very rational method of argument, truly; right military logic, and in regard of us young fellows may be salutary, our constitutions are too sanguine, and breathing a vain must be
  57
useful, so I shan't baulk your resolution come Sir.
(draws.)



Spoke with the generous pleasantry of true courage, and strict honour, it will be some pleasure, if I should fall, to fall by so brave a hand
(draws)



Let me warn you, Colonel, to keep at a distance; for there is not a man in England could stand long before me at close quarters.



You are particularly generous, my Lord, but I am prepared for all events.



Very well, Sir come on then yet hold two points we have forgot: it won't be so decent to throw the family into confusion with our private animosity, and if in this combat the Lady's favourite, which ever it is, should fall, the conqueror will have no cause for trumph; so that being somewhat between hawk and buzzard, I think the Lady should be consulted; and if she declines an explanation we can but appeal to our swords at last.



True, my Lord, and on that footing let me have the honour to call myself your Lordship's friend.



I cordially embrace your proposal, and here the Lady comes most opportunely; if you'll open the case you shall have all the justice imaginable.




Colonel, your humble servant.



Madam, your most obedient I am sorry there should be any occasion to desire an explanation of what, for particular reasons, I have endeavoured to conceal; but his Lordship informing me of acl•• he either has or intends to put in for your favour, I am under the necessity, madam, of requesting that you will do justice to the previous right I assert.



Right! Colonel! I protest you astonish me! I am an entire stranger to the meaning of this formal address.







Quite so I assure you, Sir you talk of right, and favour, and justice; but upon what cause, and between what parties I really cannot conceive.







And if I did, not having been used to the law 'tis very probable I might not be able to decide; however the curiosity incident to my sex, induces me to request an explanation.



I am thunderstruck! is it possible, madam, you can need an explanation?



Come, come, Colonel, this affected surprise, and these distant insinuations are unfair, I'll deal more candidly, and set the Lady right at onee you must know, madam, that happening to mention the impression your charms have made upon my heart, this gentleman, my friend, declared that he had already preferred his addresses 



What! his addresses to me!



Yes, madam, and that you had received them most favourably.



Favourably is it possible you could advance this, Colonel!



Why, madam, did you not?



So upon this supposition, the colonel very kindly proposed his cutting my throat, or my cutting his; and if you had not appeared, madam, like the dove with the olive branch, I know not what might have been the consequence, for our resolutions seemed very terrible on both sides.



Your Lordship is very fanciful and merry; but I am not in a mood of temper to bear sneers at present.



Nay now, Colonel, you are quite
  59
too severe, that you'll neither allow me to love p•attle nor laugh, ha! ha! ha! ha!







So, so, so, now the mystery begins to clear up; and I perceive that what appeared rudeness is merely the unhappy effects of frenzy.







Most certainly; could any thing else have introduced such romantic chimaer•s, my Lord?



Madam, this affected ignorance of what you too well know, may prove insincerity, but cannot add to the reputation of candor and judgement  choice is undoubtedly free; but that choice once fixed, does not admit of alteration without some material reason.



Ay, there, Sir, I entirely come in with your opinion had any such choice been made: but I see you are quite too violent for argument, therefore I think it will be most prudent to retire.











Sdeath! Sir, dare you interpose?
(draws)








Sheath your sword, Colonel, I shan't fight a lunatic, positively.




Bless me what was the reason of that scream?  a sword drawn ah, I shall certainly faint.



The Colonel my blood boils at the fellow.



So, I shall have the whole crew upon me,
(aside)



For heav'ns sake, Emmeline, what is the meaning of all this?



Only the Colonel, sister, who because I
  60
would not confess being in love with him, very heroically intended to murther his Lordship.



What! you in love with him?



Yes, truly, and talks of having paid his addresses in form; asserts they were favourably received; and charges me with insincerity.



What were his professions to make a cat's paw of me my pride is hurt
(aside)



Ah, have a care child he's a most dangerous fellow, he would have imposed upon me if he could.



Yes, I shall have it now, and soundly too.
(aside)



How, Sir! did you make love to my sister?



To your sister, madam 



Did not you sigh, and vow, and swear to me perjur'd wretch?







What was that your delicate taste?



Where was your discretion.



Oons! I had no discretion to run myself into such a 



Such a what, Sir?



Ay, Sir, such a what?



Why, such, such 'sdeath! no words can paint my condition.



Have not you attempted to asperse my sister?



Did you not strive to delude me?



I find you are a general lover, Colonel, ha! ha! ha! ha!



And what then, my Lord?



Why then you are a deceitful treacherous hypocrite.



A base, designing, scurvy fellow.



I am infinitely obliged to you, ladies.



You are an inveigler of hearts.



A breaker of vows.







A monster of prey.



Mighty well, mighty well, truly; I have brought myself to a fine pass here; bubbled of my mistress, jeer'd by a coxcomb, baited like a bear by a couple of well ladies I hope your lungs may be the better for this breathing whatever my ears may have suffered; for you, madam, who have so very short a memory, or such a weathercock heart, I have only to repent the knowledge of so much beauty and falshood; his facetious Lordship I may meet in a fitter time and place.
(going.)







What for you to begin again! 'sdeath! I'd sooner stand at the mouth of a charged cannon with a lighted match at the touch-hole.
runs off.



Positively he shan't escape so easy.
Exit.



Easy; no, no, he shall have t'other sasarara before he gets off.
Exit.



Ha! ha! ha! ha! let's follow and have a little more of it.



With all my heart tho' I almost begin to pity him.
Exeunt.




Bless me, Sir! have a care I'm afraid you'll fall.



No, no, my little pilot you know the song steddy, boys, steddy thof I do carry too much canvas, and sail gunwale too, in a rolling sea I shall weather the gale but strike my topsails, what are all these fresh-water passengers that are come aboard our ship, we sha'nt have stowage for them.



You mean, Sir, the company that are coming to my Lady's route.







Why, Sir, a great many ladies and gentlemen who meet to play at cards all night.



An that be their trim, spring my bowsprit, if I were master of the vessel but I'd heave all such live lumber overboard but what say you, my little pinace, to that same voyage I was talking about? an you like it I'll heave out a hawser of love, and take you in tow for the port of matrimony.



La, Sir, I am afraid you only want to delude me; I have heard such strange things of you gentlemen.



Gentlemen! strike my flag not so bad as that neither I'm a sailor, my heart of gold, not like one of your land pirates, who fight under false colours, and trade to horn-fair; we at sea stick to our sweethearts as we do to our ships, as long as they can swim so if you like to swing in my hammock say the word; I'll cruize for a parson tomorrow morning, that shall splice us fast together as if we were at moorings with the best bower and cable of a first 



To be sure, Sir, you are very good; and I must own have won my heart; but I am afraid that Sir Scrapeall will be angry.



And what then? think you he's to have steering of me? blow me up, Dick Starboard has not been so many leagues on the salt sea to be commanded by any land-lubber of them all.



Yes, Sir, but your family may think it such a disgrace; and I would not have it said for the whole world you know, Sir, I am but a waiting-woman.



A waiting-woman! and what then? board me I was but a swabber myself, so there's family for family, ho! ho! ho! mess 'tis not always safe to sail in your gilded ginger-bread pleasure-boats
  63
 I like your model and trim; and look, d'ye see, if you'll chuse me master, I'll navigate you while there's compass, helm, and sea-store.



Indeed, Sir, I don't know what to say to you; you are so fond, and so engaging, and so sincere, that, excuse my blushes I can't possibly refuse you any thing.



Why that's well said this seals my commission
(kisses her and stumbles forward)
avast, avast, mess I shipp'd a head-sea on my poop there, and had much ado to come to rights again well, my little frigate, I'll clear out of the canonical customhouse, and steer away with you for Merryland to-morrow morning wind and weather permitting  mess thou shalt be rigg'd as fine, and swagger with any quality yacht of them all; and so, d'yee see, if you'll toss me up such another can of flip as I had just now, and make a trip with it to my hammock, when its my watch I'll do the same for you.



Sir, I thought you might want something, so I kept the keys; Sir Scrapeall ordered Timothy to take them to bed, but I insisted on having them.



Well said, again, my little trimmer  run me ashore an it had not been for thee I might have lived on rope's ends and four small beer in this here ship; but choak my pumps, and scuttle my bottom, an she'll swim long so many masters and never a steersman, she'll soon be on the shallows.
(going jostles the side wing)
So, so, bring the land marks to bear Dick Starboard, and double the head-lands, seaman like.



There, Sir, you are at your chamber-door.



Enough, enough, enough, I'll cast anchor
  64
in Slumber-bay in less than half a glass. Yo, ho, mess-mate, bear a hand, and don't forget the flip, d'ye hear.
Exit.








SIR CHARLES and the COLONEL.
HA! ha! ha! ha! a pretty situation you had got into among the females; however, my discovery of the pretended Lord Frederic, has occasioned a considerable revolution in your countenance, Colonel.


Ay, and in my heart too, Sir Charles; but I am impatient to know the method of your discovery.



Know then I went in search of Lord Frederic, and being told he was gone to Lady Brainless's route, I followed; where I was so thoroughly mortified with an account of Lady Charlotte's marriage, that to collect my spirits, I retired and took a moon-light turn in the garden.



A proper place, and fit season, for melancholy reflection.



I had not been long there when her masquerading Ladyship, and Emmeline, came down a neighbouring walk, enjoying aloud the perplexity they had given us; encouraged by the subject, I drew near, and received conviction that your rival is no other than my mistress, who concluded with remarking, that she thought they had played upon us sufficiently.



Yes, truly, I think they have; so long that I began to be most horridly out of tune but
  65
prithee what could be at the bottom of this Quixote scheme?



To gain some assurance of our sincerity, which, after laughing at us a little, they seemed satisfied with.



Dear Sir Charles, let me embrace you, so prudent and spirited a design makes the little gipsies ten times dearer than ever did you let them know the discovery?



Not for the world I hastened from the garden, joined the company some minutes before them, shook off all concern, was unusually gay, and gallanted Lady Betty Ombre so warmly, that poor Lord Charles was, in his turn, utterly discontented.



Ha! ha! ha! ha! bravissimo! that was turning the tables upon them with strict justice; and I think it would not be amiss to have a little more of it



By all means, I sought you for that purpose, I am to call at Sir Scrapeall's this morning, and would have you drop in occasionally; for as the politicians play'd a double game into each others hands, it is but fit we should return like for like.



With all my heart, it will be notable revenge; mischief on't had your discovery been made a little sooner it might have saved me five thousand pounds for ought I know.







Why in the heat of my passion, I went to the Knight, made known my passion for Emmeline, and offered half her fortune for his consent.



Ha! a substantial compliment to the Lady, Colonel, but we must try to settle matters otherwise but come the hour calls me to the citizen's  I'll lead the van, do you bring up the rear.



Fear not, I am ever punctual to my orders.






Dear Lady Charlotte, I am concerned to see your natural vivacity so much disconcerted by a slight supposition.



Slight supposition! alas, Emmeline, in your case you don't see with the eyes of love, else you would put another construction upon Sir Charles's behaviour.



I admit there was something extraordinary; but the feelings he confessed when you told him of the intended marriage were strong and sincere; the gaiety he afterwards assumed was, if I judge right, a slight veil occasionally thrown over a gloomy heart.



I can't think so forced spirits are easily seen through, and such could never have carried him so far as to gallant that forward shallow piece of coquetry, Lady Betty.



There, I must acknowledge, he was somewhat mysterious.



Would I had not taken this disguise, though it has been so far useful as to prove the sincerity of your lover, it has only purchased pain for me I cannot blame Sir Charles the fault is mine I have acted like a foolish boy, who plays with and teizes a favourite bird, till breaking bondage, it takes wing never to be recalled; dear friend what step shall I take?



I would hope the best: still you know by appointment he will soon be here, sound him a little further and I dare believe he will yet fulfill my good opinion of him.



I would indulge that hope, but strong doubts press forward to exclude it.



I see him coming, and shall leave you to a private conference.
Exit.





Sir Charles good morning I have, according to promise, prepared a letter for my sister Charlotte, wherein I have enlarged upon your previous pretensions as much as possible.



I am infinitely obliged to your Lordship; but upon second thought, I have determined not to offend Lady Charlotte by a visit.



Your resolution so warmly urged is very soon changed, Sir.



Why, my Lord, upon cool deliberation, I think it better not to proceed any further in the affair; 'tis possible I might have interpreted the Lady's good nature too partially in my own favour; and as freedom of choice is undoubtedly just, it would be rude and cruel to interrupt her present scheme of happiness.



You are of a very happy disposition, Sir Charles, that can so soon, and so coolly, reconcile an affair which seemed so interesting 



Yes, my Lord, I am tolerably philosophical in these matters; besides, to own the truth, I had, amongst other conversation, talked so much of love to Lady Charlotte that I fancied our hearts engaged when there was nothing meant, I believe, but a little fashionable gallantry.



Then all my fears are true;
(aside)
but suppose, Sir, my sister's affection should have been seriously engaged.



Nay, my Lord, she's too much a fine Lady to be in any danger that way 
ENTER COLONEL.
Colonel Parrapet your most humble servant.



Sir Charles, yours: my Lord I kiss your hand.



Sir, I don't think your behaviour and our last parting admit of such familiarity.



Nay, my Lord, I came on purpose to solicit pardon; too free a glass had flustered my temper without the least intention of offence; acknowledgement of error is, I know, sufficient to a man of honour, but I must confess myself a little puzzled for an apology to this Lady.




Sir Charles, your servant oh! the Colonel  may we hope that night and reflection, Sir, have given your thoughts a calm?



Most certainly, madam, and I hope your good nature will grant indulgence to unlimited confession, especially as I am come to make all attonement possible by offering any assistance wh•ch may promote his Lordship's happiness and yours.



So this swain is changed about too.




Your condescension is very forward, Sir, but I presume his Lordship can take care of his own happiness without your assistance.



Doubtless, madam but if I could any way contribute 



Oh, Sir, you are exceeding liberal and courtly in your professions and promises, I can witness that.



How so madam? for by your own declaration I never had the honour of promising or professing to you  



'Tis no matter, Sir, but I believe if you had, you are very capable of forswearing it.



Oh dear madam, I am sorry you have so terrible an opinion of me; but I perceive this subject grows too interesting adso, I had almost forgot to tell you, Sir Charles, that I met Lady Betty Ombre just now, and to use her own phrase, she dies till she sees you.



I shall go distracted.
(aside)



Colonel I am obliged to you for delivering so kind a message; and from so accomplished a Lady; when your match with her sister Lady Frances is compleated; of friends we shall become brothers.








That will be double pleasure; pray, madam, are you intimate with the family of the Ombre•s



I don't know, I can't tell insolent tormenting man.
(aside)



Your Lordship will be happy in an acquaintance there Sir Charles will introduce you, and if your Lordship's choice was not already fixed upon this Lady, there is a third sister who has a most bewitching pair of eyes.



I can hold no longer.



A very dangerous pair of sparklers, indeed, my Lord.



Sir, you are a villain.



And, Sir, you are the worst of villains.











Oh that I were a man for justice sake.







And I too what self betrayed, ha! ha! ha! ha! this is more than I expected, and hastens the comedy to a conclusion what think you ladies, have we ballanced the account of perplexity or not?







What do you mean, Sir?



Nay, never look strange; your scheme was well laid, and had not chance directed me to a moon-light walk in the garden last night, we might have continued food for mirth at the expence of our peace.



I am glad its no worse.
(aside)



I am so confus'd and so pleas'd, I know not what to say.
(aside)



The palpitation of our hearts will, I hope, ladies, make this trespass on your patience appear excusable.



Well, gentlemen, since it is in vain to deny, I admit your discovery, and cannot but acknowledge your treatment has been founded on strict justice.



Spoke with your usual candour and generosity, lady Charlotte, and hence let mutual confidence ensue; as to you, madam, I have Sir Scrapeall's promise to make you mine.



So! so! Here's counter-working  was it fair to undermine me; but pray how did you prevail upon the knight.



By the rhetoric of five thousand pounds; that is, offering to surrender half the Lady's fortune.







And had it been twenty times as much I should have only thought it a fit sacrifice to so much merit.



An excellent proof of disinterested love, Colonel but you are outbid, for I proposed to take the Lady without any fortune at all; and am to have the honest Citizen's written consent within.







Ha! ha! ha! ha! upon my honour, Colonel, you have been fairly outsoldiered, beat at your own weapons.



And poor I set up at auction to the best bidder.



Ha! ha! ha! even so, Emmeline; but all for the better, I hope oh! I see Lady Brainless, I have some business with her in my
  71
Lordly capacity and shall beg of you to retire.



You command us madam.






Now must I play a part severely kind in hopes of good effects, your Ladyship's most obedient.
ENTER LADY BRAINLESS.
My Lord, your humble servant,



Your Ladyship had a bad run at cards last night.



Oh terrible! my Lord! it seemed as if fortune had determined to cross me.



Were not such things common, madam, in matters of chance, they would press hard upon patience I think your Ladyship lost fifteen hundred pounds? one thousand to me, and five hundred to Lord Robert Whist?



Thereabouts, I believe, my Lord.



I am sorry to urge your Ladyship; but being myself a good deal out of cash at present, and having a bill of eight hundred to pay this forenoon, should be obliged to you for the trifle depending between us.



Really, my Lord, your demand takes me rather at a disadvantage.



You know, madam, it is not like the impertinent bill of a troublesome mechanic for work done, or goods delivered, it is a debt of honour; and such you know, takes place of all other payments among people of fashion.



That's very true, my Lord, and I would always act up to the fashion, but inclination must give way where ability is totally wanting; and though Sir Scrapeall deals in cash I am almost as bare as if he was not worth a single shilling.



If this be the case I find I ventured real against imaginary sums, and must therefore be more cautious of my company.



Really, my Lord, there is much less politeness in that inuendo than I should have expected from a man of fashion.



Politeness, madam, is very well upon particular occasions; but in gaming there is no such thing, we win of whom and when we can; like death, it cuts off all distinction of rank, relations and friends, and stakes must be paid, or persons exposed; but as your Ladyship is a fine woman matters should be made as easy as possible, and if 



If what, my Lord!



I presume there could not be much love in your match with Sir Scrapeall I have conceived a passion, give it suitable return, and let the thousand pounds 



Insolent man, no more; what part of my conduct, tho' perhaps ungarded, could encourage so gross an insult gratify your malice, expose the sum due, and set me up the sport of laughing libertines, I'll bear all patiently, as the fruit and punishment of my own indiscretion, secure in this pleasing reflection, that tho' you publish my poverty you cannot taint my virtue.



Come, come, madam, Colonel Parapet would have received a gentler answer.



No, my Lord, there you are mistaken also; for though that gentleman may have been allowed a particular intimacy, and may have improved or misconstrued appearances, he must be a consumate villain if ever he dropped a prejudicial insinuation; for let me say to you, to him, and all the world, that however I have dipped into follies, the vices of life could never make me a proselyte.



'Tis as I always thought, dear Lady Brainless, these just and noble sentiments force off false appearances, and reveal me, instead of a gaming
  73
Lord, your disinterested and inviolable friend Charlotte Bloom.



Lady Charlotte! why then this disguise! or why would friendship alarm such painful sensations.



As to the motive of this appearance you shall know in due time why I have wounded your delicate feeling was to awaken a sense of what you justly call follies, which have long obscured many valuable qualifications, and subjected you to the reproach of several who have l•ss real merit, but more external caution.



Dear Lady Charlotte, I shall be ever debtor to your kind opinion and friendly design; reflection tells me I have given too just cause for censure, yet not without some plea of justification.



I am certain of it, your most disproportionate marriage, if not an entire excuse, is at least a powerful palliation.



Marriage; there you have said all at once, those who should have studied and judged better for my future happiness warmly urged the match; young and unexperienced I was, allured by the hopes of a title, and unlimited command; ever since I have been almost hourly rendered unhappy by the selfish and perverse temper of Sir Scrapeall, which has occasioned me to despise and cross him in every particular; and most of my extravagncies have been more calculated for killing time, than any pleasure pity me, dear Charlotte, for I find my scheme of life widely different from what I wish, and yet in self defence I am obliged to follow it; when avarice, jealousy, and discord prevail at home, peace must be sought abroad.



I have no reason to doubt your friendship  but tell me, did the Colonel use any freedom with my character?



No, upon my honour, what I hinted was from observation last night; and repeated to alarm you, tho' I sincerely believe you meant nothing.



Your interpretation, my friend, is kind and just; I own my horrid situation made me fond of his engaging conversation; and female vanity was flattered in some compliments he passed upon me, nothing more, I assure you, and yet, now I look back, such gallant trifling is like sporting on the unstedfast margin of a lucid stream, where while we admire the beautiful reflection in its liquid bosom, one false step hurries us to certain destruction.



Your similitude, my friend, is fancifully just; but we are too grave, Sir Charles, the Colonel and Emmeline are but in the next room, shall we join them and prattle away gloomy ideas.



Excuse me for the present, dear Lady Charlotte, the reflections you have awakened render my spirits unfit for conversation, therefore give me leave to retire think for me, gentle friend, and if any means can be found to free from, or alleviate my bondage, I promise that future conduct shall prove my errors the effect of disagreeable circumstances; of a tormented, but not a dishonest heart.
Exit.



How good a heart may inadvertently be led into unfavourable appearance?




Knowing your design. Lady Charlotte, I ventured to make these gentlemen ear witnesses of the work of reformation, and they admire it vastly.



I am glad of it; and hope you will all join to set her Ladyship free.



Sdeath! if there be no other method I'll chuck old cent. per cent. out of the window and •her••t liberty that way.



Come, come, I hope to effect it by some less furious means I'll slep to him for a few minutes.
Exit.



Hey-day! what have we here?



As I live, mother Busy, and my man Fusee  married, I hope.




Sir Charles, your most humble servant  Emmeline, how dost do child?



And pray, madam, why am I left out of the catalogue of compliments.



You! marry come up! indeed I wonder you have assurance to look me in the face after such behaviour, I should have been prettily off, indeed, if I had depended upon your fine speeches and palav'ring I should have been a fine laughing truly, for all the coxcombs and gill flirts; but I'd have you know, Mr. Colonel, grown birds are not to be catched with chaff, no, no, I saw through all your designs.



Designs! madam! what could you see but the most faithful, the most ardent passion; but I suppose you tax me with inconstancy to justify your own falshood, and will give yourself away to blast all my hopes.



Ah, that wheedling tongue, and that deceitful fa•e, if my virtue had not been impregnable, if I had not been as cold as ice to unlawful love, I don't know what might have been the consequence; but as I am not to be imposed upon; I know the world, and the difference of people  Captain Spontoon, my husband, has heard your baseness.



How! husband! ah cruel fair are you then married.



Yes, truly, Sir perhaps you thought I could not get a match; but the Captain has discernment   76
 you might have made your market, Sir, but now 'tis too late.



Then, animosity aside, I wish you joy with all my heart; and hope Fusee may make you a good husband.


Sir. Char. and Emme.
Ha! ha! ha! ha!



Fusee! and who's that pray?



A very honest fellow I assure you, madam, my servant that was, and your lord and master that is how long have you been a Captain, Fusee?



Not much above four and twenty hours, Sir.


Sir Char. Col. and Emme.
Ha! ha! ha! ha!



What can all this mean? how, Sir! are you no Captain?



No truly, not at present but I will be one if you'll buy me a commission, my charming dear.



Buy you a halter, my roguish dear.


Sir Char. Col. and Emme.
Ha! ha! ha! ha!



What am I tricked then? has neighbour Sly imposied on me?



Oh no, madam, you are not to be imposed upon you know the world, and the difference of people, ha! ha! ha!



Hold your tongue, hussy, must such a minx as you set up your face?



Nay, good madam, don't be in a passion, it discomposes your beauty a bride, and frown  oh fie.


Sir Char and Emme.
Ha! ha! ha! ha!



They provoke me so I don't know what to say or do married to his servant! well you are pleased to be mighty merry, good folks  but I am not the first that has been deceived, nor sh•n't be the last as for you, Colonel, I'll let your character be known; and this fellow I can be revenged of at any time; for if I throw myself into the river my jointure goes with me, so there's tit for tat, and bite for bite, he! he! he!
runs off



Follow your Lady, Fusee, she'll come too when she can't help herself.



I'll do what I can, Sir, for sake of the money; but if she should resolve upon a lover's leap e'en let her go, for truly I begin to think her service will prove harder duty than the brown musket and six-pence a day.
Exit.



Well, madam, I think her insolence to you is pretty well repaid.



Thoroughly, as I could wish.



Nothing but strict justice on your own account, for she was most abominably troublesome  here comes Lady Charlotte and the Knight.




Well, my Lord, upon signing the paper I sent you to peruse; you shall have my consent to marry her in writing.



Sir Scrapeall, your very humble servant.



How! my scarlet friend! what shall I say to him?
(aside)
your servant, Sir.



Well, Sir Scrapeall, the young Lady agrees to your consent in my favour.



Consent, Sir! ay, but 



How, Sir! have you been in treaty with another?







Another▪ why, Sir, did not you promise me your consent on abating half the Lady's fortune?



Nay, Colonel, but I abate the whole of her fortune.



Hey day! guardian! have you set me up to public sale?



I shall depend upon your word, Sir Scrapeall.



And I shall positively insist upon my claim.



You are very peremptory, gentlemen; but
  78
suppose I won't consent to either, what then as to you, Colonel, I don't think your fortune sufficient, and for you my Lord keep our bargain and you shall have my consent to run away with her to Scotland.
(aside)



Ha! ha! ha! a very honest and generous proposal, indeed, Sir Knight, but a word in your ear, I have more occasion for a husband than a wife.







Yes Sir, that I'll testify.



How! are not you a Lord then?



No Sir, but I am a Lady by courtesy.



What the mischief, women turned into men; I have long scrupled to believe my ears, and now I shan't chuse to trust my eyes well, Colonel, I shall consider your proposals.



Nay, Sir, it shall be settled now, and draw this way not only give your consent but the Lady's whole fortune, or I'll make you repent it.



make me repent it I defy you, Sir  madam, I mean.



Softly, Sir, you sent me a paper to peruse.







You thought it was a release for that Lady's fortune; but listen to the title directions for John Ringbolt, master of the ship Peggy, to run her ashore, she being insured at treble value 



Oh that blundering dog, my clerk
aside
well, Colonel, since I believe you'll make the girl a good husband, and she is willing, I shall give my consent.



Ay, Sir, but it must be done in due form; and now as your Lady has many just causes of complaint, to prevent the trouble, scandal, and expence of a public divorce, she proposes a voluntary separation.



With all my heart, I'll resign all title to her let her march as soon as she pleases.



And take her whole fortune with her.



No, no, I did not say that neither.



What I must consult the insurers, must I.
(aside)



Oh h h no, I'll do what you have a mind.



Well gentlemen and ladies, I call upon you as witnesses, that Sir Scrapeall agrees to a separation proposed by his Lady, and is so generous as to return her whole fortune.



Ay, all but the two thousand pounds her extravagance cost me.



Oh, the insurers shall settle that point.
(aside.)



I shall certainly run mad stark staring mad if it was not for the hopes that brother Starboard will drink himself dead in a month, and make me his heir, I could never hold out.




Who's aboard, yo, ho.



What naval greeting's that?



By the harmony of expression it should be Sir Scrapeall's delicate brother-in-law.





And Moll, and Kate, and Nancy shall roll in loui's d'ors. What cheer, what cheer, messmates? why brother Brainless, your poop always carries a signal of distress; what have you been in a gard gale since I saw you? mess, I have sailed through the channel of courtship twelve knots an hour, and made the harbour of matrimony with my little snow half a glass since.



How! what! not married, I hope?



I don't know what you call married, but I showed the parson a cocquet to clear out of the canonical custom-house; he clapped on his uniform,
  80
read grace, spliced our hands, and launched us off to swing in a hammock together.



Bravely said, honest captain.



Mrs. Ruelle I heartily wish you joy.



I am obliged to you, madam.



Ay, ay, thank you, thank you, young woman, the same to you when you steer the like course.



I profess I am astonished!



And why so, forsooth? is not she a tight built thing?



Well, since it is so, I desire you to pay me for the punch and eatables you and your followers have devoured, and the things you have broke.



Pay! blow me up then this here ship of yours is no better than a bum-boat; so d'ye see, order us a good bucket of rumbo, make your bill, and we'll pay all together a l•ght heart, &c.
(sings)

Goes off with Ruelle.


Oh mercy on me! I must follow the mad bear to see he does no more mischief.
Exit.



Ha! ha! ha! what a rueful condition is the poor Knight in.



Deservedly madam you have negotiated and distributed justice with most commendable impartiality.



The pleasing effects are amply rewarded, Colonel.



And now, my friend, it remains to perfect our own happiness, which has cost us so much anxiety in the pursuit.



But will, in the hands of these ladies, more than repay it all; for how pleasing soever the irregular sallies of dissipation may be, I doubt not but we shall be perfectly and happily convinced

That human kind no equal bliss can prove,
To the chaste raptures of connubial love.




