
The Curtain rises, and discover a pleasant Grove, &c. the Prospect end∣ing in a River running thro a Valley. Phaeton, Althea, and her Maids in the front of the Stage, and on each side Shepherds and Shep∣herdesses in Green.


Phaeton and Althea come forward before the rest.



I Was on this day, that first I saw my Phaeton,

'T was on this day, that first I lov'd my Phaeton:
For when I first beheld you, I first lov'd you.



I lov'd Althea too, when first I saw her;
Lov d did I say? no, I ador'd her rather:
For as the Gods to Man, so she to me
Reveal'd herself in generous Benefits
Of Life, of Liberty!



O! my dear Lord!
Permit me here in safety to review
The wondrous Rise of my unchanging Love:
Or I lose half the Triumphs of this day.



Oh! lose no joy that Phaeton can give.



It was the solemn Festival of Iuno,

The great Protectress of our Samian State,
When at the sacred Rites this wondrous Sight
Surprizd us all, but most affected me.
The Priest o'th sudden started from the Victim,
And threw aloft his trembling hands to Heav'n:
His hair erected, stood upripht like bristles;
His glaring eves about confus dly roll'd,
And his stretch'd nostrils breath'd a cloud of smoak:
When from his widen'd mouth an awful voice,
A Voice much more than mortal shook the Temple;
As thunder dreadful, and almost as loud,
And in a storm pronounc'd these fatal words;

Samos is lost, and Hierax is no more,
Vnless we drive these Strangers from our shore.
He said, and full of sacred Fury led
The willing people to the neighb'ring Sea.



'T was there he found us, just escap'd the Wreck;
The shatter'd Reliques of th' inclement Tempest;
Our Swords, and Virtue, all the Waves had left us.
With joy we spy'd the Ensigns of the Gods,
Secure of help, and hospitable rights,
Both from his age and office. But alas!
Our hopes all vanish'd e're they well were form'd;
For on the verge of the descending Strand,
With hostile threatnings he forbad our passage.
Th' ignoble Vulgar, with confirming shouts,
All seconded their Leader.
What cou d we do? on e ry hand beset:

  2The Sea on this side, and on that the People,
All sworn to our Ruin? Resolv'd on Death,
My small, but chosen Band, unsheath'd their Swords,
Appealing to the Gods, we rush'd upon 'em,
And drove th' inhumane herd into their street.



Ay, there I first beheld my Godlike Lord,
Like Mars undaunted, but like Cupid Fair;
A charming terror fill d his lovely face,
That did more execution than his Arm;
Tho that did Wonders scarce to be believ'd.
As from the Palace we survey'd the Fight
(For the first Tumult drove us from the Temple)
We all took Int'rest in your doubtful Fate;
And those that fear'd you, pray'd you might o'recome;
At least that swift Agreement might secure you.



The people now amazd at what we did,
Had soon agreed, had not Sesostris Sword
Cleft down their Mitred Chief. For tho he fell
Himself to expiate his Crime, their rage
Encreas'd still with their numbers; till unable
To wield our glutted Swords, we all were taken.



Then, like the Sun obscur'd in noisome Fogs,
I lost my Phaeton in th' earthy Vulgar. 
A pow'rful Pity for thy youth and beauty
(I thought it Pity but I found it Love)
Compell'd my steps down to thy frightful Dungeon,
To set thee free from Chains, and hast'ning Death.
But oh! the Joy! the Transports of my Soul,
When you refus'd your liberty and life,
If those must rob you of your Benefactress:
Refus'd a flight, that bore you from Althea!
O! the soft melody that thro my ears
Dissolv'd my heart at your dear vows and oaths
Of boundless love, and of eternal truth!



O! my false heart! thou hast too soon forgot 'em! Aside.



By the bright God, the Author of thy Being,
I cou'd not help the Fondness I betry'd.
The struggling Ecstacy too mighty grew
For my weak breast to hold! it bore down all
The artful coyness of our modest Sex:
The Tyes of Blood; the Fears of Womanhood;
Father, Mother, Country, and toilsom Dangers.
I fled with joy from all that men hold dear,
Alone o re Seas to Asia in a Boat,
My Pilot thou, and my protecting God.




Aside Oh! why was glory, and this charming woman
Such mortal foes, as not to be united?
Why must I owe so much, and be so poor,
That I can pay so little! O Lybia!
Thy tyrant Beauties have usurp'd my heart,
And ravish'd me from all my vows and oaths.



My Lord, you're thoughtful; nay you seem disturb'd,

•s oft you do oflate: does ought aggrieve you?



Nothing, Althea, but the mournful Thought,
How much ill-fated love, alas! has cost thee,



Tho Father, Mother, Country, all be lost,
Tho for my Unkles truth to •uno's trust,
For the Fidelity of Argus 

Egypts protecting Goddess hates ev'n me:
Yet in her Egypt, I have nothing lost,
While Phaeton is mine, and only mine.



Gods! why dye throw such Tenderness away,
On one so little meriting her Goodness! Aside.




Come, come, this day banish all anxious thoughts;
We'll drown in Music, and the sports prepar'd
To celebrate this Feast, all sad reflections.
Come sit with me, and please my wishing eyes,
While these delight our ears.


They seat themselves, and the Music comes forward, &c.


Come, come all ye Shepherds, come come all away,
Forget all your Cares,
Your Fears, and Despairs,
For 'tis the Lovers Holiday. Repeat this in a Chorus.




Let every Shepherd bring his Lass,
in mirthful sports the hours we'll pass;
And while we sing, to raise our pleasures,
Tread you the earth with grateful measures. Here repeat the Chorus, while the Shepherds and Shepherdesses dance.




Ye smiling Graces, come inspire
In every Breast a tender fire,
While wanton laughter adds to our desire.

Chorus and Dance again.
Boy and Girl come forward.


Life is but a little span,
Let us pass it all in pleasure;
Id not lose this dawn of Man,
Since my day's so short a measure.



Why so hasty? forward Boy:
Sure 'tis not so long you've fasted?
E're Im ripe, to crop the joy,
Is to eat me ere Im tasted.



Why this coyness? why this coursing
To the joys you long to prove?
Nature made you all for sporting,
Nature made you all for love.



O fie! O fie!















No, no, not I.



Good faith I'll try.



No, no, not •





First Shepherd and first Shepherdess.


Come, gentle Phyllis, we'll softly retire,
And once more attempt to allay the dear fire,
My Wishes, thy Eyes and thy Arms inspire.



No more for I fear we ne'r shall attain
The end of our wishes, but burn still invain.



As oft as we burn, we'll repeat the soft joy.



To repeat it t•o often the bliss will destroy.



When the fire's abated, and the passions is done,
We shall both be as easie as e're it begun. The two last lines repeat to∣gether, and then repeat em in a Chorus.



  4Second Shepherd pursuing a Shepherdess that flies him.
Cruel Daphne do not fly me,
Hear me tho you still deny me.
Hear each piteous groan and sigh,
See, oh! see! your Strephon dye.


Third Shepherd coming to him and pulling him back by the sleeve.
Fond Shepherd prithee cease to wooe her,
She flies the more, that you pursue her.
All your whining, and your pining
Will but make her proud, and vain.
Do but slight her, that will spight her,
And revenge on her your pain.
There's Lydia, there's Chloris, and Phyllis to please you;
They're fairer than Daphne, yet humble and easie,
Whe• to sighing, and groans you pervert the brisk joy,
You sin against youth, and offend the soft Boy,
For the pleasures he offers, you fondly destroy.

The last three lines repeated in a Chorus.


To passive years resign your pining,
Active youth no time can spare:
To unperforming Age leave whining,
Youth can better please the fair.
That sweetly should gain,
By the languishing pain,
And sigh more with joy, than despair.

While the last Chorus is here repeated he seems to leave her and she looks back kindly on him, and then sings,

Can you, can you, will you leave me?
Mind em not, for they deceive you.
Quick possessing,
Palls the blessing,
While resistance makes it lasting.
Easie love destroys desire,
Sighs, and wishes fan your fire.
You lose your Appetite by tasting,
Which you sharpen still by fasting:
'Tis resistance makes it lasting.

The three last lines repeated in a Chorus of Shepherdesses.


Enough of delays, my passion to raise,
And now to Feast let's repair;
Ne're fear I shall prove a glutton in love,
My stomach•s so keen by despair.



Resistance and yielding well temper'd, still prove
The best Sauce to the surfeiting Banquet of love.

They all go off Singing. Phaeton and Althea come forward.



aside. O Lybia! still thou sit'st too near my heart!
For Sports and Music to remove thee thence.
Music blows up the shame I shou'd extinguish.



My Lord, why still thus sad amidst this Mirth▪
You dash the pleasures, that you shou'd advance,
And with forbidding frowns, you check my rising Joy.
What secret sorrow thus o're-clouds your face?
On such a day as this too? Speak my Lord 

  5I will ease your mind to let me share its burden.



Nothing  But that I'm weary of this floath;
These weak enervate softnesses; this rest.
My active soul disdains this womans life.
I wou'd in youth hoard up for feeble' age,
An awful Treasure of immortal Glory.



Mistaken men invert the use of nature;
Age is most fit for Mischief, Youth for Love.
When years come on and Impotence of pleasure,
Provok'd by envy of the joys they want,
We may allow them to disturb the world.



You speak, but like a woman, as I live
How shoud I here exert the God within me?
In thrilling notes? in languishments? and kisses?



How wou'd my Lord, my Love, exert the God,
But living like the Gods in peaceful joys?
Come, you're unkind to let an empty name,
Rival a love so generous as mine.



I struggle to thee, spight of my ambition;
But yet my soul starts back to ambition;
For 'tis ambition is my nat'ral bent:
And tho I give you all of me I can,
You are unsatisfy'd you have no more.

Turns away and walks from her


Turn not away I'm pleas'd with what you'll give.
Let me but have you all while you are here.
For toilsome thoughts, you will have too much. time
Give me unrivall'd this auspicious day.
Be sort, be tender now, look kindly on me,
For my soul languishes, and I am sick with love.

Looking wistfully on him.




She views me with such pointed searching looks,
As if she'd spy into my very heart,
And there discover all the fatal secret.



You shun my Eyes as if they were disgustful
What have I done? or how have I offended
My Lord! my Life?







I swear I love with my first Virgin fondness:
I live all in you, and I dye without you.
At your approach my heart beats fast within me,
A pleasing, trembling thrills thro all my blood,
When e're you touch me with your melting hand.
But when you kiss! O 'tis not to be spoke!



No, no, you have not  nay, you can't offend me
You're innocent 



In act, in Word, in Thought,
I call the Gods to attest by innocence.
If e're I wish'd, or hop'd, or thought of joy
But what you gave, but what was all in you,
May you be angry, may you be unkind;
Or in one curse to sum up all that's hateful,
May you soon love some other!



Gods! Gods! can I hear this and yet be false. Aside:



So ma• the Lord of my desires be true,
As they all mov•, and center all in you.



Alas! Althea I can't doubt thy truth,
And know thy love. But yet 



But yet? but what?
He walks up and down discomposedly and thoughtfully.
Unfold that fatal Yet O tell me that!





Too much abundance 'tis that makes me poor.
Oh! had I ne're seen One, or seen but One,
I had been happy then: but seeing both,
I burn for both, and with an equal fire,
I love them both, and both I most desire!



Oh why thus thoughtful! why that look cast down?
Those folded Arms! Oh why those sudden starts?
Some fatal Sorrow you conceal from me
That shakes your soul thus. Give, O! give my part.
O! do not rob me of my share of woe.
Not on these terms I gave my plighted faith,
To taste your joys, and not partake your grief.
Indeed, I cannot hear such cruel kindness,
Such partial woe, where I must have no share!Weeps






Treacherous, false, persidious, as I am?
Yet she is excellent, divinely excellent!Looks earenestly at her.

Young as the Spring, and as the Graces fair;
Constant as Truth, as melting Pity tender;
As Want ingenious, and as Goodness kind!



Speak, my dear Lord, these looks are kind indeed:
Come let your Tongue convey my bitter potion,
Which yet, to share with you, will be most sweet.





Lybia is fair as her 
She must be proud too of the Crowns she brings,
If she wou'd bring 'em me: for tho I lov'd her,
Yet she perhaps woud never have lov'd me!
Or not so well, so fiercely, as Althea!



Quite lost in Thought, he hears not what I say!





And have such blended power o're my soul,
That 'tis with difficulty they're distinguish'd. 
It must be so, Ambition pleads for Lybia,

But for Althea Love.  And Love prevails, Aloud & turning to her.

She must, she shall, she does possess me all,
Be gon Ambition with thy noisy charms,
Thy tinsel glare Haste, take me to thy arms,
O fold me here most charming of thy kind!Run into her 'rms.

Here, form me, mold me, shape me to thy mind,
Glory, Ambition, all you've driven away,
You ne're possess'd me all till this triumphant day!



O racking joy! O most transporting Rapture!
O gift bevond return! what shall I say?
What shall I do to she how I am ravish'd?
What can I give, I've given you all before,
I've given my self, and I can give no more.
But take that gift, I'll give it o're and o're.

Flies into his Arms and embraces him.


O! gift like Heav'n, the same, yet always new!
Full of young pleasures, and unfading joys!
Unwasting fuel of Loves growing Fires!
Exhaustle•s source of ravishing desires!
I will forego the chace of false renown,
And my pursuit shall be thy Charms alone;
Of all things else unknowing and unknown.
Happy in thee I will sublimely move
Within the perfect circle of my love.
There blooming pleasures, will be always found.
And ever springing Raptures fill the glorious Round.








WIthin this Grove, or th' adjacent Valley
You'll find your friend, my hapless Phaeton.

I have us'd all perswasions of a Mother
To make him quit this cunning Samian Songstress;
But all in vain.  I hope from friendship more,
And what I cou'd not, you, perhaps, may gain.




Clymene be sure I'll do my utmost.

Epaphus is not us•d to be deny'd
When in so just a cause he makes demand.



I will be near to come to your Assistance,
Friendship, and filial duty join'd can't fail.



You need not stay, but leave it all to me.
I'll free you from this Samian.




Be not too rough.
He will not brook Command, tho to entreaty
Plyant.



Madam retire, I hear some coming 
Leave this Affair entirely to my conduct.



I go   but not far off, for fear he fail, As she goes out.

There mark the strengths where friendship can't prevail,
Then against those my batt•ring Engines move,
Of Pow•r, Ambition, and a Virgins Love. Exit




Gods! the proud Boy presumes too much, yet sure
He builds upon my former friendship for him:
He durst not else have brought this hated Greek

This Neice of hostile Argus into Egypt,

Nay ev'n into the sacred Roofs of •sis,

My great but injur'd mother. But he comes,


And at his sight my blood with fury boyls,
And combates fiercely with expiring friendship.



What do I see? My friend, my Epaphus▪

  8Come to my Arms, and let me press thee close.


Offers to embrace him but Epaphus puts him away with his Hand.



Forbear   for tho 'tis certain you see Epaphus,

Yet whether he ought to be your friend, y•had
Best consider.  if not, I press no Foe
To this true bosom.



What can this strangeness mean?
I am not conscious to my self of ought,
That does deserve this cold, this unkind meeting.
After thy long thy most regretted Absence.



Perhaps you hoped I never shou'd return



O! barbarous thought for one so well belov'd,
It was my Mornings Pray'r, my daily Vow.
That thou mights it loon be here.



You thought me tame then,
Mean, Cowardly, base enough to bear it?



Bear it! bear what?



Come, come, you know you've wrong'd me,
And this affected ignorance is unmanly.



Come, come, you know I cannot wrong you.



How! cannot wrong me?



The brave can do no wrong.
I cannot wrong my Fee, much less my Friend.



What er the brave can do▪ I say you've wrong'd me,
Treacherously, falsly wrong d me.



Wrong• Falshood  
False to my Friend•! as soon
I woud forego m▪ Love my Mistress nay 



Mistress! what Mistress? for when I left thee,
Thou stoodst an activ• Candidate for Glory:
Fame was thy Mystress then, and War thy Courtship;
Thy Sword the moving eloquence that won her.
If thou art alter'd, if thou• rt faln from her,
If thou art sunk to puling Womans Love,
Thou'rt false  too chang'd to be a friend of mine,



That I do love a Woman is most true:
But such a Woman; so unlike her Sex:
Full of such noble Virtues 




Fall of Vice, most worthless of her Sex  



Hold friend, no more, I charge thee say no more,
For s•ou•d I bear to hear he wrong'd by thee,
Thou well migh•st think, I'd wrong an absent Friend.



Name not that sacred word? a Friend is what
Thou dost not understand: for Friend to Friend
Is holy sacred, preferr'd to all but Heavn
While thou dese••e't thy friend for a vile Woman,
A Toy, a Butterflye: the worst of Women too  



No more   it is a m•ghty proof of Friendship,
That I can bear all th•s, tho ev•n from thee. 
I do prefer my friend to all but Honor,
And Ho•our binds me to this worthless Woman.



Honour! what Honour canst thou challenge now
That you foorsook when you affronted me,
Affronted me in much my dearest part

  9My Mother, Isis, the Goddess of thy Country;

Aegypt's protectress, the belov'd of Iove.

What honor binds you to a Vagabond,
When your friends honor, and your Mothers tears,
The safety of your native soil, and Gods
Forbid her presence, this hateful Niece, this
Limb of cursed Argus?



I owe my life
To her.



I'd sooner owe it to a Coward,
He has the face of Man  but to this Woman! 



I drew her from her Father, and her Country.



That was your Crime, now send her back then.




Unjust to leave her now.




To keep her here. Come, come, young man, you must
Forego this Samian.
















Shall! yes shall; I come to force her from thee.



Force her from me! ha! ha! I laugh at thee;
Thou know'st, proud Man, thou canst not force her from me.



Proud obstinate Boy, I will.



Ha!  By the
Bright God, m' illustrious Father 




He must dis own thee, a Womans Property,
A fond convenient tool for useful ends.
Do Gods get such as thee? no 'tis a Boast,
An empty groundless Boast.
Some Trader got thee, and some Strumpet bore thee,
And shuffl'd thee into the Royal Cradle.



If I bear this, may Girls, and Eunuchs hoot me;
Cowards buffet me; Infamy drive me
From all Resorts, where manhood•s to be shown. Draws.

Draw, draw, thou noisie Talker; try whose Arm
Will best assert its Heav'nly Author. Epaphus draws too.





Come on. Clymene runs in betwixt them.




O! hold! O! stay your furious Swords, and Arms!
Or else thro me you cut your guilty passage.



Ha! my Mother! Was this your cunning, Sir?
To place your Safeguard, e're you durst provoke me?
But I shall find a Time she shan't protect thee;
Thou Wordy Hero; thou Tongue thou Woman Fighter.
Thy guilty Mother lurk'd within a Cow
So long, she fixt the dastard Spirit in thee
Of that tame Brute.



Madam, I pray withdraw,
Or I before you shall chastise that Boy,
By your approach made bold.





Was this well done? was this done like a Friend▪
To heap more Sorrows on me by this Quarrel?

  10Wast thus that I shou'd leave it to your Conduct?
Was this your Word to M•rops, and to me?
Did we entrust to you our Common Darling,
To brave, insult, and quarrel with him?
Under the Friend have you conceal'd the Foe?
And made me lead you to destroy my Son?
It is unjust, inhospitable, base,
Unworthy the bright Goddess, whence you sprung!
To her I must appeal against her Son.



I have been to blame, I ask your Pardon.
But thoughts of Injuries from him in Absence;
And offer'd to my Mother from him I lov'd;
My only b•som Friend, that shou'd have made
My Cause his own; so stung my Heart before,
So wrought my fiery Temper up to Rage,
That at his sight, I scarce k•ew what I did.



A poor Evasion of th Affront you've giv'n,
To avoid its Punishment, I'll surely pay.
The Time be sure I'll find I will till then 
I will have naught to say to thee.



You know I do not fear you but I•m calm.



O! my dear Phaeton! I do conjure thee
(I would command, but you've forgot Obedience)
By all the Pains, and Fears I've felt for thee,
To give me up thy Vengeance, and thy Anger.



I ask the same, tho not for Fear but Friendship.



O think that both a Friend, and Mother ask you!



He said, I was a Womans Property,
A Tool And can a Tool have any Friend?



I said it in my Rage, but cou•d not think it,
The Injuries of such a one, cou'd never move me.



The wrong I did you, if I've done you wrong,
I had not thought enough, that it was so,
I was so lost in Love, else I•d not done it.
For if there be a Love, above the Love
Of Woman, sure it is the Love of Friends,
And that I had for thee in its Perfection.
If then a Fault, tho done without Design.
Because a Friends, so touch'd the Friend in thee,
How must thy bitter and reviling Words,
Move such a Friend; wound such a Friend as me?



You were too Good, and I too rudely brutal?
You gave too much to Fri•ndship. I too little.



If thou think so, I gave not then enough;
I should have born more, much more, if possible!
Or else have left thee till thou d•'• been more calm 
But that I thought your Friend shou•d not be brav•d,
Perhaps I h'd been more passive. O' my Brother!
You us•d me Harshly,   but you are my Friend 
And have a Right to chide me. O! Epaphus!
Thy name has •ous•• the Friend, which bears down all,
And over-runs my Soul! can•t thou forgive me?



Oh! canst thou ask it? ask it too of me?
Who have offended most? Shame and Confusion
Sink me Oh! let me kneel, and crawl into thy Arms.

  11I dare not chear my guilty Eyes with thine,
Till they with Tears have wash'd away my Stain.

Kneels and moves forward to him on his Knees embracing his.



Taking him up. Oh! rise my Friend, or I shall dye with shame.
Cleave to my Bosom with an unfeign•d Ardor!
Thou shalt to o'recome, this Samian shall be gone,
And bear this guilty Wretch away from Egypt.

Yes, I•ll attone my Mother, Friend, and Country,
The Angry Gods too, with my just Exile.




No rather let ten thousand Samians stay,
Let rather the whole Race of Argus stay,
Than Egypt shou'd lose thee, the pride of Youth,
The Soldiers Courage, and the Virgins wish!
No by the Gods! I will my self step in
'Twixt thee and Fare; appease my Mothers Rage,
Or in her Temple sacrifice her Son.



But his Samian! 



Now, by my Soul, do with her what thou wilt,
Give me but Friendship; firm me but thy Friend.



embracing. O! with more Joy than I wou'd grasp at Victory.



Ha! in that Word your Native Virtue spoke. 
I wou'd not, cou'd I help it, have my Friend,
Unlike the Son of the All-seeing Sun,
Lye thus obscur•d in Shades, in Groves, and Grotto's,
Averse to Glory, and inviting Greatness!
But mount himself to th' topmost spoak of Fortune,
And meet the waiting Homages of Kings.
For as thy Father lights the world above,
So shou'd his Son rule all the World below.



And dost thou think that Phaebus was my Father?



Forget the barbarous Trespass of my Anger,
Or you will break my Heart. I know he is,
Your Deeds, your Virtues, and your Form confess him.
My conscious Soul is Wi•ness that he is.



By a•l his awful Beams, I swear my Friend,
A vast, and unexperienc•d Joy strikes through me,
Fires all my Blood, and bounds thro every Vein,
Rolls in my Breast, and so exalts my Soul,
That I'm unable to contain th' Ecstasie.
To hear thee own me Son of the great Sun,
Extends my Limbs, and make me shoot aloft
To a more Go•like Stature. And now methinks
I tread in Air, and mount yon dazling, Orb,
Exert my Father, •nd confess the God.
O! Mother! Friend! O! lead me out to Glory,
I'll shake this downy lethargy of Love
From off my Eyes, that thus forbids my Flight.



Ay now you do indeed exert your F•ther!
You look, you speak, you move, y•u are a God!
To fire you m•re▪ I bring you joyful News,
The Crowns of India, and of Aegypt wait you;
Stretch out your hand, and set em on your Head,



You speak mysterious Won•er•, be m•re plain.



Thus long I've stood, by joyful Wonder fixt,
To see the powerful Motions of your Friendship
Working on to this blest Union. Now
I tell yon, that your Friend, and Mother bring you
Love, untasted Beauties, and a Crown!

Lybia, my Son, the Charming Lybia!




Says my Mother? how knew you that I lov'd her?

Althea's self ne'r yet found out that secret.



I knew not you lov'd her, but she loves you;
And I'm o'rejoy'd to find the Passion mutual.



Oh! you attack me with such subtle Arts,
You must, you will o'recome. A Crown! and Lybia!
The Force is too resistless! But Althea!



Let not that worthless Woman cross thy Thoughts.



O! do not call her Worthless! She has Worth,
Eternal Love and an immortal Truth!
She sav'd me from her Fathers barbarous Rage,
And lov'd me so, she fled from him with me.



It was a wanton Girls thoughtless Trick,
And twas her Folly what you call her Love,
To leave her Friends, to fly with a young stranger.



It was her Crime  for she betray'd her Father,
E're she deliver'd you.



Then add to that,
It was her Father slew your guiltless Friends,
Against all Rights, both humane and divine.



Again, she sav'd me in Alphenor's Court,
By treacherous means, when he had bound me fast,
She snatch'd the Dagger from his lifted Hand,
And struck it to his Heart.



She was not free. So very plain the Choice
'Twixt Age, and Youth; my Friend, and old Alphenor;
A petty Tyrant of an Asian Village,
And the young blooming Pride, and Hopes of Aegypt.




Whate•re she did, she did compell'd by Love,
You owe to Venus, what you pay to her.



He has indeed o're paid her for a Trifle.
Thus long she has enjoy'd the Court of Egypt;
And fill•d her Bosom with a future God.



But oh! my Children!



Send her back with Gold
Enough to purchase a more noble Kingdom
Than was her Fathers, for her self, and Children.



But it will break her Heart!



O! think not so 
A Wife, and break her Heart to lose her Husband!



You have no other way to save 'em all:
The life of Merops is bound up in Lybia,

And hers in thee.



Ha! does she love me so?



More, more than I can tell thee. She's impatient,
Not having seen thee now so many hours.



O Friend! O Mother! haste, and bring me to her!
For I'm impatient too! I long, I sigh, I burn!

  13I am unpardonable by the least Delay,
And lose an Age of Pleasure, in one moments stay.
With furious Love I'll rush into her Arms,
And rise a God from her immortal Charms.










O Hymen! must we always see
Perjur'd Man thus faithless be,
And still securely slight our Deity?
Must Vows, and Oaths by man be swore,
And then be never thought on more?
In vain our Votaries seek our Aid,
If thus they still must be betray'd.



These crimes unpunish'd must not go:
No longer delay,
But call just Nemesis away,
From her dismal shades below.
To her Almighty Fate allows
To punish broken Vows.



Come come, just Nemesis away,
Too long your justice you delay.


Nemesis and her train of Furies ascend.


Grieve, grieve no more, nor sigh in vain.
Revenge alone can ease your pain.
Revenge affords a sure Relief,
While Love alas promotes your Grief.



At the hiss of their Snakes let that passion retire,
That more noble revenge that Bosom may fire.

In this Chorus they dance and shake their Snakes over
or towards Althea, then descend 
Iuno and Hymen with their Train ascend, and then
Merope and Cassiope come forward.


Methinks Strange sounds fill all the Ambient Air.



Of late too frequent have the Portents been,
Boding, I fear, some fatal Evil to us,
Which now alas! appears too imminent
In Phaeton's forsaking our poor Lady.



Ah! Merope! that this inhumane Man
Had never landed on our Samian Coast.
That prosperous Winds, and Seas had born him safe
To Delos, Claros, or to any place
Far from unhappy Samos. 



O! my Cassiope! that he h'd been sunk!

  14For ever sunk in the devouring Tempest!
Or that h' had perish'd too in the Samian Dungeons!
Then had our Princess never been thus wretched,
By a too fatal, and too tender Love
For an ingrateful, and a false deceiver.
Then had Althea never left her Country,
For the proud Piles of these Aegyptian Palaces;
Nor on precarious Favours here depended;
Nor on the sickle Passion of a faithless Youth.



Surcharg'd with the too p•ndrous Weight of Evil,
Thus fixt she fits, her down-cast streaming Eyes
Dissolving in a constant Flood of Tears.
Sometimes, with sighs, she wrings her tender Hands,
Then casting up to Heav'n her watry Eyes,
In soft Laments, and most pathetic Murmurs,
Condemns her self for having left her Country,
Her Father, Friends, and •ou•hold Gods, for one,
For one, who thus inhumanely deserts her.
Deaf as the Rocks, or Winds, or raging Seas,
She'll hear no Counsel, and admit no Comfort.



Alas! how will she be•• the app•••ching Evil.



Ha! What is't you say? more Evils yet?



The Tyrant Merops, Father •• her Rival,
Unsatisfy•d with all the brutal 〈◊〉

Sent by his Messengers new 〈◊〉 himself,
To drive her, and her Children out •f Eg•pt.




Will Phaeton, tho weary o••is Wife,
Suffer his Children to be sent to Ex••e.



This new Alliance, •akes up all his Thoughts,
He has no Memory of his past Love,

Althea's Tenderness, or his broken Vows.



O! hard condition of poor Womankind!
Made Slaves to Mans imperious changeful Will!



O! cruel Custom! O! too partial Laws,
That give to Man an Arbitrary Pow•r,
To throw us from him, when his Fancy veers,
And points him to another!



Hold See s•e rises and comes forward.

Al•hea rises and comes forward.



Ah! me! Alas! Undone, undone! forsaken! 
Weep, weep fond Eyes! dissolve, dissolve in Tears!
You let the fatal Mischiefs in! Oh! woe!
Oh! Misery! Oh! Ruin!



Have Patience, Madam, my Lord still loves you.



No, no, he•s false! he's chang•d! he loves no more!
For when he lov•d he scarce wou'd er be from me;
Or if he left me, swift was his return,
And still preventing the appointed Minute.
But now how many tedious Hours are gone!
And yet he comes not   comes not, tho I've sent
To beg his Presence   Na• he does not send
To ease my Pain or contradict my Fears  
My Fears! alas! my Ruin is too certain!
The common talk of every busy Cour•ier!
Am I not pointed at, and ••unn•d by all?

  15Already twice commanded to be gone
Erom Egypt, and from him! Despair and Horror! 
Relentless Pow'rs, hurl, hurl your Thunder down
On my devoted Head! propitious fates
Cut off, cut off my thread of wretched Life▪ Walks up and down in a discompos'd and mournful manner.




O! wond'rous Pow'r of Woe to make us wi•h
For Death, which is by Nature most abhorr•d!



O! mighty Themis! O! holy Artemis.kneels.

Ye awful Pow•rs that Guardians are of Vows,
Do not my Husbands impious Deeds provoke you?
He breaks thro all your sacred. T•yes of Oaths,
To the curs'd Joys of a new ridal Bed. Rises

Sink, sink, destro, tumble down the Tyrants Palace
On him, on her, on every gui••y Cause
Of my unmerited, my dismal Ruin  pauses.

Oh! my Father! oh my poor widow'd Mother!
Oh! my dear lost Country all abandond!
All forsaken! for the false perjur'd Phaeton!



Indulge not thus a passion, whose Violence,
If you give way, must b••• down Life before it.



VVhat use of Life have I, that I shou'd spare it?
Robb'd of my peace by this enormous Evil?
That dear false Man, within whose faithless Bosom
Was all my Hoard of Joy, alas has left me!
Lef• me alone, forlorn, of F•iends berest,
Beset all round with Foes! in a strange Land,
Na•ed of needful Helps, no Refuge near me!
No Country, Brother, Father, or Mother here;
To who•• from th impetuous Storm of Sorrows,
As to a welcom Harbour I might steer.
I•m lost! I perish! taste the Sow•rs of Death,
Ev'n while I live! Oh! let me taste its Sweets
In Death itself, and so forget my Woe!



I beg you for your Childrens sake be calm.



My Children! ha! my Children did you say?
The joyful product of our mutual Love?
They•re part of him, and of his barbarous Sex 
Pauses and walks thoughtfully up and down, starting now and then
 Avert avert the thought ye Pow•rs Divine▪
Alas they're innocent! and wrong'd like me,
Like me forsaken, and undone like me!
No let th' Offending only feel my Anger!



Ay, give it Vent, on those discharge your pain.
It is our Sexes Quarrel, Womankind
However fearful else, will here be bold,
And with confederate Mischief back your Vengeance.



Vengeance! Vengeance! alas! I love too much! 
My wrongs are great, but oh! my Love is greater!
When his dear Image comes before my Mind,
False as he is, my Rage ebbs out apace,
And Love in a full Tyde of Tenderness flows in.



For Lybia's Lover? and for your Betrayer?



For Lybia's Lover? Oh! the very Thought
Strikes Daggers thro me, and alarms my So•l:

  16Rouze• my injur'd Heart to hateful Mischief!
I cannot, will not bear it. Ha! Her Fathers Ghost arises, and she starts back, and gazes as affrighted.








O! all ye Gods! and heavenly Pow'rs protect me!
O! Iuno guard me from this dreadful Vision!



O! gracious Heav'n restore her wandring Senses!



Tho I see nothing, yet a trembling Horror
Shakes me all •'re



O! Gods! see yet he stays and glares upon me!



Let not the Image of thy Father fright thee!
I come not now to punish, but assist thee!
At least as far as cruel Fate allows.
Fear not, but hear me!



O! thou paternal Shades! O! Hierax! Father!
Father (for yet that kind indulgent Form
Speaks Tenderness, that merits that dear Name)
Can you? O! can you, yet forgive my Flight?
My guilty Flight? that bore me from my Father,
My Hopes, my Happiness! my Innocence!
But oh! severely have I suffer'd for it,
Pierc'd through and through with most ingrateful wrongs!



Too strong, Althea, were the just Impressions
Thy Virtue made upon a Fathers Soul
For Death to raze. 
Our Passions are immortal, as our beings,
A part Essential of them, for without them
There is no Pain, nor Pleasure; Bliss, nor Woe•

I blame not then thy Flight, compell•d by Love,
That o're the young maintains a Tyranny.
I blame thee not for Love, but for thy Tameness;
For bearing Wrongs from this Aegyptian Race.
The injur'd Genius of thy native Country
Calls loudly on thee for Revenge, Revenge.
How long? how long must our unhappy House

Call for Revenge in vain, in vain from thee.

Aegypt's the Source of all our Houses Woe.
For Isis, Argus falls; I for Phaeton:
For Lybia thou. Iuno and Hymen both
Demand Revenge for violated Vows.

Iuno herself assists thy just Revenge
Revenge! Revenge! Revenge!  Sinks down.




Oh! stay Oh! do not fly so swiftly from me!
Take not away so soon that pious form,
That pleasing Image of paternal Love,
That touch'd with Care of his unhappy Daughter,
Burst from the peaceful Mansions of the Dead,
To rouze my Justice and accuse my Tameness;
This poor Insensibility of VVrongs!
I feel my Father roll through all my Veins,
Rage in my Blood, and fire my doubting heart!
Revenge! Revenge, Revenge it was he cry'd
Justice, and Pity demand revenge.
My Country, Father, and the Gods demand it.



O! Gods appease this Fury of her Mind!



Revenge is the best ease the Gods can give her.



Revenge! Revenge! it gives some tast to Life
Nor am I wholly wretched while I can
Revenge my Wrongs, and punish my Undoer. 
Inform, advise, instruct, direct my Fury,
While yet my mind is capable of acting.
Yes I will live.  but live for speedy Vengeanc•,
Great as my Causeless Wrongs, on him, on her;
On her the curs'd Usurper of my Bed:
On Merops, Clymene, and all the Guilty House.




Might I advise; I'd leave him to the Gods,
Nor think more of him.



How! not think of him while yet he wrongs me?
While yet he flights and leaves me for another?
No I'm all Rage, whole Nemesis is in me!
And I'll pursue him with immortal Hate,
Rev•nge my Injuries, tho I fall my self.



But hold. Compose your self hide your concern;
For see th' Aegyptian Tyrant Merops comes.
Please not his Eyes with Griefs you shou'd not own
To their vile cause  till your Revenge is sure.






How long must I command you hence in vain?
Weak Monarchs thus are Brow-beat by their Slaves,
When they forget to see themselves obey'd
Therefore depart immediately away,
For hence I'll not remove till you are gone.



Protect me Heav'n! this blow compleats my Ruin.
Ah! me! to whom! Ah! whither shall I turn?
When thus I fall on every side most wretched.



I have no leisure now to hear you rave
Impatient of your hated sight   be gone  
Ease me and mine of this most odious Burden.



Thus low, opprest with such a Weight of Woe,
Permit me ask the Reason of my Exile.
What new! what sudden motive cou'd I give,
A helpless Woman, and of All forsaken?



Let it suffice I fear thee;
(For mean disguises are below a King)
I fear you'll plot some Mischief against my Daughter,
And for these Fears you are a fertile Cause.

Asia and Europe yield too fatal Proofs,
With what impetuous Fury 'tis you love;
And how my Lybia ought to dread your Rage,
Since you're divorc'd for her, from Phaeton.




I grant, that forc'd by Loves Almighty Pow'r
I dard above my Sexes •oster Temper
For him that said, nay swore too that he lov'd me
Above his Life, his Life! above his Glory.
Yet think not Merops, think me not so mean,
So very fond to love when I am slighted.
What e•r I did for him when yet he lov'd,
I nothing shall attempt for him that hates
Nor boots it me who loves, or who's belov'd,
Since he loves me no more, since he hates me.

  18Go on, proceed, consummate their Espousals;
Live long; live happily; I envy't not.
Allow this Wretch alas a sad Retreat.
A shelter against worse Fortune's all I ask.
In secret only I•ll on him complain;
Murmur the pangs of my expiring Love.
Where soon I•ll learn to yield him up to her,
That more deserves him, than my self.



Your Words a specious Mildness only bear,
I fear the deadly Rancour hid within.
For with more Ease w' oppose the Lust of Vengeance,
When it appears in its own native fury,
Than when disguis'd in smooth submissive Words.
Therefore be gone nor think with subtle Speeches
To change my Will; thy Exile is decreed;
Nor shall thy cunning Arts reverse thy Doom.



Oh! I will clasp your Knees: O Sir! by these, She kneels, and clasps his knees.

By the new Pair I beg, I do conjure you 



You beg in vain, all you can say is lost.



It is unkingly to reject a Suppliant.



It is unjust to prize you 'bove my Family.



O! my Country! 'tis now, 'tis now, tis now, alas▪
That I remember thee!



That you shou'd ne'r
Have suffer'd to escape your Memory.



O Love! destructive plague to womankind!



Yes, when pursu'd against a Parents will.




Remember who was the Author of all this!



Trifler be gone, and free me from my Cares.



'Tis me, 'tis me alone hat Cares oppress;
No need I more to make me wholly wretched.



Be gone I say, or Slaves shall drive you hence.



O! Merops hear me! yield to my Request!



In vain you strive to break my fix'd Resolve.



No, I will go I aim not by my Tears
To bend your Stubborn Mind to let me stay? Rises




What wou•d you then? Why leave you not my Kingdom?



Give but a day to fit me for my Journey.
And since their Father has forgot his Children,
Permit me give em the best Help I can.
Ah! pity them, for you•ve had Children too!
As youre a Parent let a Parents sorrows
Touch you Young, tender, and unus'd to Hardships,
As you well know I am; yet, O▪ Merops!

I am not griev'd for my own Banishment,
But the Misfortunes that attend my Infants,
My little helpless Babes! my early Orphans,
Orphans, while yet their Father is alive.
'Tis these torment me, these that rack my Soul.



That I•m not rul•d by an obdurate Mind,
Let this convince you; your Desire is granted.
Yet hear me, Woman, hear, and mark me well,
If then to morrows Sun do find thee here
Thou dy'st, thou and thy Childr•n surely dye. 
Exit Merops cum suis.






What will you do? or whither will you flye?
To unexperienc'd miseries expos'd?



Whose Friendship? or what Nation will you seek?
What Hospitable coast against your sufferings?



'Tis true, my Friends Ill-Fortune does surround me,
Yet think not that I ll lose this last success.
Think you I cou'd have couch'd so to the Tyrant?
Have been His Suppliant? held to Him these Hands?
Had not my hopes of Vengeance bent my Knees,
Soften'd my Language, and thrust out my Arms?
Besotted Merops shou'd have driv'n me hence,
Not giv'n a Day! a Day's a mighty Space,
Enough to Sacrifice all, all my Foes,
The Daughter, Father, Mother, Son
My perjur'd Husband! Where shall I begin!
Amid this Crop, this Glut of my Revenge?
Shall I set fire to their curs'd Nuptial Bed?
Or with this Dagger pierce their guilty Hearts?
No, by more subtle Arts I must prevail,
Deceit with the Deceivers shou'd not fail;
Yet if this do not, as it ought, succeed,
I with this Hand will do the dreadful Deed:
Amid their Guards, in the full face of Day,
Nor Heav'n nor Hell shall stop my furious way;
I'll wound, I'll stab, transfix their conscious Hearts; •aufes.

From me they shall be sure of their Deserts.
With joy I'd dye, and as in Triumph fall;
If with my pondrous Fate, I crush'd them all,
Exeunt Omnes.








MOv'd by my Love, I come, unkind Althea,

To mourn, and to provide for your sad Journey;
For I can't wish you Evil, tho you hate me.



Then you are come? you dare approach me then?
O! worst of Men! most guilty of thy kind!
(For want of Pow'r allows me but Reproaches)
'Tis not assurance, but vile Impudence,
That brings you to a Friend, you so have wrong'd.
And yet 'tis well, 'tis just, that you are come,
That I may vent m' imprison'd Griefs on thee,
And with contageous Sorrows blast thy Joys.



Madam, I have no joys, while you're in Pain.



First (for I ll begin with my first Benefits)
I sav•d your Life (nor can you yet deny it)
When in one Night your Guiltless Friends were slain,
Then you Ingrate, then you too shou'd have dy'd.

  20In pity of your untimely Fate.
I Snatch'd you from my angry Fathers Rage,
And set you free O! that I h'd done no more!
But press'd by my ill stars, o're pow'red by Love!
By artful sighs, and your unmeaning Vows,
At once his Hopes, and Ve•geance I betray'd;
Not only gave you life, but •led too with you.
 Again in Asia where I might have reign'd,
Neglecting still all interests of my own,
To save your Life I slew the King Alphenor.

And fled again by Night thro Foes and Dangers,
And tho I fled fro•, what you seek, a Crown,
I fled well pleas'd because I fled with you.



Yet hear me; and be patient while I speak 



I took all Fears from you, and in Return
Of such, so man• Benefits have you?
Have you betray•d me? O! Prodigy of Falsehood!
Made by my fruitful Love now twice a Father,
In all my youth, in all my Spring of Beauty
To leave me for another!
O! my false Joys! O! disappointed Hopes!
How have I been deceiv'd; O how abus'd!
Thinkst thou there are no Gods, that heard thy Oaths?
Or thinkst thou, they want Power to punish Crimes
Like thine? O! Hands! O! Knees! so often press'd
In vain in vain by his protesting Hands



Wou'd you but hear I should not seem thus Guilty.



I'll calmly reason with you like a Friend,
As if I hop•d some Benefit from you.
Whither shall I go? to whom shall I return
Cast off by you? What to my native Country?
That I forsook for you! what to my Father?
Alas! he's dead! kill'd by my guilty Flight!
I was the only Pleasure of his Age,
His prop, his stay, and when I •led, he fell,
And left this Throne to m• inveterate Foes.



Yet hear me speak, and then condemn or quit •e!



Or shall I fly to slain •lphenors Court?
Where for his Death, I shall be kindly treated.
You bid me go, but cut off all Retreat.
My native Friends that merited no evil,
For thee I've lost, for thee I've made all Foes!
And now for all these fatal proofs of Love,
I'm thrust a Vagabond to the wide World.
Defenceless, Widow'd, Friendless, and alone!
Or what is worse, with my two helpless Orphans.
If this must be, O! think but how 'twill sound,
At your new Nuptials, that you've driv'n to exile
Your Children Beggars, with that tender Wife,
To whom you owe the life you use against her.
O! Iupiter! why hast thou giv'n to Gold,
A certain Test to know the true from false,
And yet in Man hath fixt no certain Mark,
To know the Good from Evil?



I find you've drawn a dreadful Charge again•t me,
And such as Guilt cou'd never hope to Answer,

  21Yet, fortify'd with Innocence, I dare
Appeal to your own self to judge my Cause.
Lay but your Passion for a while aside
And tell me who? who caus'd this mournful parting?



Ask thy self that Question? ask thy own Heart.



It was not I, I sought not this Divorce,
The Gods, the angry Gods wou'd have us parted,
Witness ye Pow'rs! how long I did oppose you!
Struggling with Fate, my Mother, and my Country,
Before I yielded up a Prize like this.
The hoary Priests of Isis threatn'd Egypt,

With Evils imminent, with Plagues, with Famine,
Unless that you were banish'd And the Nil•

Withdrew its fertile Streams within its Bed,
And shrunk its noble Flood into a Brook.
In vain the holy Priests mourn'd drown'd Osiris,

With shorn Locks, and dismal Cries in vain
A Successor they sought to the white God!
All was deny'd till you was driven from Egypt.

What cou'd I do? or how cou'd I deny
My Friend, my Mother, and my falling Country?



If this were so, why left we not this Egypt?
Why should my Banishment from Egypt part us?
We had been wanderers together before this!
Nor Gods, nor Priests, requir'd that you should stay,
And Love, and Benefits, and Vows, and Oaths
Oblig'd you to go with me 
But these are Feints, weak Blinds to hide their Guilt,
'Tis Lybia is the God compels your stay!
'Tis Lybia drives Althea out of Egypt!
'Tis Lybia is the dreadful Fate that parts us!



Be calm a while, and give me leave to speak.
I will not urge the Love that Lybia bears me,
(Tho that, I swear, would move another strangely)
The Crowns she brings (tho I was born for Crowns)
I will not urge, for these are foreign Motives:
It was for you I yielded to these Nuptials. 



For me! for me you left me for another!
O wretched Trifler!



Pray hear me out 
You ask what God! what Priests require my stay?
Why you, Althea, are the God compels it.
Knowing the Hardships of a Friendless Exile,
How could I bear to see Althea perish,
And have it in my Power to ward her Fate?
My Children too, sprung from that beauteous root,
Attackt my Heart, and with resistless force,
Tore me from what my Soul desires most!
For Me, you've made too many Foes already,
And should I then add to their fatal Number?
If Asia and Samos are provok'd for me,
Should I dare Egypt too, to fix your Ruin?
Alas! if I go with you I destroy you,
If I stay here, I•m but my self unhappy,
And by my pain provide for you and yours,

  22'Tis Death to my Desires to lose Althea,

But 'tis Damnation to undo her more.
Yet wou•d I go, the Pow'r of Aegypt stops me,
The Pow'r drives you hence, that confines me here.
Come calm that Rage (which yet I cannot blame
Because it shews you Love me) and consider
That by this match the Wealth of Aegypt s yours,
For what is mine is so. By which ill-Fortune
Will follow you in vain, but never reach you:
Contending Nations will with Pride invite you
That know your Interest in the Prince of Aegypt.




How easie tis to give us Words for Deeds!
No more with specious Arts disguise the truth;
The fulsom Dawb too visibly is seen.
It twas for me you did these wondrous things.
Why was the secret kept thus long from me?
Who first shou•d have been won to yield you to her.



How• cou•d I plead a hateful Cause with you?
I cou•d not wish to gain ev'n from my self?



These are invented Causes, not the real;
Your proud aspiring Soul disdain•d my Bed,
Because I brought no Kingdoms for my Dowr.



Believe the brave Ambition of my Soul.
Wou'd not permit me to forgo my Love,
For any Cause, but what I have assign'd,
Your Childrens, and your Happiness 



Give me no Happiness that•'s mixt with Woe,
Nor Wealth and Pow•r that rack my Soul with Grief.



Opinion only makes you here unhappy,
Who in the midst of Plenty think you're Poor.



Delude me on with Words, you•ve got a Refuge,
And you grow eloquent upon it: But your Deeds
Your Deeds are more emphatic: am I not
Forsaken? with my Children forc'd to Exile?



To ease that Care take largely of my store,
Rich presents to our Friends to recommend you.



I•ll use no Friends of thine, nor touch thy Gifts;
The Gifts ill men bestow advantage none.



By the refulgent God, that gave me being!
My Father Phaebus! 



Thy Father! thine! th' illustrious God disdains thee.
Thy Father! 'twas a boast of thy false Mother.
By which she wou'd conceal her guilty shame.



No more for yet I call the Gods to witness
I'd pour into your Arms what e'r you want,
Both for your journey, and your after Ease;
Tho you to your own detriment refuse it.
And with in•urious Language drive me from you: Exit.




Go, go make haste, to your new Bride make haste!
Too long I've kept you from her wish'd-for sight.
Go on, go on, Consummate your new Nuptials,
Yet if the Gods but lend a pitying Ear,
You soon shall wish you never had prepar•d 'em.

Walks up and down in a Passion.


If once, O! Venus! I must feel thy Power.

  23Far be this racking Violence of Passion!
A Love more gentle in my Soul inspire!
Calm be my Joys, temperate my Desire!
Easie the soft Emotions of my Heart!
Or if they must be fierce, Oh! make 'em short.
My inclinations veering, as the Wind,
In change preventing that false roving kind!



O! Iuno! early Guardian of my youth,
And sacred Pledge of our Connubial Vows,
If e'er my Off'rings have been grateful to you,
I do adjure you suffer not my Foes
To gather Joys from my opprobrious Grief!



Madam, transported by untimely Rage,
You've lost th' occasion that before you wisht for. Ex. Mer.




Ha! thou sayst true  haste after Phaeton

And call him back, say what thou wilt to bring him.
Ungovern'd Fury at his sight burst out,
And almost robb'd me of my dear Revenge.

Althea summon all the Woman in thee,
The large Hypocrisy of all thy Sex,
And add to that the subtle Arts of Priests,
And Courtiers, when they'd make their vengeance sure.
Thou wantst them all, nay more if possible,
To smooth thy Brow, to calm thy Face and Eyes,
That not one glimps of Rage to him appear. 
Away fond Love: ye tender Thoughts away!
I feel my Wrongs, Beware my Soul, beware!
Of leaving me the sport and jest of Egypt,

Th' By-word, and scorn of this Barbarian Race.
But hold  these Thoughts too much disturb me.
Let me have Music to compose my Mind.
Here in this mournful posture he shall find me.
Sits down and reclines her Head on her Hand.
Symphony and Song.How happy wou'd poor Woman be,
From the Cares of Love still free,
Did not false Mans deluding Arts
Rob us of our Peace and Hearts.
With Tears and Oaths the Cheat maintain
Till we poor helpless women love again,
And wound our selves, alas! to cure their pain.
But then, ah! then! how soon they change!
How soon the fickle wanderers range!
How soon forget each Oath and Vow,
And to some other beauty bow!
Again they beg, again they pray,
On purpose only to betray.
Ah! seal my Heart! ye chaster Pow'rs,
Against their cunning Art,
And of my Lifes succeeding Hours,
Ah! give to Love no Part.






Madam, I'm told you sent for me again,
Tho you are angry with me I obey,
And come with Joy to hear what you'll command me.




Rising and coming forward Forgive, my Lord, the outrage of my Tongue
Nay I beg you, by our mutual benefits,
By our past Love (alas! that it is past!)
To pardon my Violence of Passion.
If I said ought too harsh, or to severe,
Think me a Woman, impotent of Reason,
That cou'd not see thro Pain my future Good,
And such a Pain, as to be rent from you;
My Soul, my All (for you were All to me)
Just in the fierce abundance of my Love.
Then add to this my little helpless Infants
Banish'd, and in the tender Bud expos'd
To nipping Blasts of an inclement Fortune. weeps.

Pardon these Tears, that spight of me will fall
When e're this dreadful Image comes in view.



Excuse them not, they speak a noble Nature.



These Ills thro them transfix•d the Mother in me,
And work'd the raging Terror into Madness 
But now I'm calm, and Reason rules again,
I am convinc'd, that you have done most wisely,
Perhaps most kindly too! Sighs.

I own your Care of me, and of my Children;
I own I ve nothing to accuse but Fate,
And since our Stars will have it so, I'll bear it.



O• my Althea! I approve thy Grief,
Nor can I blame thy Rage; for both are just.
I swear thy Tendern•s•, and Love so charm me
But that the Gods, have d•om•d me to be Great
For thy Protection, I should leap down with thee
Into ignoble Ruin 
Nor think of my immortal Glory more.



Dissembling Villain! Oh! my Heart be calm!
Or I shall lose this only Hour of Vengeance! Aside.

Fool that I was, who cou'd not see my good.
Had I been wise, I had my self advis'd it,
And stood a glad assistant at your Nuptials.
But alas! I am a Woman! and tis
Below you to emulate me in Evil;
Or rail because I rail'd, I then was Mad,
But now I have consider'd, I consent,



You do, Althea! like a tender Mother,
To share that Pain for them, I feel for you.
In this we both prefer the Good and Fortune
Of what we Love to our own fond desires.



Bring forth, bring forth my pretty Babes, bring me
To their Father to take their last Farewel.



Let him behold in these his double likeness.
Extend, extend your little Arms; embrace him,
Cling you about his Neck, and you about his Knees,

The Maids apply each as directed, and Althea Kneels, and takes hold of his Hands


  25Speak to him tende•ly; and move his Soul!
Methinks ev'n now their Eyes, and Motions speak,
And with me beg your most peculiar Care.
Look on them well do they not deserve it?
Are these young tender Images of you,
Fit for the Hazards of a tedious Voyage?
O! my 'dear Children! O! my little Babes!
Must you so soon partake your Mothers Woe?
Oh! press him closer yet, and yet more close,
And with your melting cries excite the Father.



O! my Father! oh! good Father pity us!



Father, what have we done to make you leave us?
Have I done any thing to anger you?
If I have been a naughty Boy, indeed
I'm sorry for't, indeed I am. Pomp of Sadness't





speaking te•derly and mov'd. Rise, oh! rise! What means thi•

What wou d these Tears? What wou'd these dear Embraces?

Embraces them all, takes up Althea, and the Maid and Child.

You cannot think that I can ever slight 'em?
They shall, as my first Hopes, be my first Care.
And if the Gods but favour my Designs,
I once shall see them Princes here in Aegypt.

Grow up my Boys, and be your Mothers Comfort,
And my Glory. She turns and aside her head, seems to weep.

Why dost thou turn thy Beauteous Face away?
And with stoln Tears bedew thy tendder Cheeks?
Why hear these wi••es, with unwilling Ears?



Nothing 'Tis a fond Mothers sudden pang
For her unhappy Children.




Give you farther Grief: I'll take care of them.



I wou'd obey you but I am a Woman 
A Sex, that's born for Tears Oh! my Children!



But why so often call you on your Children?



Indeed I cannot help it, for I bore 'em,
And brought them forth into this World of Woe.
And now must see them, e're they know what life i•.
Expos'd, and driven upon a thousand hazards
Perhaps there may be cause why I should go,
But what alarms can these afford the Court?



What would you hav• me do?




Beg it of Merups with your utmost zeal.
While they're secure, within their Fathers sight,
The dearer half of me is free from Danger.



Well I will try, but can't assure sucess.



VVhat cannot only Daughters do with Fathers?
Employ but Lybia, and the Boon is granted.



I will nor will she I believe deny me.



O! I will help you in this grateful labour;
I have a Robe, that•s wove by hands Divine,
Materials rich, as the fam'd story's artful:

Minerva's Tryal 'tis with bold Arachne.

This with a Crown of Gold by Vulcan wrought,
And giv'n by Iuno to our fav'rite House;

  26I will, with my two Children send to win her.
No Mortal can resist such a powerful Bribes.



Rob not they self of such unequally'd Treasures,
The Egyptian Court has wealth enough for her,
VVith whom my VVill outweighs a Mine of Gold.



You must permit me, Sir, to send them, for
VVere my life demanded for their stay,
I'd freely part with it, much more with these,
And Gold with Man's more prevalent, than duty,
The Gods make Fortune still attend on Gold,
As if their Blessings too were bought and sold.



Well then, Althea, you shall have your will.



I fly on all the Wings of swift desire,
To send this noble Ransom with my Children.



I will before to make their way more easy. Ex.



Now Gods befriend me, and one fatal Hour,
Shall venge my wrongs, and your affronted Pow'r. Ex. Omnes.










GIve me a full account of all, that past.



Soon as your Gifts and Children reach'd the Presence,
Your Friends, that felt your Sorrows, were o'rejoy'd,
That Phaeton, and you were reconcil'd.



On to Lybia.  of her I'd only hear.



Unmark•d by her (for she was fondly toying
With her new Lord, her Eyes fast fixt on his,
And darting wanton Wishes to his Soul)
We came up to her.  Seeing us she started.
Sprung from his Arms, and turn'd away her Face,
As i• the Gorgon •ight wou'd make her Stone,



Gods! Gods! how I despise her petty Malice.
That reach'd my tender in offensive Children,
Yet she might fear them well; they brought her Death.



Averse she held her angry Eyes a while.
Till Phaeton thus mildly check•d her scorn.
Receive my Friends with a more gentle Brow,
Think these a valu'd Portion of your Husband.
Receive their precious Gifts, and beg your Father
For my sake to remit my Children Exile.
Soon as her greedy Eyes had spy'd the Presents;
The dazling Crown and Robe of heav'nly Make.
She cou'd deny him nothing, All was granted.
Upon her downy Hair he set the Crown,
And on her Shoulders fixt the flowing Mantle.



O! height! O! Masterpiece of dear Revenge!
To make my perjur'd Husband put 'em on,
And with officious Hands ensure her Ruin!



Proud of the glitt ring Load, with haughty steps
She traverses the Room; and in the Glass,

  27With self-pleas'd Eyes, surveys her shining Form.



So the fond Victim to the Altar doom'd,
Bounds o're the Earth exalted with its Trappings,
Its sacred Wreaths, and holy Pomp of Death,
Unknowing that these usher its Fate,
So Lybia too.  For all those glittering Presents
Great Iuno gave me, and she bid me send 'em
To my most hated Foe for sure Revenge.
Here in the Temple of the Sun I'll wait
To see my guilty Sacrifices fall.
Thus veil'd secure, within this hostile Roof.






The holy Priests already are advanc'd,
And see the Court, and Bride and Bridegroom come. They all Enter.




With guilty Joy they come, but shall return,
VVith an avenging Grief. I know the poison
Must have effect before the Rites are done.


The Bridegroom places himself on one side the Altar, the Bride on the other, and the rest in their order, then the Music begins; during which, Althea often looks on Phaeton.


O! sacrid Isis! and Apollo hear!
O! bright Divinities give ear,
And showr your blessings on this Royal Pair.

Repeat in a Chorus.


Look down bright God of day, look down,
On this fair Virgin, and thy Son.
Ease their Pain:
Increase their pleasure,
In soft Chain•s ensure their Treasure.
Give 'em joys, ah! give 'em blisses,
Melting as their warmest wishes!



O! sacred Phoebus hear,
And showr your blessings on this on this happy pair.




Isis, by the pains Love cost you,
By the storms in which it tost you,
By the awful charms of Jove,

By the Transports of his Love.



O! sacred Isis and Apollo hear,
O! bright Divinities, give ear,
And shour your Blessings on this Royal pair.

After the Music, two Priests lead Lybia up to the Altar, where she kneels down on a Cushion, and offers In∣cence, as she is leading up, Althea speaks.


Why beats my Heart thus! what does love return?
Why shou'd such tender thoughts besiege my Breast
Ev'n in the Act, in which he wrongs me most?
Oh! cou'd he yet repent, I cou'd forgive him:
For he has got a Friend within my Bosome,
Pleads for him with prevailing Eloquence.
Methinks too midst this outward formal Joy,
There sits a sort of sorrow on his Brow.
That flatters me, that I am yet within.
I'll try him 

  28And if he yet persists then let him dye.
Goes up to him and pulls him aside.
My Lord!
While your fair Bride her Sacrifice performs
Permit me speak with you.







It does concern your Happiness, and Life.



Come to me then, soon as the Rites are over.



'T will be too late.



No matter then I'll dye.
No Fears shall interrupt my present Joy.



Gods! how he's transported! one moment, Sir,
Or midst your Joys you perish.







I wish I cou'd! but you must hear me speak.



If I must hear you, I pray you be most brief.
For I've no time to trifle.



This way a little. Seems to discourse him.

The Princess sinks down on her cushion before the Altar.


The Princess, help, the Princess faints away!

The Company gets about her, but Phaeton is stopt by Althea.



You must not thither, for your Fate lies there.
Or if a Womans Death you long to see,
Turn! oh! turn your barbarous Eyes on me! Vnveils herself.

See your Althea perish at your feet!
Does no Remorse? no pity touch you yet?



Althea•ha! what means this fond relapse?



Is then Althea quite forgot? forsaken,
Cast off for ever? here at least remember,
Before the Gods within their Roofs, your Vows.


Merops in the crowd.
Ha! she grows paler, see a sudden shiv'ring
Has seiz'd on all her Limbs. Oh! bear her quickly
Back to her Apartment. O! fatal Nuptials!

All go off with the Princess.


Let go my Arm my Princess is not well.



Your Wife is worse, your Benefactress worse.



Her sudden Ill has discompos'd me so,
I am unfit to reason with you now.



So griev'd for her! so unconcern'd for me!
Gods! sure you owe me more, than foolish Lybia!




Some other time will better suit your Madness;
Now Love and Honour call me to my Princess.



Ha! Love and Honor! thou, alas! hast neither.
What, Love and Honor call you from your Wife?
From your Preserver? from the Wretch you've made so?



Grief fills my Soul so, there's no Room for Anger,
Or I shou'd chide th' impertinence away.



False Wretch! beware, beware how you provoke me;
A Qualm of Pity stopp'd thee from thy Ruin 
But have a Care 



Then let your Cruelty strait send me to it,
If with my sickning Princess I shall find it.



Fond Man, here's Life, there certain Death attends thee.



Let me but go, I'll face that certain Death.



Hell! and Furies! how he slights my Love!

  29Is Death with her better than Life with me?



Since you will force the Secret from me 'tis.



Enough! enough! thou Ill without a Name!
Yes, false betrayer, yes, ingrateful Wretch,
You shall go to her but you first shall hear
The Noble Vengeance, that you have assisted.




Ha! Vengeance saist thou? and by me assisted



I did not wrong thee in thy darling Office,
For Death, and Ruin are the just Returns
You're us'd to make for Tenderness and Love.



Ha! Death, and Ruin! O! my boding Heart!



When with the Crown and Robe you deck'd your Bride,
You drest the Victim of my injur'd Love.
You fix'd ten thousand Poisons on her Head,
And cloath'd her in inevitable Fate.
Ev'n now she breathes her last; now gasps for Breath,
Go reap the Fruit of Perjury in Death,
Clasp to thy fickle Breast her dying Charms,
And hug th' Infection in thy faithless Arms.



O! dire Revenge for what was kindly meant thee!
O! barbarous Woman, or fell Tygress rather,
More cruel far, than Scylla, or the Syrens,
Like the Hyaena, and the Crocodile,
With false Laments, and artful Tears you kill 
But may th' avenging Furies soon o'retake thee.
The Gods destroy thee, or the earth devour thee:
Heav'n pierce thee with its Bolts: Hell rack thee with its Tortures



In vain you rave; in vain you vent your Curses;
What God, or Daemon can regard your Pray'rs,
Perjur'd, as you are, by all their Deities?



They need not, for thy Guilt will always haunt thee.



My Guilt? Why I am wholly innocent!
Thy Crimes provok'd it, and thy Hands perform'd it.



My Hands? my Hands too shou'd revenge it.



If it be kind, or just thou canst not do it.



Thou'rt troublesome to me, and thy Speech is hateful.



W' agree in this, for thine is so to me:
Go, go, and bury your expiring Bride,



Oh! Honor! Piety! Manhood now assist me!
Assist, thou bright paternal Fire, assist!
Or Rage unmans me: drives me to a Deed,
Will fully all my past, and future Glories. Pauses.

Woman away lest all shou'd be too weak
To guard thee from my Rage, my growing Madness.



This slighted Out-cast, this abandon'd Wife,
Alone, deserted, had the Pow'r, you find,
To sink the Pride of your injurious Aegypt;
And punish thee, 'midst thy fond security.



Woman, I say be gone be gone! or yet 





If you wou'd see the Princess e'r she dye,
You must outstrip the Minutes swiftest haste.



Thanks to thy call, I h'd lost my self in Rage;

  30Almost forgot my Lybia too. I fly. Is going.




Fly, fly swiftly, to compleat my Vengeance.






Whence is this frightful haste?



I come to you,
But whence, alas! I come, I scarce dare tell you.



Speak boldly, for I am prepar'd to hear you.



But oh! I bring so sad a Tale, so near
Concerning you, you'll never bear it.
A tale so dreadful, and so full of Horror,
'Twill chill your Blood, and freeze you into Age.



Speak on say Lybia's dead, and yet thou'lt see
I have a Godlike Virtue to support it.



You'll need it All, for tis from her I come.
Scarce had she reach'd the door of her Apartment,
When from her Mouth a white, but horrid Foam,
Spread o're her lovely Face, her Eye-balls roll'd,
And wildly whirl'd about with dire Convulsions.
Silent she lay, or breath'd but piteous Sighs,
And piercing groans, till the first sit was over



Gods! how this staggers all my boasted Courage!
Was not her Death enough? but Tortures too?



Go on, for all my injur'd Blood it warms.



No sooner to herself she came, but saw
The blazing Crown belch out a fiery Deluge,
That prey'd upon her Hair, her Head, her Face;
From whence her Flesh like melting Wax ran down,
Mingl'd with Fire and Blood. Mean while the Robe
With fatal Rage devour'd her fainting Limbs.



How did she? nay, how cou'd she bear all this?



First starting up, she shook her flaming Hair:
From side to side she tossd her burning Temples,
To dash the cleaving Gold from off her Head.
In vain, the more she shook, the more it fix'd, and burnt.



O! strange! O! miserable Fate!



But then o're come by the prevailing Mischief,
Alas! she fell but too unlike herself!
Gone were the rosie Honours of her Face,
And fled the awful Lustre of her Eye.



O hapless Maid! O! wretched Phaeton!



All struck till now with the amazing Evil
Forbore to touch her; till th' unhappy Father,
Now starting from his Trance of sudden Woe,
Threw down his aged Body by her, clasp'd,
And kiss'd her Then burst-into these Moans.
O! m' unhappy Daughter! what angry God
Deny'd thy pious hands to close my Eyes,
Ev'n on this shut of Life! O! my poor Girl!
Gods that I might but perish with thee now!
He said no more, secure of being heard.



Oh! parent God support me or I fall.



But oh! the dreadful Contest that ensu'd
Striving at length to raise his tyr'd Body,
He stuck too fa•t to the invenom'd Robe
Ever to part from his consuming Child.

  31He rends her Flesh and Bowels if he rises,
And if he sta•s immediately he dyes.
Few were the weak Efforts the Father made,
But soon his fainting Body by her Corps he laid,
He saw his Daughter in the Flame expire,
Then sunk himself in the same fatal Fire.
And then alas! sad Cl mene. 




I charge thee, by thy Friendship, say no more.
But cast a Veil of silence o're the rest.
I've heard too much, too much already lend your hand.
The Ghastly Image sinks my floating Senses
I bore what man cou'd bear, but Ills like these
O'recome the God within me! Faints away.





Where, where's the Prince? the Multitude,
Enrag'd at what the Royal House has suffer'd,
Forcing the Palace, with one common Voice.
Devote Althea to immediately Vengeance.



No, dull AEgyptian, no, I am not born
To fall by their vile Hands, by base Aegyptians.

This Dagger is my Safe-guard, and this Hand.
Protects from that Infamy.



O! Madam do not pierce your own dear Bosom!
This awful Temple will repel their Fury,
And gain you Time for a more gentle Fate.



Impossible! the People Rage spares nothing.
Has no respect to Altars, or to Gods! 
Besides Happiness has for ever left me,
And to live wretched, is much worse, than Death.
It is enough I've liv'd to see my Wrongs
Amply revenged: I'll leave no turn to Fortune
To rob me of that Joy, but thus 



O! stop your fatal Hand! As she stabs herself they seize her hand, and wrest the Dagger from her, but cou'd not prevent a slight wound.



What have you done?



Do you conspire too against my Peace?
'Tis well the Dagger•s arm'd with double Fate,
I h'd mist my Aim else, now this scratch will do it;
What the Blow can't, the Poison will perform.



He breathes, go bear him gently to his Bed,
I'll but appease the people, and attend him. 
They bear off Phaeton,





My Lord, the tumult now is grown too fierce
To be repell'd, or ev'n to be withstood.
Like Fire in Stubble driven before the Wind,
They bear down all.

Althea's Lodgings they've destroy'd already,
And tore her Children in ten thousand pieces.
Nor satisfy'd with this they rave for her.
And much I fear, unless she's found, their Fury
Will reach the Prince himself as her Concealer.



The Prince; alas! he feels too much already
Of this their common Woe.




As Son to their bright Goddess, King of Aegypt.




The Crown, I own, is an Illustrious offer,
Yet not to be accepted by a Friend
In a friends wrong, that is unworthy me. I will go to 'em
Appease their fury with the Awe of Isis,

Or fall my self to vindicate my Friend
Fortune does ev'ry day dispose of Crowns,
But Heav n too seldom gives a faithful Friend. Ex. cum suis




Ha! Merope! what did the fatal Raven Croak?
My Children! my dear Infants torn to pieces?
O! dreadful News! O! cruel Rage! O! cursed Aegypt!



T'was so, alas! he said!



Dead! are they dead! the pretty Orphans dead!
Their Tongues that us'd to charm me with such Music,
For ever silenc'd? And their sparkling Eyes
Shut up, and clos'd for ever. Walks up and down discomposedly.




Grieve not too much for
What you can't redress.



Yet the great Gods, that suffer'd all this Evil,
Might have some mighty End, and Purpose in it.
To prevent Ills hid in the Womb of Time.
They took them innocent from this bad World,
As yet incapable of Guilt, or Grief.
For had they liv'd, perhaps they might have prov'd
False as their Father, or like me unhappy.



Then grieve no more, for what the Gods have doom'd



But thus to 'dye! thus to be torn to pieces!
Their Limbs dissever'd, their dear litte Arms
That have so often twisted round my Neck,
Their balmy Lips, that have so often kiss'd me,
Mangl'd and torn to pieces by vile Slaves!
By barbarous, curs'd Aegyptians! O! pain!
O! Torture! greater far than Lybia bore!
She faints away into their Arms.
This cannot; must not be! Oh!



Oh! Merope! our wretched Lady's dead!



No Life still struggles with grim Death within her:
Her Heart with furious, and thick beating Throbs
Bounces against her Breast.
Bend her more forward So she revives.



Stand off, and give me way, that I may fly
Swifter than thought, to stop the murdering Hand
Of Destiny. Gods! Gods! I'm come too late!
The Deed is done, their tender Threads are cut!
Oh! for the pow'r of strong Thessalian Charms!
To mock her Envy, and reverse their Doom!
All will not do they are for ever lost!



Alas! she raves, her Look and▪ Motion's wild!



Alas! my Heart bleeds at the piteous sight!



Hist in your Ear. I've found the secret out.
Drawing 'em to her.
 Softly we'll creep to the black horrid Scene
Of Infants Blood, and steal the precious Pieces;
Gather them all, and carry 'em to the Gods

  33To solder them together the Gods can do it,



What can we do to give her some Relief?



Oh! 'tis not to be done Despair, and Poison
Unite their Force to disappoint ous Wishes.



Ha! th' unequal Gods deny the Boon!
Again disperse and scatter the dear Reliques,
I with such Pain, and Hazard have collected. Pauses, and looks upward.

'Tis Guilt, not Innocence is now their Care▪
For perjur'd Phaeton is born a loft,
And grows familiar with the partial Gods.



O! ye jut Gods! remit her ranging Grief!



Oh! that I cou'd, by sharing it, abate it.



Ha! now he's leapt into his Fathers Seat!
He h's seiz'd the •iery Chariot of the Sun.
But see the Steeds despise his feeble Rein,
And swiftly whirl him o re the Azure Plain. pauses, looking fix'dty upward.

The Chariot burns! th' Heav'ns blaze, th Earths on Fire!
See Athos, Ida, Taurus, Oeta Flame!
Hills and Valleys burn! Fountains and Streams dry up
Stars, Earth, and Air are swallow'd up in Fire 
Ambition falls, see now he tumbles down!
The Precipice of Heav'n! Oh! shield us Iove!
For now he comes directly on our Heads. 
Breaks from them that endeavour to hold her, tears off her Head-Cloaths, &c. and her hair tumbles about her Shoulders.


Tear, tear, tear off these Flaming Tresses,
These burning Garments, this catching Fuel!
Haste, haste into the Flood, or we consume! Throws herself down.

So so, hark! hark! that Thunderclap has sav'd us!
See hes faln, he's motionless, he's dead!
Ha! how freezing cold he's grown already!
I've caught the shudd'ring Fit, it chills my Heart!
Oh! 
Dyes. Re-enter Epaphus.




Here let the People wait till we return, Speaks entring.

Too far already has their Fury bore 'em

Aegyptians! Countrymen! see where she lies!
And let your Anger terminate with Death
But learn ye All from this too fatal Day
That Iove o're Kings maintains an awful Sway.
All things are order'd by the Pow'rs above.
Against whose Will our Counsels fruitless prove.
In sad Events our wisest hopes we lose;
And what we can't expect the Gods produce. Exeunt Omnes




IN the Preface, p. 1. l. 22. r specious p. 2. l. 19, add of: p. 4. l. 40 r. yours: l. 41 r. Benefits: p. 7. l. 30. r. Reasonable. p. 8. l. 21. r. dum. l. 35.1. Identity. In the Play p. 3. l. 22. r. graceful: p. 10. l. 10. add and: p. 11. r. Goddess: p. 13.4.30. r. her: p. 16. l. 15. r. Shade: p. 19. l. 8. r. crouch'd: l. 15. add and her: 1.26. dele pauses: p. 20. l. •. add too: p. 22.1.4. aster Pow'r add that, and after hence dele that: p. 24. l. 48. for Me r. them.
