



She is in Mourning.


VVHat 'cause he kill'd Adolphus must he dye?
Shall Love be martyr'd by your cruelty?
Perhaps Adolphus gave him a just Cause;
His Life's then forfeited by Honours Laws.
But why should you be thus concern'd to make
Conradine wretched for Adolphus's sake!



I'll tell you Brother; we contracted were,
And though he's dead, he still is living here. 
Shall I go to his Bed who took my Life?
I'm made a murther'ess when I'm made his Wife. 
His Wife! that were to load my Soul with guilt;
What! Crimson o're this black with what he spilt?
And dye my Soul more black than these? She'll approve
Of the worst Treasons who can Traitors love.
By Heaven; these Tears, (which offer'd unto you,
Divine dear Saint, I count a sacred dew)

  2Nay by thy self I swear, if e'er I see
That Dog, this Hand shall be his Tragedy. 




There is no hopes, nor is it just to move
Her to wed him who has destroy'd her Love.






I can't endur't, he's proud and saucy; shall
My Husband's Brother slight me?  No, his fall
Must be contriv'd, or I shall burst with hate;
But it is wisdom to conceal his Fate.
I'll give it Wings, yet so that none shall dream
I am the poysoner of a balmy Stream;
I'll use such Words shall only friendship sound,
Yet give his Credit such a secret wound
'Shall gangrene so insensibly, that he
Shall plung'd be, 'fore he thinks of Misery.
For she's a Fool, who arm'd with love or spight,
Will not enflame the World t' encrease her light.
Did he not say my Parentage was base?
(Though not base born, yet of an obscure Race?)
And that his Brother rais'd me by his Love,
To what I could not hope? will not this move
Me to Revenge? Yes Fool, yes, thou shalt find,
Though meanly born, I have an high flown Mind
Which resents affronts. I (that Nettle-plant)
Will make the Cedar stoop to servile want;
Yet guild it all with Love, no shew of strife,
I'll weeping wound, and smiling take thy Life. 
 His Life! that's murther. But it must be done,
And then his Place goes to my Brother's Son;
Thus will I raise my own Relations, and
Give Check-mate to his Honours, and his Lands,
This neither Men nor Gods shall Countermand.


Good morning to your Grace.



And you my Dear,
Go to my Brother, say I want him here.




How does brave Eustace, Sir? He is unkind,
I have not seen him here to day, my mind
Prompts me to fear some Mischief; this last night
Methought I saw him environ'd with Light:
In his right and left Hand two Commets stood,
Which in a Moment did convert to Blood;
The Light was clouded, his Vilage grew pale,
His Tongue did faulter, and his Feet did fail;
And sinking thus into my Arms he cry'd,
"Farewel base World, farewel, and smiling dy'd.
Pray Heaven this my Dream does not fatal prove.



Oh no; 'Tis but the extremity of your Love;
The end of which is trembling careful Fears,
Just as excess of Joy distills in Tears.



Such Tears my Fate ne'er gave me Cause to shed,
Unless by being honoured with your Bed;
And sure if any thing can cause it now,
'T will be the good success of those I know
You love, of which I'm sure he has great part,
He's so obliging, can dissolve a Heart
Of Ice into a flaming Stream of Love;
He is not mortal sure; the Gods above,
Dissembling for a while their Bliss, came down,
And took his shape to glorifie their own,
And weary of the Earth do now return;
Can less than Commets wait them to the Urn?



Fie, you do so much over-load his Bays,
And injure Heaven with your luxuriant Praise.







Eustace, you troubled the Dutchess last night,
And she is scarcely yet out of the fright;
I left her to her self, and must you come?
Was it for you d' you think I left my Room?



The Duke rallys, I thought you were dead,
Which clouded me with Fears, and storms of Tears;
But now the Sun is up those Clouds are fled.



Madam, I curse my over-saucy Stars
For whispering to your Peace the sound of Wars,
Yet cannot chuse but bless their kindness too,
Since they have made me so esteem'd by you.
Why would you thus abuse your Thoughts on one
Who lives or dyes by your Command alone?
Sir, here are Warrants for you signature,

For Forty thousand Crowns.




There's no mistake; I leave it to your care,
Both of my Honour and your Trust beware.



If ever by deceit or negligence
I abuse your indulgent Confidence,
May my honour be to dark oblivion hurl'd,
Nay, let me be a By-word to the World;
Which is much worse; for a true born noble Spirit,
Would rather be forgot, than live t' inherit
The sooty Off springs of black Calumny;
Such are still dying, and yet never dye.



'T was not distrust, or giddy Jealous-fear;
But caution made me speak, your Souls too clear,
To be eclips'd by waining-earthy Dross.
Wealth bought wish Honour is the greatest loss.



Brave Eustace is so nice in Honours Cause,
He'd rather lose his Life then break her Laws;
So true to Justice, and so just to Truth;
Goodness in him is aged, and a youth,

  5Old 'cause from the beginning it was so;
Young cause it does greater and greater grow;
And if he does not nip that forward Bud,
He'll run into excess by being good:
You had no reason then my Lord to fear,
Your Caution's fond, extravagant your Care:
For should the Heavens prove frail, the Gods untrue,
Yet Eustace cannot be unjust to you.



How shall I thank your kindness? The whole store
Of Rhetorick is banckrupt, Thoughts are too poor
To fancy the rough Draught of a return.



'Tis but a Vizard, underneath's thy Urn. 




You'll shew your Gratitude, and Kindness too,
By the well performing of my Birth days Ceremonies.




Like Heaven, my Duty Service do approve,
What I do for my Honour you count Love;
I'm in your Debt, can I wipe out the score
Of obligations, by being obliged more?
That is a thrifty Payment.




To borrow on, and pay with Reputation 




We'll say no more, your Debt is current Coin,



If you distrust his Bond, you shall have mine.





Though you do not want Instructions, yet
Observe these Rules of mine;
Let not your mind gape at the Full-moon-tyde
Of Wealth, so far that Honour be deny'd
Her Rights; but let your gains be just and true:
He loses all who gets anothers due.
Be civil unto all Men as you can,
He who's the bravest is the humblest Man.
Beware of Bribes for they are basely foul,
Sins baudy Panders who corrupt the Soul.



Your Rules I will observe as sacred, and
As such I shall observe your least Command.



There needed not that strain, I know you'r just;
He who has noble Thoughts cannot distrust.



And therefore my design will easier be;
I'll sow his Seed, the Profit reap for me.







Lost if I see her, if I don't I dye,
How is my Soul plung'd in extremity!
If Fate when I was born did then contrive
To make me dye, why did Heaven make me live?
Why did not Death rifle my Mothers Womb?
And stop these Curses with so blest a doom?
Yet gentle Eustace pitty my distress,
Plead with her once more for my happiness.



Excuse me, Sir, I will not be so unjust Brother,
To Court her to what she so much hates.



Adieu, I'll to some melancholly Shade,
Heaven may at last cure these Wounds she has made. 
Exit.



My Friends you'r welcom all; what service now
Do your Commands oblige me with?




Unto your Honour in an humble suit.



 When Friends Petition, Reason may dispute
Whether 'tis Friendship speaks: what wound have I
Unwilling giv'n to make it pine and dye?
Use not such Crab-fac'd distance to your Friend:



It is your kindness thus to condescend,
Our Fortunes are too narrow, Minds too poor;



He who's a true Friend is the greatest store.



These gaudy Apples have a rotten Core,
They're Cankers to true Honour, and they bring
In their Mouth Nectar, in the Tail a Sting.




To morrow Morning, when the Duke's at leisure,
I'll him move in your Business: I take pleasure
In being serviceable to my Friend.



Your Goodness is a World, none knows its end.



We kiss your Hand 



 He speaks for all I see;




I humbly kiss your Feet.



A Ladies Lap dogs Flea
Would be ador'd by him, oh how he Cringes!
His Tongue, nay, his whole Body hangs o'th Hinges
Of Profit, he'll weep, smile, court, and scrue
Himself into more shapes than Proteus knew:
For baudy Game. Brave Eustace is too kind
Unto these Serpents.


Eust.How is my Mind
Ensnar'd with Love! oh! how is my Soul twin'd
In th' cruel Shackles of her downy Hair! 
Yet they are precious Chains, a glorious Snare. 
 But Reason bids me not enslave my Soul to
Woman, her rise was but Rib-high, 'twas Man
Was made the Head (the Metropolitan) 
 Reason, thou art unreasonable; she
Is Empress of the World who subjects me:

Venus does sometime blush, sometime look pale,
To see her self out-shone, and wears a Vail.
Smooth-tongu'd-Minerva swears Apollo got
This Eloquence; she comprehends it not.

Diana does forget the Chast Lucrece;

Rome never knew this Ladies like, nor Greece.

Frowning Bellona casts her Armour by,
Swears it was ravish'd from her by her Eye.
Thus Beauty, Learning, Chastity and War,
Do homage to this more illustrious Star.
Presume not then to love, only admire,
For fear her Eyes do burn thee in their Fire. 
 Not love for fear? Fears base, for if I burn,
I go a happy Commet to my Urn.
Encrease thy Flames then, if she cruel prove,
I dye her Martyr, sacrifid to Love.







  You need not fear,
There is no danger, the Coast's clear;

Pol on the Arras cannot prate
Of our solemn sweets to any, that

Elme courted by, the too-fond Vine
Will not declare; you see they twine,
And tacitly upbraid our cold
Neglect. Will you live to be old,
And lose your dear delights? faith try;
You rob your self when you deny:
Your Blushes shall not speak, I'll fan
Them into paleness, and that wan-
Ness shall not accuse, that Death-
Look I'll make ruddy with my Breath.
Let's then by now fufilling Love,
Anticipate those Joys above.



What have I done to fan yoor beastly Flame,
That it dares be so sawcy as to name
Its rude Desires? Has my Deportment been
So light, you think, it must be pois'd with Sin!



Dare be so saucy! had you been
Diviner than the Paphian Queen;
Or had the fondness of great Jove

Adopted you to be his Love,
And I a dirty Scullion born,
You could not then have us'd more scorn;
You might have giv'n an Answer free
From Pride or Incivillity:
You could but chide your Foot-boy so.



He's better bred, and honester I know.
Tell me not of the greatness of your Blood,
"'Tis he alone is great who dares be good.
You Exercise your Power to do ill;
In thus controuling you your greatness kill.

  9Can he be Noble who does basely stoop
To pamper'd Sence, and make his Honour droop?
Can he be Gallant who does quit the Field
To vaunting Lust? Is't Valour thus to yield?
No no; that Prince who has a Peasants Mind,
Is but a gaudy Bladder cram'd with Wind.
Honour is poiz'd with Vertue, 'tis not light,
Some men were born, others made Lords in spight.
For Nature angry with the Father, gave
A Son should prove an honourable Knave;
This may plead fashion, and so pardon get.
But when men shall be Beasts, (I'll not repeat
Those many ways they make them so) then 'tis
Nature does plague Birth with an Emphasis:
She is ingenious in her Vengeance, when
She makes the best by Birth the worst of Men.
Titles of Honour I know the Duke can
Give, you must make your self a Noble man.



Love firmly rooted never finds remorse,
It must enjoy by favour or by force.



Do not delude your self, there are those nigh
Will soon divert your black intent.














Fredrick shant know you would abuse his Wife,
For that would cost or him or you a Life.
But come no more unto my House.





So fool'd! it must not die without repair: 
 I hav't: The VVorld will think her foul, 'cause fair:
I'll say she is my VVhore; nay swear't: thus I
VVill be reveng'd to see her Honour die.







You throw away, dear Sir, your generous Passion;
I cannot make a just Retalliation,
You are so far abov't yet you shall fee
I'll Honour you as much as you Love me.



Your Love do's Wealth, Honour, Bliss comprehend,
Has he not all who has so brave a Friend?



You are an Artist, Sir, I quit the Field,
My Language must; my Love shall never yield.
Yet I'm afraid that too will too weak prove,
Your Merits bind me, you love, 'cause you love:
I love for Gain; you can no Reason give
For yours to me. So do the Gods, who live
Only to love poor Mortals, so do you;
And that Love which is Heavenly must be True.



In striving to persue this Copious Theam,
I cut against the Grain, swim 'gainst the Stream:
You do out-do me, I'll my Top-sail lower;
Your Language and your Love have the sole Power.



I'll say no more, but keep that in my Breast;
Which, though can't, would seem Flattery if exprest.




If he were not her Husband, she might prove
Mild to my Suit, and gratifie my Love:
Or were he not my Friend, to have my will,
Perhaps commanding Love might make me kill
Him, the only Thwart to my Desires, and try
By Fraud or Force to spot her Purity. 
 But that's 'gainst both Divine and Humane Law. 
 Love makes it lawful, though to break all Law. 
 Honour will not deceive any who trust
To her, and honesty bids me be just
To all, in all things; 'tis strict Vertues will
We bear Fates Tortures not committing ill.
I'll love her then; but with that sacred Flame
Shan't Honour blot, nor deface Friendships Name.






I'Ve promis'd it unto Eustace his Friend,
If you command I know he'll not, contend,
But willingly, and with great Joy submit
To lay his Int'rest at your Nephews Feet.



Far be that, Sir: You know all kindness shewn
To him, I ever reckon'd as my own



The next opportunity I have of conferring any thing
Worthy of Thierrie, I'll not forget him.



Let him enjoy't, it is not worth my strife;

He shall surrender't shortly with his life.








Enter Dutchess and Godfry



THe Duke do's love him, therefore we must be
Subtlely friendly in our Treachery:
He thinks my Flames are Loyal; but they are
Only to melt him into woful care.
I'll laugh to see him plunge without relief
In sweaty Anger and in briny Grief.
Let him, like Niobe, weep into Stone,
Useless to all, regarded to by none:
Then tickled with that Pleasure, I shall die
In Raptures, as I loft Virginity.



 Since 'tis your Pleasure I'll obey your Grace.



'Tis for your Profit your Son gets his Place.




 I am his Bosom; can I break my Trust
To one so Faithful, so exactly Just? 
Hence Treachery, what! shall a Womans Hate
Triumph o're Goodness? I'll divert that Fate. 

  12 But she proposes Wealth, and Honour too;
VVhat will not any for those Beauties do?
They captivate all with their golden Hair;
Evaporate then Friendship into Air.






Besides all this, he's Honours Advocate,
A God to Vertue; but to Vice a Fate.



He takes not Honour in the new-mode's Sence;
But weighs it in the Scale of Conscience.



He's Natures Darling, and the Muses Dear;
And yet can teach even Mars to break a Spear.



Rob the VVorlds Cabbinet, and ransack Fame;
You cannot equal then brave Eustace's Name.
He is in one word (that we mayn't time spena)
The greatest Soldier, Courtier, truest Friend.





 VVith what regret do I found forth his Praise!
 How do I curse when I trim up his Bays;
My tow'ring Thoughts disdain to be out-flown;
Envy all Encomium's that are not their own:
My Soul's as lofty as the best; I hate
So mean a thing, as second in a State.
Nature made all Men naked, Beggars, and Kings:
'Tis Fortune only turns the Scale of things.
If she should make my Sovereign's Scepters mine,
I'd think my self as Sovereign and Divine
As he; and on him from that Wheel look down,
With an upbraiding Smile, disdainful Frown.

Eustace I'll strike at first; and when I'm in
(Ambition can digest the greatest Sin)
I'll level at the Duke; th' Attempt is brave;
I gain if loose; a Subject is a Slave.
The Dutchess in all this shall be the Scale
I'll take th' height of this Attempt by her pale

  13Looks, frequent Blushes, broken Sighs of late,
Argue she's Pris'ner unto Love or Hate,
Or both; and if I'm not mistaken, I
Saw my self seated in her amorous Eye;
If so, I'll make her love Baud to my Lust,
These two Flames joyn'd shall burn the Duke to Dust.






 Not love you! Why?
Cause you'r so killing perfect, must love dye?
You not belov'd! whose high flown Eloquence
Sacred Sybilline, dictates do's dispence!
The Rhetorick of your Face with silence can
Speak threats unto the Gods, but death to Man.
When Phyrrha and Deucalion threw the Stones,
And from thence sprang both Male and Female ones;
Nature intended Love, else you would feel,
Instead of Flesh, those Flints and Hearts of Steel;
She mollifi'd those Stones, encreas'd desire,
She took away the Flint, but left the Fire.



That Fire you speak of ought to be refin'd
In the chast Furnace of a Godly Mind:
The Gods allow love's Flame, yours Lusts will prove,
Would Eustace have me lose my Love by Love?
Love's Fire's divine, Divinity is just.
O Heavens! Can Eustace be eclips'd with Lust!
Fredrick's your Friend; from yours he draws his Life,

Fie Eustace, fie, would you abuse his Wife?



 Could any Mortal Eye transpierce the Sphere,
And see what the just Gods are doing there,
How they eternal Joys give to the Good,
And do revenge Adulteries and Blood;
Or did they think the Thunderer was near,
The very worst of Men to sin would fear;
D' you think me then so impudent, that I
Dare sin when such a Deity is nigh?

  14No Madam, no; may Heaven exclude me there,
And you me hate (a greater Hell by far)
If my Flame's not as just as theirs above,
The very abstract of the purest Love.
I crave but to enjoy your Company,
To kiss your Feet, your heavenly Beauty view;
To feed upon your Voices Harmony,
Heaven is not Heaven if all this is not true:
And if your Servant covets more than this,
Like Lucifer may I lose all my Bliss.



Eustace is Eustace now, methinks I see

In him all Glory, all Divinity;
And since his Thoughts nothing but Vertue are,
As I before, am still his Worshipper.
Eustace shall Fredrick, Fredrick Eustace be,

Except in Bed, one and the same to me;
This is true Love, Lust is the Beasts delight,
That beams the Sun, this darkens blackest Night.



When Eustace is deposed, my Son shall
Be Treasurer, I Lord General;
To gain Honour, who do's not think'tis fit
To baffle Friendship, is not stor'd with Wit.



There's your Commission 



 Sir, I still must be
Indebted to your great Civility
How I applaud my Wit for this new Power,
He raises me to make himself fall lower;

•is Envy's Lechery to make Men fall

By that they built to save themselves withal.







Post away, relate it to the Duke in the most odious
Terms maginable,
Then return to me disguis'd.

I'll mittigate these Flames in which I burn,
Or kindle those shall bring me to my Urn.


How are they incumbred who do wear a Crown;
They cannot truly call what's theirs their own;
All rob the Prince, Theft's not Theft in that thing;
'Tis godly Policy to cheat the King.
The Sycophant oyls us with Flatteries,
Our Gold is angled at by avarice;
Th' ambitious Worms would over-top their heuer,
The envious wretch would starve our Princely State,
All strive to raise themselves, or whet our Fate;
Nor are we free from Traitors when we are dead.
Did not Rodulphus tell me but just now,
(Treason sole regent sate upon his Brow)
That he; Rodulphus! would more loyal be
Then him, who from me takes his Pedigree? 
More Loyal! ha!   was not th' Accent there? Yes 
 My Brother false? No, he a Traitor is 
 But why do I Condemn him thus?  Yet can
Eustace, brave Eustace, be less then a man?
(For Traitors are Beasts, Monsters)  Yet we know
Blood Royal thinks that Nature do's it owe
A Crown; Eustace may think himself as fit,
In Majesty, in Wisdom, and in Wit,
To sit at Helm as I He cant break his Trust 
 The best corrupted though prove most unjust.
I'll therefore watch him, and th' informer too;
Perhaps he talks but what himself would do.




So let him play a while with this first Bait,
False-sighted Jealousie can pick deceit
Out of true Loyalty, now Eustace shall
Not talk of Honey, but he'll extract Gall;
And I'll so feed his Humour, blind his Sence,
He'll Duty check, and Treason recompence.
Enter Dutchess.
God save your Grace.



Oh! what! Rodulphus! joy;
You are turn'd Soldier, count the Court a Toy;
It is a Miracle to see you here,
A day of Jubilee when you appear.



Your Grace is merry, Soldiers must obey
Their Officers, else 'twere a Puppet-play;
Female Suns shine at Court; Rodulphus can
Feast his Eyes on his Mistris; who's a Man,
My General, brave Eustace, I adore;
I'll never think of Women any more.



Methinks Rodulphus (none do hear but we)

Himself might be the General, had not he
A Soul too narrow to contain the Fire
Of his dear Princess Libussa's desire;
And in my Judgment, he deserves it, far
Beyond that vulgar Shadow, painted Star. 
 The Dutchess told me this her self; if you
Have not Faith to believe that it is true,
Come to her Bed-Chamber, I'll place you where
You all our close Discourse shall over hear.
She weeps for Joy when I begin your name;
Yet those dews are soon dry'd up in Loves Flame.
She sighs, and weeps again to cool Desire,
Alas! those oyly drops encrease the Fire. 

  17Rodulphus did not know who was his Slave

Before I told. For this my Fee I'll have;




Ha, ha, ha, All this I knew before; we wise men must
Make many Tryals before we do trust. 
Rodulphus might be General (ha, ha, ha.) Yes I

Will Eustace be, and Duke, or bravely dye.


I'll wait upon her Grace.




 Lord Treasurer or Lord General Let's see 
Which of those Titles is the best for me 
 Faith Treasurer, for I love Gold; beside
A Cannons Language I could ne'er abide,
(Not that all Soldiers think they must fight, no;
The Duke I fear would have few, thought they so.)
'Tis a rough Dialect, but Gold's smooth Tongue
Makes Angels dance unto its heavenly Song;
That then I'll choose shall make all Men admire
My State; a Generals but a Powder Fire.
Ha, ha, ha, Who'd be a Soldier? he's a flash can't hold,
Unless the Treasurer feeds him with Gold.
I do allow their Officers are bright;
If I (their Sun) contract my Beams, 'tis Night.
How am I ravish'd with these Thoughts! I'll live
In greatest splendour; there's nought shall reprive
The least of Pleasures from my ravenous Sence;
The Stars from me shall take their influence,
Bending to my will all Mens Humours, he
Shall be Atheist thought who do's not worship me;
In Beds of Down I'll revel without care,
In richest Chariots take the pregnant Air;
Which drawn by two more Horses than the Sun,
My uncontrouled Course like him I'll run;
How will the Virgins court me! the whilst I
Only laugh at their forc'd Virginity. 

  18The Dutchess in all this I must obey,
She do's expect, I dare not make her stay:
Let her conceive rough Plots, I'll bring them forth,
My Tongue shall lick and form them into worth.











A Law is to your Slave.








 Such a thought your Grace ne'er bred,
You'd almost dye to raise him was he dead.



He's close, I'll give his Wit a Bone to pick. 

Not kill proud Eustace! hence you puny Chick;
How can you else be General?




Was it Commissioned by your Command,
Should tear my Heart before your sacred Eyes;
Dare I do that, and yet not sacrifice
Eustace to your hate? Yes, if greater far.




Not for my Love, but to be Treasurer.
Base Traitor to thy Master, thou shalt dye
For this foul Treason.




Was not that seal'd Box to Leopaldus sent?



It is, but he came hither whilst it went,
So miss'd it. 



 There are the Writings: That's all.

Ha, ha, ha, ha.



How did my proud Heart fall;
His Plumes when your Grace call'd, 'twas a great fright.



Day's welcom after the most; tedious Night.
Now to th' Affair. You must hatch jealousie
In th' Duke of Eustace his Fidelity
In both his Offices. Let some trick be
Found out to make him think he aims at me;
I with my kindness will so rub the sore,
It shall not heal, but fester more and more;
Yet do it secretly that none may know,
That he his Downfal unto us do's owe;

  19I know you're wise, it is your own Affair,
Therefore it do's concern you to take care.




Are all the Syrens Habits made, and the Musick perfect:
1 Masquer, Yes. 



 Pray let them be very exact, for
I value my Reputation
In the well performing of this Masque.






Dares Eustace then commit such Crimes as those?



Your seeming Friends are still the basest Foes;
I hate you, Brother, for this Black-mouth'd Deed;
Do you, his choicest Flower, turn a Weed?
Ill root you out o' my Thoughts for this; you shall
Have little cause to glory in his Fall.



Madam what needs this heat, 'tis for his good
I tell the Duke. 



 A way corrupted Blood;
Black Parasite, whose Soul knows nought but Vice,
'Tis cram'd with Pride, Envy and Avarice;
Thou'rt just to flalshood, to all Truth untrue;



I am as just to Friendship, true, as you.



'Tis sawcy, Sir, I hope you will not shew
Your self unkind to Carlos, Sir. I know
This Accusation's false. If not, than I
Desire to school him for this Vanity.
Seem not to know it, chide him not for this;
'Tis 'gainst his Will if he has done amiss.



Well, Madam, I am calm'd; for he that can
Still ward the Hilts of Vice is more than Man.




Was it not bravely acted.




My Knowledge and my Judgment were at strife,
Whether it was in earnest or in jest,
So naturally urg'd so strongly prest.



They who do seek to undermine the Wise,
Must Nature use with Art to blind their Eyes.






How do's Rodulphus like his Regiment?




I humbly thank your Honour; they are all
Men who deserve so brave a General.



Oh no Rodulphus; all the World can tell
Their bravery is in their Colonel.




If Fortune do's not play the Jade, they shall
Soon see their Colonel their General. 



and Ladies are seated for the Mask.




Who says that I'm no Deity? when they
Who rule the Heaven shall wonder at this Clay;
Great Jupiter shall not only look down,
But even descend this glorious Earth to Crown.






What makes the Hills to dance! the Mountains play!
The Groves cut Capers! whose is this Holy-day!
My Flocks do skip, and every Bird do's sing;
For whom's this great mirth made!








Wonder not Pan, a God's born on
the Earth,
The World must needs move in a Sphere of mirth.


Wonder not Pan, a God's, &c. as before.








What Melody is this! whence are these Charms?
Far sweeter than my Syrens!







Sing Syrens sing; Nature's immortal; we
Must bow unto her New-born Deity.

Satyrs and Syrens sing.]
Sing Syrens sing, Nature's, &c.



The six Syrens and six Satyrs dance an Antick.
Cupid and Mercury enter.



Hail glorious Prince, all I can do will be
To make Ten thousand Ladies dye for thee.



Break thy Bow, Cupid; th' amorous Tackling tear,
Thou art no God; all love is seated here.
Syrens and Satyrs sing.

Break thy Bow, break thy Bow, Cupid, for we
Must bow unto this New-born Deity.

Mercury and Cupid dance a Sarabran.
Whilst Mars and Venus descend.


What Stern-sweet-beauty's this makes Mars afraid!]
My Valour's rivall'd.



I'm glad 'tis no Maid.



Sing Venus, forget thy Adonis; for he
VVas not so fair as this new Deity.

Syrens, Satyrs. Sing Venus, forget, &c. as before.


  22Pan, Neptune, and Mars dance, whilst Jupiter and Juno de∣scend; And then Jupiter, Juno, Mars, Venus, Cupid and Mercury dance.



Thus when good Kings are born upon the Earth,
The Host of Heaven is ravished with mirth.

The six last go off of the Stage; and whilst they are ascending,
Pan and his Satyrs, and Neptune with his Syrens dance, and
by degrees leave the Stage.






The Scene's drawn; The Duke in State with all his Nobles
about him, prepar'd to give Audience to the Duke of
Schawden's Ambassador.
Enter Ambassadour; And after due Ceremonies past speaks.

THe Great Duke of Schawden do's defie thee Great Baldwin, and is resolv'd after Twenty days, to lay wast thy Do∣minion by Fire and Sword, to be reveng'd for thy execrable murthering his Nephew the brave Conradine.



Tell the proud unjust Duke thy Master; that he
shall dearly pay, for endeavouring to cloud our Rays with
such detestable Actions.
For though his force and hatred is so great,
VVe'll drown his Anger in a Bloody-sweat.



I know you're wise, it is your own Affair,
Therefore it do's concern you to take care. 

  23It do's I know, and I'll be careful too,
Who o' the Devil knows what she may do?
Base Traitor thou shalt dye said she: 
And who can tell? she may in earnest be:
No, Dutchess, no, you shall not cozen me.
I'll go to Eustace and disclose the Plot,
Unload my self of guilt; but they will not
Believe my Accusations, and thus I
Revealing Treason Traitor-like shall dye.
I must go through now I've begun; 'tis base
To faulter in the middle of a Chase.
Enter a Servant gives him a Box.
Don Lewis left it here.




Be gone. What's this
A Ruby! Topaz! and an Amithyst! 
Dull plumbeous Brain. What a Hen-hearted Slave
Was I to doubt the Dutchess, can one have
Surer Proofs of her Loyalty than this?
Faint Jealousie do's often judge amiss:
Do not these Jewels and this Gold infer,
That I shall be advanced Treasurer?
I'll follow't now with eagerness, I doubt
Not but to succeed when he's justled out.



Am I not well disguis'd, is not this Hair
An exact Vizard? and are not these Pair
Of Mustachoes well order'd? ha!




As though your Honour fetch'd them out of Hell;
So black, so horn'd, and so deceitful too,
The Devil's in Men sure when they do woe,
Or else they would not so transform themselves
For nothing but to please these waspish Elves,
Who, if they did not court, would court themselves.



That's too Satyrical, but, prithee how
Dost like my Mask, Philippo, couldst thou know
Me, had I not foretold thee my design?



O, Sir, your Vertues through these Clouds do shine,
Cloaths cannot hide that Part which is Divine.



You must be exercising of your Wit;



'T has slept so long I fear I've smother'd it.



I must contrive it so,
That he stay here, and I in chief may go
Against the Duke of Schawden. 
Yet if he goes, he secretly shall fall
By me, and I'll return the General.






Another Regiment then must be rais'd.



But will you venture Eustace in this Fight?
Should he miscarry, you loose all your might
At one blow; for as soon as he is lost,
Your Bed-rid Dukedom will give up the Ghost.
He is the Soul of Valour; should they see
Him fall, your bravest Martialists would flee
Like frighted Sheep before the Wolves, none shall
Resist, but with a meek Devotion fall
A Sacrifice to him; some out of fear,
Others, 'cause he is gone, hate to live here;
Let him stay here for a reserve at last
To graple with Death when all hopes are past.



Madam, to keep him here's to loose the Day,
What strength remains when the Soul's ta'ne away?



Those Court-silk-worms, whose sophisticated Fare
Is Peace, sauc'd up in Pleasure, whose Pallats War
Do's nauseate; who with ease Ermin their Gown,
Mind not their Princes Interest but their own;

  25Should we sit still and let the Commons sweat
Alone, they would our Honour from us get.
Had I Ten thousand Lives, each drop of Blood
Should be exhausted for my Countries good.






Great Sir, your Fame
Has made the World enamour'd with your Name;
You need not bring a Letter to be known;
There's nothing Great nor Good that's not your own.
Since you have put your Rays under the Cloud
Of Nancy, let my poor House be allow'd
That Honour; Ferdinando may be as free,
As if he was brave Otho. Exeunt.






Letters from him! from Otho! that shall be
Matter wherewith I'll feed my Villany.



By thus matching my Sister with the Brother of the dead Conradine, I shall create a Peace upon Honourable Terms. He who muzzles the Jaws of the Sword, do's his Country as great a Service, as he who vindicates her honour by it. Yet I will keep it secret, that it may be more vallued; for we are apt to prize those Blessings most which come unex∣pected.





Come Boys let's bid adieu to these Thred-bare knitty Jir∣kins, these Spawns of Peace; she who never gave Soldiers any thing but a king Bellies and itching Backs.



Faith if we had lain still any longer, every one I think had been a General; I believe I can Muster Ten thousand, besides what have had the strapado, and been turn'd out of Service.



But now we'll ruffle in Silk, and be lousie with Credit: Brace our Bellies with Provocatives; make our Souls tyde it to Elysium in Wine, then have an Alderman's Wife to close up the Stomach.



Take it off you mean.



Faith I must have half a dozen to cure my Itch.



No, one with her Husband's best new Suit and clean Shirt will do't; for they are famous for such Cures.






I do his noble praise admire,
And emulate his worth; but Cupid's Fire
Catch from the Eyes. 



 h' has your Picture. 




He live and doat upon my Picture still.
I'll marry none by Proxy; Kings in that
Are then their Subjects more unfortunate.



'Twas not report that rais'd Otho's Love,
Or your Effigies did his Passion move;
But he has seen you, Madam; from your Eyes
The Fire was kindled for this Sacrifice;
He offers a true broken Heart; Quench not
That holy Flame your Beauty has begot.



What's got by Beauty will with Beauty fade,
When the Sun sets we are left in the Shade;



Beauty is not External, but Divine,
He do's adore the Features of your Mind;
You are the Fountain of Divinity;
Through you all Glory, Bliss, and Goodness run,
The Heavens do boast of your Affinity;
Your splendant Eyes renew and beam the Sun.
Should you be angry, and withdraw your Light,
The World would grovel in eternal Night.
Let not, let not your too much Cruelty,
Give cause to doubt of your Divinity.



How do's he plead against himself? 'tis he



  27Justice as well as Mercy's in the Gods,
One Hand holds Blessings, and the other Rods
To punish proud Offenders. Sir, can I
Think Otho do's count me his Deity;
When in his first address I read such Crimes?
O Heavens! the Pride of Men in these our Times!
Can the Proud Otho think that I'm Divine,
When Scrivener-like he courts me thus by Line?
The Path to Conquer her is strait, thought he,
And easie. 'Tis a sign he Honours me;
Did he so much admire what he writ,
To think that I'd be ravish'd with his Wit?
Or did he think himself, (great Man!) too good
To come himself? Or thought he travail would
Cool th' Glow-worm flashes of his hasty Fire,
Or me quite void of what should raise desire?
Or does he think I must be his by fate?
'Tis fit I scourge his Confidence with hate.







No more; I'll not hear one word more.



Your Laws are Sacred, I your VVill adore.



Your humour's peevish, Sister.




Owe you a great respect I know; yet why
Should you usurp a Power over me?
Love's not begot by any force; 'tis free.
I will obey your modest Mandates still;
But marry whom I please, not whom you will.



There's no resisting VVomans wild desire, 

Pray let your Reason mittigate your Ire. 




I'm glad she is so cruel 




VVhat thing is Love! of what is it begot!
Sure they who know it best do know it not;
It is a sudden fire, a secret flame,
It has a thousand, yet not one true Name. 
Hell's chiefest Agent's Lust, Love takes its birth
From that; sure then Love is Hell upon Earth;
To me it is, for I'm hurl'd in a Fire,
In which I burn, and shall yet ne'er expire.









If these.three fail, how cursed is my fate;
There's neither God of Love, nor Friend of hate.






Now by my Life this News do's make me fear 
Letters from him! his Confident too here
By Eustace entertaind! If so, I m sure
That Traitor has my Dukedom made secure
Unto himself. Prithee what's best to do? 
I'll his Commission seize. 



 That's not safe, you
Must do it by degrees, no rash ways try,
Fetter his Gyant-strength with Policy,
Send him unto St. Enay, tell him that you
Can trust none but Eustace himself to view
That Fort; he gone, you must pick out some one
VVho Treason hates, to crush Rebellion
In the Egg; him make General.




Some hope yet left through thy sagacity;
And did not gratitude, my safety would
Invite thee to be General; 'Tis good
To scourge Rebellion with an Iron Whip;
Thy forward Zeal for me will make thee strip
Those Traitors of all means to do me harm;
I'm safe under thy Conduct and thy Arm.



Meer Nature honours Kings; you bind me now
By Gratitude to keep m' Allegiance Vow.
If e'er I violate my Fealty, may
That Crime give VVings unto the Judgment day.



I doubt not; but dost not know any more
VVho are charm'd with the Beauty of this VVhore

  29Ambition? what Officers are they
With whom he does intend this Game to play?



Fredrick's Bosom, him you must remove,

Not out of Jealousie, but seeming Love;
Give him a better Place, though far more worse;



I'll Honour him with Master of our Horse,
Because he is the good Eustace his Friend.



'Tis fit indeed they ride unto their end.



Those Subjects who dare so usurp the Crown,
Do but exalt themselves to tumble down.




I'll not that humble fear, nor thy weak frown,
Ten thousand Lives to wear a minutes Crown.
Exit.
Enter Gertrudo and Maria in a Garden.
I sigh, weep, mourn, rejoyce, I freeze, I fry?
How am I scourged with uncertainty! 
Sing me the Song thou sungst last night; ah me!
I'll with my Sighs and Tears thy Chorus be.



Descend ye gentle Angels; see
A Wretch hem'd in with Grief;
All Misery's sum'd up in me,
Look down and bring Relief;
Let your kind Breath and Wings fan my rude Fire,
Not like my Sighs and Tears which feed desire.
Woe Tyrant Cupid for Relief,
(If such a God there be)
Paint out, murmur to him my Grief;
A Friend would pitty me;
Tell him how devillish is his damned Fire,
Let him stand farther off, or else come nigher.
Must Beauty still be joyn'd with Grief?
Take that then quite from me,
Or else take this, and give relief
To what you first gave me;
O Gods! Can you be plagu'd with hellish Fires!
I am your Image; Image my Desires.



Or give me more, or take what strength I have,
That melting I may drop into my Grave.






I'll write to him, invite him to come here,
All Clouds must fly when the Sun does appear.



I will inclose your Letter in mine.





I want Money, Sir, to furnish me for this Expedition,
and your Honours Clerk denies me my Pay.



You'r troublesom, you'r troublesom, away.




Such Officers are Enemies.






Next time he writes unto Otho, see
You carefully that Letter bring to me,
It may concern our Business;




Your Graces will with great Devotion.




Who a Kings Favourite would tumble down,
Must make his Vices justifie their own.
Enter Ferdinando.

Cruel Gertrudo; but more Cruel Love,
Thus to enflame my Soul, and yet not move
In her Desire; under this blest Shade I
Will sit and pray to be so too; to dye
Is a great Blessing to the Happiest Men;
What is it to the Miserable then?




Why did ye make us subject unto Passion?
Why did ye give us Tongues wherewith to speak?
If we must subject be to this strict fashion,
Not to relate our Loves though our Hearts break? 
Tis Man's Extortion, we may be as free
In that as they, or wrong the Deity.
For they made nothing but was for some use 
Otho loves me, I Ferdinando; may

Not I let him know it without abuse
To Modesty? If not we're worse than Clay.
I'll un-Lanthorn my Flame, no longer I
Will hover in this strange uncertainty.




As when Men from some pleasant Dream awake
Wish they might always sleep for that Dreams sake;
And can't but fancy happiness a while
(So does desire our willing Sence beguile)
So 'tis with me; for rising from that Shade,
Methinks I am a Constellation made.
And wish I might Eternally lye there,
The Mellody of her Complaints to hear. 
I'll after her and give my Griefs a Grave.





Fredrick's made Master of the Horse, we have

A Boy to be our Colonel.




When Butterflies do give the Falcon Laws,
And painted Peacocks clip the Eagles Claws:



O 'Tis Rodulphus's Plot; There are two more,
Right Sons of Mars, quite turned out of Door,
And for it made Bed-chamber-men.





But that our General's brave, I'd scorn to move
By such Men's Orders.




If there is Treason hatching, I think I
Should then stay here to cherish Loyalty;
Or crush that Monstrous Egg; but since you do
Command me, unto Stenay I must go:
For he who does dispute his King's Command,
No Subject is, but the Crowns Countermand,


I cannot fathom't; Treason's budding, yet
The Armies Head must be lop'd off; 1s't fit
I should be busied 'bout a little Fort,
And leave all else Confus'd? 
There's something more in it; But since I'm free
From the least stain, it cannot injure me.


You are but young, and must not be asham'd of
Directions, 



 Your Commands to me are
Lovely, and like a Loadstone draw me
By their Motion; all my Actions shall point
Directly at your will.



And that's your Honour;
You too, Captains, must make me still your Rule,
Consult me always: For you must know those
Men whose Places you inherit are not
Well satisfi'd, and are studdying your
Ruine with eagerness; and though they smile,
They'r cruel Traps, varnish'd but to beguile 
VVith greater ease, uncloset not your Souls
To all, they'll quickly be unrivetted,
From your Bodies if ye do 




Your Instructions to a Tittle.



These are dull Fools, and may be drawn aside
Unto all Villanies, when I'm their Guide;
Fight with Devotion 'gainst their Prince, cause they
Believe they can't err when I lead the way.




That does not prove him Traitor, the best Men

  33Are most abus'd; Fame's Falfe, Suspition's grudge,
And Jealousie is an unequal Judge;
Rodulphus may forge it: In this Age, all

Think 'tis Religion to supplant; the fall
Of Princes Favourites Nature Contrives;
She Envy roots, as soon as Heaven breaths Lives. 
Yet let him plow the Deep, and fetch from thence
Legions of Devil's to delude my Sence;
Scale great Jove's Fabrick, seduce Angels there
To come and own his Accusations here:
They'd make me fear 'twas true, yet never move
My Heart 'gainst Justice t' extirpate my Love;
I'd hear him speak, not damn, cause I distrust;
Kings are not Men till they can be unjust.






I've left a Letter with Leopaldus. (Ferdina.) Go
Fetch it, I'll inclos't in mine.
Exit.



Sir, may I know
How soon you will return.



In Ten days; See
You are not idle in your Courtship; shee
Seems better humour'd now; and when he's come
She'll melt; Courtship at distance is but dumb.
Fear not her frowns, persue your Amorous Sence,
Be bold, it is a pleasing violence;



I cant wait on you; 'tis much 'gainst my will,



Duty takes place of Ceremony still.





This is great kindness, Sirs. 



 Men are bereft
Of Comfort, when they are in darkness left.



Fancy paints Death. 



 No marvel if we run
To take our leaves of our departing Sun.



The Sun sets but to rise. 



 Thought we not so,
You'ld see us all depart before you go.



Go! that word's Hell. 



 Let us wait on you Sir.



The Soul gone, the Trunk's so benum'd can't stir.



I'm wrack'd to leave you; but it must be, when
I come our Friendship will be new again.



In Grief and Discontent we'll make our Urn,
There will we buried be till you return.




VVhen Earth's not Earth, Sea Sea, till then't must be
That great Men shall be gull'd with Flattery.
Exit.
Enter Frederick.


Distrust my Conduct? or my Loyalty?
Though I'm Master of the Horse, I might have been
A Colonel too; Plurality's no Sin;
Or Venial at most, 't might be forgiven,
Since 'tis their Tract who point the way to Heaven. 
Dos he think I'm no Soldier; no, his Eyes
Has dazled been to see the Prodigies,
This Hand has hew'd out for his safety. yet. 
Kings are not Gods because they can forget.
Enter Eustace, Albert booted.
Booted my Lord!



Yes Fredrick I must go.



Give me leave to wait on your Lordship.




You must stay here.



You do but take the Air
I do presume; your Lordship rides not far.









Can you be spar'd! 



 I know-not; but'tis true 
Why dost thou muse.



My Lord I like it not;
There is some jugling in't, some dirty Plot
Upon my Life; you're sent away, and my
Commission's seis'd, by I know not why.

Ʋlric and Bruno are uncaptain'd: they
Who've done this have an after Game to play;

  35Godfrey's Son's made Colonel; Is't a time,
When we should be at top to learn to climb?
He's but Seventeen, scarce knows to draw a Sword;
He is not taught to speak should give the Word.
Then there are two more, in the room of those
I nam'd, would tremble at the name of Foes;
I grieve to think my Country shall be lost,
Conducted by those have been on the Post 
Traitor Rodulphus, he is soaring still,
A Raven, though's Wings are imp'd with Doves Quill.



I've weigh'd these things to Fredrick, and can't guess
Rodulphus false to me








'Twas I rais'd him; can he be so deprav'd,
To destroy that by whom himself is sav'd?



Ill Men are Enemies to Goodness; they
Delight to see them ragged made them gay:
You are too good to think all Just.




Thou'rt Captive still to dreaming Jealousie.
'Tis the Dukes Love, says he, you I can trust,
I know not that Rodulphus will be just.



Well, Heaven avert what my Dream's do foresee;
To trust all's the High-way to beggary.



Though I beleiv't, I'll not his Mood foment,
'Tis Treason to encourage Discontent 
Aside.












NOT gone last Night! and in her Chamber too
Till Three this Morning! O Gods! What to do?



Could I, 'twere Sin to tell,  Good Deeds love light,
But theirs were masqued with the Clouds of Night.



Thou speak'st as though she were false to my Bed,
By all the Gods or prove't, or, Dog, thou'rt dead.



Prove it! who can? But is not a Nights stay
Alone with her enough? 



 Screech-Owl away 
Yet stay and tell me more, or I'll advance
Thy Head on yonder Tower. 




Is all the Proof in such a Case; we may
Conclude the Sun's not far at break of day.
How careful is she for Eustace his good?
She draws Life from his Breath.




Allows that kindness. 



 But, Great Sir, no kin
Can check the Passions of unruly Sin.
How uncontroulable is pamper'd Lust!
It makes the very worst of Deeds most Just,
To gratifie its Sence: Nero's Mother
Could not divert his Flames; nought can smother
Those Hellish Fires: They who make Lust their God
Justice despise; contemn th' Avenger's Rod;
Such a one's Eustace and the Dutchess too. 
These Jewels were not sent to him by you.

No, these are Trophies of his Antes desire,
The Sparks declare her base incestuous Fire.

  37Pardon, Great Sir, this boldness; on my Knee
I beg; 'twas forc'd by Zeal; Truth should be free.




These are great Circumstances, Sir; yet more
Must be found out to prove a Queen a Whore.
And shall by thee, or thou a Traitor prove;
Shall Subjects undermine their Sovereigns Love?
Guard Enter. Carry him to the Tower during our Plea∣sure.




I've built my self a Castle.





Sent by my Wife to Eustace, and his stay
All night affrights me. Heavens! What can she say
To justifie this Action? it appears
Odious to me yet.






What all in Tears!
Why is your Grace to day so sadly drest?



With what Convulsions are their Souls opprest,
Who are forc'd to accuse those they love best!
That Case is mine.
Next unto You, my poor abused Love
Unto your Brother Eustace still did move,
Because I thought him (pardon't Gods above)
More than Divine.
But how does he reward my Love! (Curs'd Fate!
Heavens! Why was I made thus unfortunate!)
He Courted me,  he Courted (base ingrate)
How shall I speak?
He Courted me; would you believ't? to lye
With him last night; (unheard of Infamy)
Eustace, where is now thy Divinity?
Deceiv'd Heart break;
When I repuls'd him, he reply'd, what then
Did those Jewels you sent me mean? we Men
Know Ladies Presents give for Love again;
Come, come, your Eyes

  Say you meant so When by your Soul I sent
Them to be match'd and polish'd, my intent,
By Heaven, was altogether Innocent.



  By Jove he dyes:
For he that would defile his Sovereigns Wife;
Waits but a fit time to enshare his Life.



Pardon his Life; he may repent in time,
When Age comes on our Thoughts are more sublime.
Enter Rodulphus, gives the Duke a Letter.
Duke reads,]
Eustace, To the Renowned Otho.
How can the Ship sail without a Pilot?
In what disorder will an Army be
Without a General? Come then your self,
And head your own Party if you mean to
Prosper; for I do not find it easie
To gain Compliance, you being absent.
Dispose therefore of your Affairs into
Trusty Hands, and make hast hither, where you
Shall find all things prepar'd according to
Your desires; but leave none of your Courage
Behind you, for we are to deal with
Resolute and Politick Enemies. Howere
I'll not distrust, for I am Confident
They'll vanish, when you appear to
Countenance the Endeavours of your  Eustace.




Ingrateful Eustace, couldst thou serve me so!
But I'll reward thee; Let's to Cbuncel go.



The Packquet was gone before I came.



Gods! What will Otho think when he receives
An Invitation from Eustace to come hither. 
But it can't be help'd.





  Godfrey made Treasurer!



'Tis too true, and Rodulphus General.



Was Eustace rais'd so high, to make his fall
The greater?



What! And shall we Soldiers see
Brave Eustace suffer this Indignity
Without Revenge?



No, By great Mars I'll take
My Troop, and face the very Pallace Gate;
And there dispute his Right with my last Breath,
Who dyes for him finds Honour in his Death.
Shan't we share Fortunes Captain?








Let Eustace come first; till then smooth your Brow,
Make all your Discontents march in the dark,
Fetter your Tongues, the fiercest Dogs don't bark.



We shall obey your Orders till he come.




We'll write this night to bid him make haste home.






A silly shallow Lad; could better tell
To lead a Dance, than be a Colonel,
Yet Ap'd General. 



 I, though the spruise
Young Gallant, would grow quickly out of use?
A thing made up of Words, a Courtier, fit
To Fire the Ladies with a flash of Wit.
His Tongue was very fleet off o' th' Score;



Ay, it has run its Master out of Door.
He thought twas fine to hear the Ladies laugh
At his pump'd Wit; when, alas! do but waff
A Straw about your Head, and they will giggle;
Their Blood is so refin'd does alwaystickle.



Besides, good Manners make them keep the Mode,
They laugh, are pleas'd with all, be't bad or good;



And Policy sometimes does make them smile,
Thereby they do the Gallants much beguile;
Who think they understand what they do not:
'Tis a deceitful pretty Female Plot.
Yet this pleas'd him 



 Indeed all his Designs
Were womanish; 



 How Honour multiplies
Merit! he is naturally as dull
And empty as the meanest; yet his Name,
Boy'd up by the Duke's smiles gave wings to Fame.




My Lord, we heartily Congratulate
Your New-born Honours; may they dispise Fate.



VVhen Time has snow'd your Head with Silver Plumes,
Soaring leave them, and greater reassume.



I thank ye Sirs; ye're kind my Friend, ye're kind?




How do my Fears congeal my Hopes? I freeze
In Winters of Dispair; and by degrees
My Heart blood turns to Isikles; O may
These Clouds just Powers end in a Sunshine day. 
Yet these Death whispers force me to distrust
I ne're shall Eustace see Then Heaven's unjust.






Should he come to a legal Tryal, he
Would let the VVorld (by me yet blinded) see,
How Innocent he is? how great our Guilt?
Then all our Labours and our Hopes are spilt.

  41No, I'll divert that Stream.


You take away his Life; but then you must
Regard your Honour; he is of your Blood:
Oh that so great a Prince should not be good!
Yet let not his prodigious Treasons blot
The divine Veins of Lorein's Crown; let not
The World say Treason from th' Stem Royal came;
(Not that his Vice can vitiate your Name)
Yet 'cause he is your Father's Son.
Salve his bright Fame, and take his Life alone;
So shall you prune the Vine, not hurt the Root.



I like your Counsel: but how shall I do't?



This Friend of mine I'll send to Stenay, he
Shall strike him with a deadly Lethargy;
A Pill neatly conveighed into his Wine,
Sends him to sup with Death, with Pluto dine:
And though it works so suddenly, none shall
Surmise his Death was preternatural.
Thus by anticipating, Sir, his Fate
You'll undermine the Ground-work of his Hate.



See it be done without delay.





You need not hasten murtherous mind to kill.


I have Commission now for what I do.

I see the Port: For when Eustace is dead,
The Crown shall be too heavy for thy Head:
'Twill make it ake, blind Duke: Thou gone, strait I
Rise circumvest with Beams of Majesty.
But first I will revenge Clementia's Scorn;
Her Husband shall suspect he wears my Horn.
Then let him act the Tragedy; I'll feed
My hatred with delight to see her bleed.






Your Advice, old man, about this Fort.



Why, an't please your Honours Goodness; your sweet
Worships Wisdom has thought it accessary
To direct it on the South-west part 




That is the most advantageous place.
But concerning the pulling down of Houses.



Why an't please your Lordships Excellency 



Dispatch, Friend, and leave your Ceremonies.



Money? why an't please your Graceless Goodness,
I shan't be so ill bred, d'ee see, to ask
Tour Worship for Money, d'ee mark mark me Sir,
Till the work be deform'd. 




Leave thy Deformities, and give my Lord
A more handsome account. 



 I thank God I
An't so beggarly, d'ee mark, but I can
Stay for my Wages till I have preserv'd
It, d'ee mark; I'm a deficient man,
Church-warden of the whole Parish, d'ee mark,
An't please you. 



 Ay an't please your Mightiness,
My Husband is a mighty deficient
Able man, as I conceive. 




Woman, because you have conceiv'd. But friend very
Answer me, what Houses must be pull'd down? 



Why an't please your Highness Worship. 




Pleasant fellow, my Lord, ha, ha.  





He is a Miller and my near Kinsman,
My Father's Grand father (who was a Smith,)
Was he not Julian?



Prithee prate no more.




I'll read my dear Clementia's first.

What pretty Plot she feigns to bring me home.

  43But what says Fredrick, he brings no such News.



 Ha! What's this! O Gods! O damn'd abuse!
Fredrick's Mad How does your Master you?



I left him well. 



 Is it his Hand? too true 
 He do's but jest, Ferdinando will clear the Doubt.



  Gods! did ye sleep when this was brought about!
Or have ye forgot Justice, and will take
Vengeance on good Men for the wicked's sake? 
 It is resolv'd.
And were I by th' Infernal Host withstood,
I'd vindicate my Honour with their Blood;
Get Post-horses immediately.

I'll come as swift as Lightning to their Eyes;
Vengeance exact is when it does surprise.



I'm rais'd 'tis true, but yet your Subject; dare
Not step into your Bed; 'tis fitter far,
For Gods to taste that ravishing delight;
Your luster would not cherish, but afright
Such weak ey'd mortals as your Servant; were
I a Duke made, I might be lodg'd there,
Perhaps with Confidence; till then I can
Do you no good. 'Tis Spirit makes the Man.
But your Divinity does check desire,
Not Warm my Blood. I tremble at your Fire.
When Lust enjoys its object, it does cool.
Who trusts a Womans Gratitude's a Fool. Aside.





To kill the Duke is barbarous; 'tis too black
A Deed yet for my Soul to undertake 
 But if Rodulphus thirsty passion move,
More on Ambitions Wings than those of Love,
He ne'er will yield to gratifie my Sence,
Until my squeasie Conscience can dispence
With this religious Scruple. Were he not
My Husband, pitty should be soon forgot;

  44And I would make him Fuel for my Flame 
 Why that were Murther; and this but the same. 
 'Tis done. Who fears to strike her Husband's Life,
Does not deserve to be Rodulphus's Wife.





 Gone last night  If he had staid till day
I'm sure he had been gone. But I'll away.




The Man's mad, if he had staid he had gone;
How can that be? Is go and stay all one!
What say you Boy? you are a Schollar.



Now if I don't unfold this Fellows Riddle;
Which none but himself and the Devil
Can do, my Father will swear my School-money
Is thrown away (which he may very safely)
But I thank God he has not much wit (though he
Is Mr. Mayor;) I shall fool him well enough. 

Sir, the Gentleman's a Schollar, speaks figuratively:
The Common Discourse of us Learned is Enigma's
To the Populace; But I'll unfold it to you.
Gone is spelt g. o. n. e. (for we may add a Letter sometimes.)
Now nè, in Latin, is not, which being joyn'd with go signifies
Not to go, so go and stay is all one.



You see the Benefit of breeding our Son a Schollar now.



I do, I do Love, I do.






Can you hope to enjoy what I've deny'd
Brave Otho? Is it Folly or your Pride
That does entice you thus to Vanity?



No it is Love, and for that Love I dye;
Madam; when I my Passion did declare,
'Twas not in hope you'd ease it, no, Dispair

  45Possest my too-aspiring Soul; I knew
Death was prepar'd for him who dares love you.
My design was only to let you know,
That I unto my Grave your Martyr go,
That passing by my Tomb pitty might move
You to a Sigh or Tear for buried Love.



I cannot help Men's Follies, if they will
Destroy themselves, it is not I who kill;
And if I should on your Grave shed a Tear,
'Tis not cause Love, but madness brought you there:
I'd have you live then, let it not be said,
Ferdinando was born, liv'd a Fool, and dy'd mad.




 I'd have you Live.  'Tis kindness that But she
Would have me live, yet not live happily.
But why do I distrust? did I not hear
Her say she lov'd? how childish is my fear 

Then, Madam, must I dye? What! no Reprieve,
Let Smiles disperee those Frowns, and yet say live;
Was you made Beautiful to be unkind?
Then Beauty is but Cruelty refind;
But sure you are all Glorious within:
Heaven's greatest Glory is to pardon Sin;
Then since you are Divine 'twill be yours too.
If you destroy me, can it profit you?
How can I sing your Praises in my Grave?
What Honour is't to triumph o'er your Slave? 
 But why do I expostulate? 'tis just,
Your Anger burn presumptuous Love to Dust.
Over my Grave a weeping Stone shall lye
(How will those Tears upbraid your Cruelty!)
With this Inscription; Here Ferdinando lyes,
Martyr'd by Cruel-fair Gertrudo's Eyes;
Love was his Crime. O let it not be said,
Those Beams kill'd, which have Power to raise the Dead.
What though you have Otho deny'd,
It neither argues Vanity nor Pride

  46In me to court; common consent does prove,
We can no Reason give for Love but Love;
King's have to Beggars stoop'd, and great Queens Flames
Have kindled been by Grooms. Love is the same.
Yet Otho cannot boast one drop of Blood
So great, but that in these Veins runs as good.



  What Prodigies are Men in these our Times!
They dare commit the very worst of Crimes;
And that with greatest Confidence; nay more,
They take delight to read their own Faults o'er;
For fear they'd not be Registred by Fame,
They write them down themselves, to 'em let their Name;
Cause they're deprav'd, and can do nothing well;
They strive to be famous for doing ill;
Of that unhallowed Brood art thou, profane
Abuser of Good, to Honour a Stain:
And thinkst me of that Sect, else wouldst not dare
To urge thy Passion with so little fear.
Can I think he can tell how to be Just,
VVho to his Friend so basely breaks his Trust?
Can I hope thou wilt e'er be true to me,
VVho's false to the Laws of Hospitality?
My Brother lodg'd thee here to be an Actor
For Otho, but thou'rt turn'd thine own Factor.
Thinkst thou thy Flatteries can me intice?
VVhy: to Love thee, is to be in Love with Vice 




Yes 'twas a Dream Mad Ferdinando couldst not see
Such Happiness was ne'er design'd for thee?
Read thy Lifes Story, in every Line thou'lt find
Th' wert born but to shew Heaven can be unkind.



The Devil's sooner rais'd than laid; my thought
Is still aspiring, though 'twas mock'd with nought. 
 A Thousand Duckets a Reward for me,
Who thought the world mine own? well Dutchess see

  47Th' Event; the time will come when you may want
My Service, and your Treachery recant.



How mad am I! It is but Three days since
I would have courted him (such influence
Had Love on me) But now he sues I fly,
I who fear Death am th' only Cause I dye. 
 Fool that I was, so sharply to reprove
His Flames first Offrings.  Come take Vengeance, Love,
Study new Torments to afflict me, till
My Humour's Complasent made to my VVill. 
 Curs'd bashfulness! But why would I believe
Her Dictates, she was made but to deceive
Our Sex of Pleasure, and her Blushings are
Not Types of Innocence, but Crimes infer.
Yet on this Text do all old Mothers preach;
Shun Man, be coy.  These against Nature teach;
For when they've had all the Pleasure they can,
They say fly that deceitful Creature man;
It is Apocrypha, no Divine Truth,
Hatchd but to blast the Pleasures of our Youth.



out of his House buttening his Dublet, and seems to endeavour
that he should not see him.



Rodulphus, here so late! how do my Fears

Prompt me to think my Horns out vie my Ears. 
 I'll sift my VVife; if she trips in the least,
I'll Cook her defil'd Limbs for the VVorms Feast.












Thy words are steep'd in Tears, thy Actions kill.
Did I not see him came out of my Doors
At One this morning? Curse on all such Whores.
Was not his Doublet all unbrac'd? and he
E'en tir'd with Pleasure? this I did not see;
No, I was drunk, yes, or perhaps mine Eyes
Were Traitors to my sight. 



 May I ne'er rise

From these chast Knees, nor in that General Day,
If I have seen him here these Two Months. 




Yet I'll not give thee time,Throws her into the Well. preach in that Well,
I'd sink thee lower, if I could, than Hell. 
 What have I done! murther'd my Wife! my dear!
(He stoops and calls her.)
Ha! dead! what have I done! ha! (Stoops and calls again.)
Clementia: Here,
Here, my Clementia, does thy Fredrick stand,
O'rewhelm'd with Guilt and Tears. Give me thy hand,
I'll snatch thee from that watry Tyrant's Arm. 
 But I'm the Tyrant, I have done the harm. 
Blind Jealousie. My Life I'll sacrifice,
(draws out a Pristol.
And with my own Blood write thy Elegies. 
(The Pistol flashes in the Pan, and wont off)
Ha! cheated! what means this Reprieve! her Soul
Bids me live to revenge Rodulphus foul
Slanders and Treacheries: Tnat done I'll fall
T'appease thy Ghost, wait on thy Funeral.









 What means your fright? how is Clementia? well?
Speaks not my Friend? how does Clementia? 







You're strangely discompos'd; pray let me know
The Cause; I hope you count me not your Foe.



Re-volving all your Wrongs, Angers just Flame
Kindled my Thoughts into Revenge. You came
And rais'd my Joys unto extreams, (for who
Can escape Raptures when he does see you?)
These Two contrary Passions meeting, strove,
And Anger would have overcame my Love.
And I, not able to endure their Heat,
Lost my Senses in a shivering Sweat.
This was the Cause, Sir, of my Extasie.



I'm glad my fright
Is past. At first I thought eternal Night
Had sabled-o're Clementia's Beams. 




Is gone to Church to pray for you and me.



She's good; her early Soul seeks Heaven betime;
'Tis a steep way, who thinks to reach't must climb.






The other Regiment of Foot shall march to morrow:
And on Thursday the Horse: I never saw men more
Chearful, nor march with a greater Resolution, indeed
Confidence.



'Tis a good Omen. But what of



no murmuring I hope. 



 Not a whisper.



They'll forget him. 



 I wish they may; but now
He's return'd, I advise your Grace to secure him:
He may beget Mischief. 



 Let's in and consult.







Not come to Court, that's worse than all the rest:
Condemn'd unheard? how happy then! how blest
Is Treason and all Traitors, if they can
So easily puff down the Loyal Man!


Here comes my Friend. How do's the Duke? what News,
Welpho? 



I'm busie, Sir, pray excuse






'Tis he sure. 



 Yes, but you're not General now.





Oh my Friend Arnulph! 



 Good Sir, don't trou∣ble me,





 This is the highest degree
Of sin! base Raskals.

Here comes one I'm sure
Is honest. 



 'Tis unsafe to be secure.
How do's Lodovick.




 Good Sir, what d'ee mean?
It is uncivil thus to intervene;





 But that they are
Below my Passion, or my meanest Care,
I'd kick them into Atoms: But here's one


Will reconcile me; his Soul is too high-flown
To stoop to that vile thing, Ingratitude.

My Friend, what news? how do's the Duke. 




'Tis not fit Traitors should Court-Secrets know.




How  Tell the Duke I kick'd you, Sirrah, go.




Curs'd Cows have but short Horns, thy Glass is run,
For thou shalt set before to morrow's Sun.




What Flies are these? they play in the Sun-shine
Of Great Men's Fortunes; but the Frost decline. 

  51Now to be Great is a great Infamy,
Birth is become a Cloak to Villany.
He that for gain do's scorn to sell his Love,
And in misfortunes bitter North-winds proves
As constant as the Loadstone's to that Pole;
He is the truly gallant noble Soul.



It can't be worse, I am now desperate;
Boldness perhaps may contradict my Fate;
Fortune is Valours Friend. I'm sure to have,
If not her Love, the kindness of a Grave.


Now will I know my Happiness or Doom.
Those who are plung'd in Misery do find
Pity from all; there is a secret kind
Of Sympathy in Man to Wretches: none
Did e'er weep on the Gallows yet alone;
As many wait on him as on the Throne;
All striving to excuse the Fact; thus he
That's legally condemn'd, by them's set free,
And has as many Plaudits as the Chair
Of Justice Curses which did bring him there. 
Blest Criminal: Lovers are wrackd with care,
Pity'd by none, all laugh at their despair.
Yet as some Murtherers have scap'd a while,
(The Devil lulls the hopes but to beguile
With greater Hell) and been condemn'd for what
They thought not of, (much less committed not.)
So 'tis with me: Love's Treason; but you wave
That, and condemn me for a perjur'd Slave;
For being false to Otho: O Heaven!
Your Justice equal is, the Cause uneven.
I do Gertrudo love; 'tis just I die:
Is it not just too that the World knows why?
Can ye not punish sin without a Lye?

  52To be Gertrudo's Martyr, is to go
To Heaven clad with more Glories than ye know;
But to dye branded with such Crimes as these,
How could ye think my injur'd Soul t' appease?
For if from thence I should chance to look down,
And smell that Name stink which was once my own;
Gods! I should be transported with that Flame,
I'd leave ye to descend and own my Name;
For; let me be Hells Mark, if I don't prove,
I have not injur'd Honour by my Love.



If that were clear, though I will not profess
To love you more yet, I will hate you less.



'Tis all I beg, to mitigate your Hate,
Who thinks to gain your Love must Banckru ptFate.
Then see Otho's Surrender, Madam, see,

Has he not given you away to me?



H' has quitted me, my Brother cannot now
Praise his own Choise, nor can he disallow
With Justice mine; neither with Justice can
I deny him who is so brave a Man;
For since he has his Honour justifi'd,
I wrong my Love should his suit be deny'd;
Yet Modesty would mince it, and I fear
To speak as much as he's afraid to hear. 

My hatred's vanishd, and we are now Friends. 




Love will begin I hope where Hatred ends.




Heavens! how deform'd his Vice! methinks his Face
Is monstrous, he's of some; prodigious Race;
Sure Pluto with a Succubus did joyn,
Get him, ill Nature with ill Shape did twine;
On purpose that he might of all be known
To be his eldest, nay his only Son.
Yet how, dull Fooll, did Friendship blind my Eyes:
How easily can Hell its shapes disguise?




What means your melancholy Friend?




Me Friend? Thy Friendships Diabolical.

I see thou hast not lost thine Honour yet.



I may my Life, but that I'll never quit.



How darst thou then my Sister Court, and prove
False to Otho.




 Can any resist Love?



That's no Excuse; none must 'gainst Honour Sin,
You might have lov'd her, and not injur'd him;
Silenc'd your Flames, sown your Tears in the Sands.



Honour too weak is when Love Countermands.



Love's but an humorous Itch, Honour's Divine;



The Gods Love is so too: and so is mine.



They break not Friendships Vows to purchase Love,
Thine is but Persidy disguis'd in Love.



Where Love does Rule, all must obey his Laws,
Or Traitors be, blame not th' Effect but Cause.



He who does Sin, himself's the very Cause,
And must be punish'd for't by Human Laws,
And by Divine; the Devil does entice,
But he must pay for't who commits the Vice:
'Tis thou hast Honour broke, and Friendship too,
If Love did cause it I'll kill the Cause in you.




Hold  one word more How rash is Jealousie,
Unjust and Barbarons!



To save, their Lives what will not Cowards say,
Did I not hear thy Perfidy? away
Impostor, thou hast Honour slain, I come
To Sacrifice thee on her mournful Tomb.


Pardon, Sir, this rude Office; I protest
I do the Dukes Commands with great regret:

  54'Tis his Pleasure that you and that Noble
Stranger be secur'd.




Let's turn our Points, Sir, and these Sheep will fly.



Hold, 'tis my Soveraign's Will, we must obey.






He has writ to be heard, I can't deny
That Justice, 'tis the greatest Tyranny.



No, Sir, 'tis Mercy; if he Pleads he'll prove
Himself a Traitor; is it not then Love?
Not only to forgive, but to conceal
Faults. 



 The vulgar will say h'has none; to reveal
Thus my Kindness to him will hate create
In them to me, they'll say I've edg'd his Fate.



Is't fit that Kings should fear their Subjects Frown?
The pamper'd Jade tumbles his Rider down.
Will you, to gratifie the Vulgar, shew
The World your own Blood is Corrupted? No,
Let them surmize; Kings should move in a Sphere
Will blind those Subjects Eyes dare come too near.



Were he our Son, and should a Traitor prove,
Justice should quite blot out Paternal Love.
On Thursday we will hear him. Exit. 





Will that prevent; to morrow he shall dye.


Where art thou gone, my dear Clementia, where?
Hast thou so soon forgot thy Eustace here?
Art thou in Prison? thence wing a Sigh, send
It to thy now twice fetter'd Friend:
I'll Echo all thy Sighs, and Pearl thy Tears,
Poize thou thy Griefs, I'll Counterpoize my Cares;
And see which does o'er-ballance; Can there be
A difference 'twixt thine and my Misery?

  55Art thou dead my Clementia? Then am I 
Hence Sacrilegious Thoughts, she cannot dye,
She's only slipt int' Immortality.
Yet thence descend, and tell what Transports were
In Heaven amongst the Gods when thou cam'st there;
Tell how the ravish'd Angel Quire did sing,
When thou appeard'st to Glorifie their King.
Enter Ghost.
 Ha! pale aad wet! my dear Clementia? how!
Exit Ghost.
How wert thou thus abus'd! Come, tell me now.
What gone! didst come but to delude my Sence?
To shew me Heaven, then leave me in suspence. 
He kneels.]
If it will not defile thine Eyes and Ear,
To see thy Slave, and his Petitions hear,
Look down; and tell what Miscreant snatch'd thee hence,
That I may Vengeance take for his Offence.
Let me Revenge, I say, trust not to Jove,

He'll gratifie that Traitor with his Love.
For had not the Villain don't, thou hadst been here,
And he still languishing till thou cam'st there:
Let me revenge, Clementia, I will try
To find out Tortures beyond Cruelty.






I know you silently do murmur that
Your Services have been neglected: what
Yo've lost by Time, I pay with Interest now:
I did delay't on purpose, but to know
Your Temper, to see how you'd bear't, but you
I find even to th' unjust can be true.



Where Duty binds, there no Rewards are due,
I'm largely gratifi'd in serving you.
Who serves his Prince only for Gain, serves Gain,
And not his Prince; Madam, the Loyal Vein
Holds not one drop which it does not impart,
With all obsequiousness to chear the Heart:

  56Kings are the Heart. We the Veins, must them feed,
If the Veins are Corrupt, 'tis fit they bleed.



Your Principles are honest; but yet they
Should cherish those which do good Blood conveigh;
Go with this Letter to Rodulphus, he
Has Orders to Reward thy Loyalty.


By your leave Dutchess; 'fore I farther go;
The Business, and my Reward both, I'll know. 

Perhaps it is to hang me, that I may
Not unvail her Clouded Deeds to the day.
He reads.]
The Duke on Thursday will his Nephew hear,
How sooty we, how snowy he'll appear!
To morrow murther him; the next night I
Will give the Duke a Posset; he shall dye.
Then will our Loves mount by their fall, all hate
Cease. Let the Messenger have the same Fate.
Indeed! 'tis well  I'll do't  If it does hit,
They both shall dye, and I'll be Treasurer yet.





My Regiment is yours 



 My Troop 




Acknowledge, Sir, no General but you.



The Army is all yours, except those few
Peacock plumb'd-upstart-Officers, whom you
Can frown to Dust. 



 Why will your Honour Cloud
Your self. 



 We'll cry for Justice, cry aloud;
Not with a Female Tone, but with a Voice,
Shall make Rodulphus tremble at the noise.



If you will give the word, we'll make the World
Look pale, it shall be to a Chaos hurl'd;

  57And even then your Word can all revive.
And make it in due method, once more live.
Why will you be contemn'd? when with a Breath
Of Wrath, you rival may, nay, conquer Death.



O how exactly wicked's the World grown!
They'd court even Angels to Rebellion. 
These Tempters I'll discard; Treason will find
Too many ways alone t' attack the Mind. 

My Friends, I thank your Valour and your Love;
But yet I'll find a milder way to prove
My Honour was ne'er stain'd; who'd purchase Fame
With the sweet Treasure of a loyal Name?
Go home and check your Giant Thoughts. I will,
As I have always, think ye my Friends still.

Those are rough Men; I thought Fred'rick had been
More honest or more wise, than to be seen
A Champion for Disloyalty; I fear
Your Smiles on me are Counterfeits, not clea•;
For this I know (whate'er he may pretend)
He who'd destroy his King, would kill his Friend.



Eustace is too severe; I did not mean


My thirsty Passion at Rodulphus drove;
If, whilst my just Revenge with m' Anger strove,
I drop'd some Words might Treason Countenance,
Pardon't; Religion was lost in a Trance;
And whilst my Heart strove to be just, my Tongue
(Grief stifling Reason) did my just Thoughts wrong.
Yet hadst thou Eustace the same Cause, I think
'T would force thy Well-built Loyalty to sink.
Hear then (my Griefs are keen, they'll pierce thy Heart;
Friends do in Joys or Woes bear equal part)
Summon Religion to endure this Blow,
Thou who hat'st Treason, wilt prove Traitor now.
Rodulphus my Clementia did abuse.








I thought you'd startle at the News;

  58That Traitor told the Duke that she and you
Had exchang'd Hearts; she all your Treasons knew.
And now she's lost, have I not cause to fear
That Dog has trapp'd her, and they'r wracking her?



 Hence Coward Loyalty: O Heaven, O Hell,
I you invoke; Justice and Plagues pour down
On her Black Murtherers, on Lorain's Crown,
Or bless us, shew us here Clementia's well. 
 They'r dull: O Anger! O Revenge! O Spite!
(More Gods than they) blind with eternal night;
That puppet Prince, that earthen God, who shews
No Symptom's of a King, but only those
The Prince of Torment's known by: 'tis fit he
Who is so like him should Hell's Vice-Roy be 
Call the Officers; sound a Charge; sound it home.

O here they are; thanks noble Friends, come, come,
Come follow me, follow your Leader, Boys,
Wee'll drown the Thunder with our Cannons noise,

 But he's my Prince; Love and Revenge must rest
Satisfy'd; our Lives are in our Kings Breasts:
If they will be unjust, we must submit;
Heaven sees, and that alone can punish it.
Then pardon, Loyalty, this Crime; who can
Be silent now, is less, or more, than Man.
Rodulphus though by this Right hand shall die,







I know my Lord, you that think I have been
An Actor in this Tragedy of Sin.
But when great-bellyed Time is brought a-bed,
Bald truth will take that Scandal off my head.







If I can't be believ'd,
Let that. I hope you are now undeceiv'd.





I never loath'd my Bonds till now; were I
But at liberty to scourge that wretch Rodulphus,

I'd smile on Death.



My Lord, you are at liberty: I so much hate
Rodulphus's Treachery, I'll wing his Fate:
Appoint your time, I'll wait on you and let
You forth the private way. Eust. Thanks good Sebastion.

But what's to be done. 



 I will a Letter frame
(For I can counterfeit the Dutchess Name)
Unto Rodulpus; wherein he shall be
Commanded to wait on her at Seven this night
In the Garden, and bring Godfry and Thierrie

With him; there you may punish them all, they'll
Have only their walking Swords with them.
Thus will you vindicate your self, and prove
Them greatest Traitors who've profess'd most Love.



Yet let them bring their fighting Swords, I hate
To trepan even Traitors to their Fate:
We Three alone will meet them, there's no odds
But this, they fight against, we with the Gods.
The greatest sign of an heroick mind,
Is to die nobly when our death's design'd.




Thus do I bring them all unto their Graves.
They who'd be great in this World must be Knaves.






Give it the Duke with your own Hands; make hast.

How Princes are abus'd! how Truth's down-fac'd!







Wee'll not fail to wait upon her Grace.





Ordain'd the Priest, shalt be the Offering now.




The Dutchess intends to poyson you with a Posset this night. 














 Not so Well I fear;
What o'the Devil make these Fellows here 




Start not; We're Friends, there is the Dutchess hand.

Do'st see me, Dog? Execute her Command. 
Canst thou read, Hell-hound? 







yet do not look
That thou shalt e'er be saved by the Book;
'Tis past the Clergy's Power; such Crimes as these 

Heaven it self cannot pardon. 




The injur'd Ghost of my Clementia; see
Her Fredrick comes to be reveng'd on thee.



No, that's my Duty.  



 Come bravely then, come all;
I'm pleas'd to see that others with me fall.





My Crimes out-ballance his; sin is a load
Lies heavy when stern Justice cries for Blood.


Eustace, thou canst not 'scape.  
Enter Leopaldus










Kill him some Friend.








Death o'my Soul! my Lord and Master dead!




All slain! See Eustace how Heaven strikes Traitors. D'ee see that Hand? 



 Tis mine. 



 There you in∣vite Otho to invade me. 



 He desir'd my Sister for a Wife; and I, considering 'twould conclude a Peace, did en∣cline to't, and Writ him that Invitation; it being against her Inclinations to marry one she had never seen. By my now ex∣piring Soul 'tis true; there's his Letter to me.




 How black's Ingratitude! I loath my Deeds:
Pardon't; my Soul more than my Body Bleeds 




You never courted the Dutchess to Vanity?



No, by all the Gods, that Letter will assure you.







All my Joys are consumptive. How pale they're grown? Be not so lavish, every drop's my own.





Such Cordials even with rough Hell can strive,
Quite nonplus Fate, and make a dead-man live.
Death is too weak when in thine Arms I twine;
I grow Immortal by thus being thine.
If your Grace is not satisfi'd, I can clear all your Doubts. When Conradine knew Gertrudo's hatred to him was impreg∣nable, he sent word to the Duke of Sohawden, that he was murther'd by your directions, knowing he should thereby Create a War: then putting himself into a disguise, feigns a Letter from his Brother Otho to Eustace; wherein he asks his
  62
Sister for his Wife, upon Conditions of Peace, as you see, and names himself Ferdinando; who instead of courting her for Otho, courts for himself: If Gertrudo had still been obdurate to all my Stratagems, then the Duke of Schawden should have mediated for me; For I am that unfortunate (suppos'd happy Conradine.)


Gozelo, go to the Duke my Uncle, and relate this sad Story; tell him the last Whispers of my departing Soul, were, that he would not injure this good Prince by any Acts of Hostility: Since the Cause is taken away let the Effect cease. Farewel my Gertrudo. 



VVas any so tormented here on Earth;
My Life is dead, and thence my Grief takes birth.
To suffer pain after death's Hell, thus I
Am dead, and yet tormented I can't die.
What shall I ask, Great God's? what shall I crave?
O give me back my Life, or. give a Grave.



Tell me, Rodulphus, did Clementia stain
My Bed with thee? speak truly; death speaks plain.



No, she was chaste.



Finish thy Conquest death,
For fear I poyson the world with my Breath.
I slew Clementia, give me no reprieve,
'Twould be the greatest torment now to live. 




Live! who can! her death was all Mankind's Tomb;
Life dy'd with her. Blest Soul I come, I come, 




How monstrous is Libussa grown! I see
VVith melting Eyes her gross deformity.
Ah cruel Aunt, but more hard-hearted VVise,
At once to strike his Honour and my Life.




Nay, do not rail before you know 'tis true;
I'm not so great a Churl, there's some for you.


  63Rodulphus come; thu• ha•d in hand we'll go

Either to Joys above, or Joys below:
No matter which; in either we shall find
Eternal Joys when thus our Loves are twin'd.
VVhen all our Plots are cross'd here, every Breath
Is redious, there's no Blessing left but Death. 




I triumph now, Malice could wish no more,
For since they are dead, I die the Conqueror.
And though I could not the besieg'd Crown take,
Be this my Monument, I made it shake. 




VVhat a Blow's here! But why did Vengeance strike
The Good with th' Unjust? must all fare alike?
Is Justice blind? and cannot Vengeance see?
But shoots at this or that, at him or me?
'Cause Heaven's alarm'd with Sins thundering call,
Do's that hurl Darts, and cares not where they fall?
Must Eustace die because Rodulphus's Fault
And Libussa's threatned Heaven with an Assault?
Cowards to bring two Enemies to their ends
VVould hazard more than twenty of their Friends.
Is Heaven turn'd dastard? or were their Sins so great
They could not them without such loss defeat?
'Twas none of these that made them snach thee hence,
But Love would not Delay thy Recompence.
Blest Soul; when after Ages read thy Story,
The Eye of Faith will dazzle at its Glory.




