





INDEED, Gentlemen, I have been a long time rumi∣nating upon this Matter; but at last an Ingenious Lady put it into my Head, to set up this Lottery for Wives.



It shou'd therefore, methinks, have been call'd, the Ladies Invention.



Right; for 'tis an excellent Contrivance indeed, especially, at such a time as this, when Lotteries are Al-a-mode.



Al-a-mode d'you call it? Ay, and an Old Mode too: For I'm sure Marriage has been a Lottery ever since I can remember.



And what's the Reason of that, Sir, but because the Law does not allow a Month's tryal before hand? So that we are forc'd to take Pigs in Pokes, contrary to the Custom of all Markets.



Well, to the point. I knew there were a World of poor Gentlemen in and about this City, who had Daughters that stuck upon their Hands for want of Portions.







So, I sent for a good many of 'em, and told 'em, That I had a great number of extraordinary Rarities, which I intended to put off by way of Lottery, (as many others do, now a days, Books and Cakes) and if they would venture their Daughters, I'de venture my Goods; for I intend∣ed
  2
that every Female shou'd have a Lot of Price and Value to carry her off, for Male encouragement.



I'le assure you, Sir, you may be justly call'd,
The distressed Damsel's Patron:
For I never knew Self-Interest, and publick Charity so carnally coupl'd be∣fore.



Nay, more than this, Gentlemen, I'le have no Blanks But a Lot and a Woman; a Woman and a Lot quite through; 'till all be drawn.



By the Temptation of Womankind, this Contrivance must take, Gentlemen.



Ay, ay This Lottery must hit; it must, it must!



But hold a little How shall we know, Master of mine, whe∣ther these same Rarities of yours are worth the ready Money we are to lay down?



There's a Question indeed Worth, quoth a? Why, I'le tell you what, Friend, there's one Woman will have a strange Fish, with no less than Twenty Feet between the Head and Tail. As I hope to be Knighted, Gentlemen, I fetch'd it my self out of the Zodiack, not many Leagues from the North Pole, where 'tis well known, That the Sun stands still a whole Fortnight together.



And that's the Reason, I believe, that we have wanted one Month in the Summer these several Years past.



Not unlikely, truly But, Sir, there's one thing more I desire you, if you have any Woman fairer than the rest, pray let me have her for I don't care how simple she is.



And let me have the blackest in the whole Pack, for I have heard, That a Woman's Pride is many times the Guardian of her Ho∣nour.



I gad, Sir, if I have a Red-hair'd Woman, I'll turn her upon your Hands again; for I hate to have Fire in the upper Tire.



Pray, Sir, let me have a very genteel Woman; That will sit and simper in the Bar, and draw Customers.



A Genteel Woman, say you!
Why, what are you, Friend?



A Tapster, Sir, at the Colchester-Inn in Bishop's-gate-street; I am very well known, Sir, all about that end of the Town; and a pretty Woman will be the making of me.




As for the Complexions and Conditions of your Women,
Ye must be contented with your Lots 
Fortune and Destiny will have their Course 
And so farewell, 'till I see you again.







Well, Gentlemen, what d'ye think on't?



Why? very well for my part; but then d'ye hear, Gentlemen, we must be sure to take the right way, or we are all spoil'd.







Why if we have to do with Fortune, we must renounce our Sen∣ses and Understandings, and turn meer Fools.







Why then if we han't good luck, I'le ne're trust Proverb more.









I tell thee, Fool, I don't wonder to see thee look with scorn on all those noble Pieces I have shown thee; for thou art young, and conse∣quently, the contempt of every thing that bears the resemblance of Antiqui∣ty, is natural to thee.



Not always, Sir, for I have known a handsome young Lady of Sixteen, throw her self into the gouty Arms of Threescore and Ten, when his Medals have been of the right stamp But, Sir, that which vex∣es me, is to see you ruin your Estate and Fortune, by purchasing the rub∣bish of sack'd Cities, and so disable your self of providing for a Figure of your own erecting, a young handsom Daughter; yet not so young neither, but, I promise you, 'tis more than time she were well dispos'd of.



What a walking Statue of Ignorance thou art! Why I tell thee, that any one of those exquisite Pieces which I have shewn thee, is of worth sufficient to Marry her to an Earl.



Yes, if she wanted only a gilded Frame for a Husband: But, alas! the Custom now a-days is, no Money, no Matrimony You may talk of Cupid, and his Quiver, but 'tis the God of Riches makes the Match.




Harken to me with attention, and I'le tell thee a Secret.



Lord, Sir! don't burthen me with your Secrets 
I tell you before hand I can't keep 'em.



I'le put no constraint upon thee, Child, yet 'tis something that will please thee, and thou may'st tell it to all the World if thou wilt.



Well, well, what is't?



Why you must know, that I have set up a Lottery.



How! a Lottery! why I hope you are not mad, that you are go∣ing thus to expose all that y'are worth, to the figgaries of Fortune.



No, no, Child, only a few Trifles that lie dead upon my Hands, that's all.





And what's your highest Lot?



Thy Mistress and my Daughter, with Five Thousand Pounds in ready Money, which I will raise by some hundreds of other Curiosities which I have, at Three Guinea's a Lot Nay, and I intend to tack a Woman for a Wife to every one of my Lots; some Handsome, and some so so; some Wise, and some otherwise 'Tis no matter for their Conditions, nor their Honesty, for that's Hab-nab, as if the Choice were their own I le take care indeed, that they be Water-tite, and Wind-tite, and able of Body, and that's all I need to care for.



Now the Devil take you for putting my Mistress among your Old Trumpery By this means, the next Scoundrel of a Drawer, or Foot-man that ventures his Three Guinea's, shall run away with her Od's∣flesh! would any Cannibal of a Father but you, commit the well-being of an only Daughter, to be broke upon the Wheel of Fortune?



Ne're trouble thy Head, Girl; I have taken that care, and gi∣ven such Power to Clitander's Man Trick-well, that I have made all cock-sure, I warrant thee but I lose time, bid thy Mistress, since she has such a mind to marry, prepare to be a Bride, while I go in and get every thing ready for drawing the Lottery.





Hold, yonder comes Trick-well; I'le hear what he says 
Enter Trickwell like a Doctor, in a black Gown.

Trick-well, well met 
Whither away so fast, Man? prithee stay,
And tell me what thou think'st of the grand Affair,
Between thy Master and my Mistress;
Will it fadge or no?



Why faith, Isbell, I can't tell, for Love without Money is like a Summer Pippin, 'twill never last.



Oh, but Mr. Maggot's Lottery will soon supply all those Defects.



I tell thee, once again, Isbell, That Love is hot in the Fourth Degree, but cold in the Fifti'th; so that 'tis rank Poison, take it which way you will.



Well, but what dost think of the Lottery it self, I hear thou art to be the chief Manager of it?



Why truly, Isbell, I am contriving all things for the best.



That is to say, thou art plotting some cursed piece of Knavery and Roguery or other.



Alas, Isbell! Roguery and Knavery reign'd powerfully in the World before I came into it; but indeed I got a terrible itch of it when I
  5
was young; and then as I grew up in Years, I became so desperately infect∣ed with it, that I was all over like a Leaper, by that time I was One-and-Twenty.



Methinks a Quick-silver Girdle might have cur'd thee.



Alas! I tri'd, but I'gad it wrought a contrary effect in me, for the Mercury got into my Head, and made me ten times worse.



But hast thou no sense of Reputation or Conscience, when Trust and Confidence rely on thy Engagements?



Why truly, Isbell, now I think on't, I left my Conscience, one Night drunk, behind me in a Hackney Coach, and could never hear of it since.



Well, but I hope you don't intend to shark any of your Tricks upon me; thou know'st I'm to be flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone, Man.



No, no, Isbell, never fear: We Serving-Men have all our lucid intervals of Honesty.



Pray then have a care of the grand Lot, that it may fall right without Coz ning and Deceit.



Set thy Heart at rest, Girl, and bid thy Mistress depend upon me. In the mean time, I'le read thee a List of some of my Lotts, for I fore∣see that we shall tumble in Gold, Child.



Come on Let's hear a little.


A general List of Mr. Maggot's Lottery, carry'd on, and ma∣nag'd by Squire Trick-well.



Squire Trick-well! Marry come up.



Yes, why not, as well as the Hang-man Well, but to the purpose 

Here is first, and Imprimis, a Camphire Shirt, with a Woman's Shift of the same; the one to mortify rampant Lust in young Fops and Fluttering Beau's, and the other to keep poor Maids honest whether they will or no.



Thou should'st have a Million of the hirts, but make Tinder of the Shift; for a Woman has no thanks that's Honest against her will. But come, go on.





An Enchanted Crystal, which, if look't into by a pure Virgin, or a Woman with Child, will resolve all Questions touching either Physick, Love, or News.





As for the Women with Child, they may look in your Crystal as long as they please, but let the Maids have a care what they do, for I war∣rant you here are a great many that pass muster in the Rolls of Honesty, but I'm afraid your Crystal wou d put some of em to the blush.





Next, here's a Pint of that singular Ladies Milk, that never knew any Man but her own Husband, which perfectly Cur'd an Aegyptian King of his Blindness, when all the Women besides, in his Kingdom could not do it.



Pray send some of that Milk to those Princes that can't see their own Interest, that they may Wash and clear their Eyes 
Well, what's next?





Why another Venetian Looking-glass, made by the only Artist of the World.



What's the Rarity of it?





I'le tell you In the first place, if a debauch'd Chamber-maid dres∣ses her self by this Looking-glass, she'll dream the Night following of Kissing her Lord, and making her Lady a She Cuckold; then to sodder her crackt Virginity, her kind Lord shall Marry her to his Chaplain, and he have the next Living that falls.









If a stale antiquated Court Lady looks on this Reflexion, she'll see her Old Face thro' her new Complexion.









An Usurer can't see his Conscience in't, nor a Scrivener his Ears.









If a Citizen chance to peep into't, his Brow-Antlers will spread and fill the Glass And lastly, if a Blind-man see his Face in't, 'tis a sign he'll recover his sight again.





What more, good Trick-well?






Why an indifferent large Viol of the Quintessence of Skull, Chi mically drawn from Aristotle's Pericranium.



Prithee what is't good for?



Oh! it has admirable Virtues, and very strange Operations, assure you.









Why if you pour but four drops into a Country Attorny's Ear, they'l make him write true Latin Three drops will fill the Capital of an Universi∣ty Gander Indeed ha•f a Dram's enough for the terrestrial Head of a High Constable; and three Scruples and a half will more than fill the empty Num∣scull of a Biggotted-Banbury Brother.









Yes, several sorts of Nonparelio Italian Gloves There is one pair that will almost sit any Lawyer They are made of an entire Load-stone, and have a very strange and powerful Vertue to draw Gold unto 'em They were perfum'd with the Lavender Conscience of a damn'd Usurer, and will keep their Scent 'till wrangling and bawling have left Westwinster-Hall; they are seam'd with Indentures, by the Needle-work of Mortgage, and both topp'd and stiffn'd with a Noverint Universi, & caetera I would wil∣lingly describe the Vertues of several other pair, but that 'tis against the Sta∣tute Besides, few or none now a days need Gloves, by reason all our Beau's have Cordivant Hands But do'st hear, Isbell, I dare not be too busie, for Truth oftentimes offends.



I wonder where Mr. Maggot pick'd up all these Antiquities and Ra∣rities? In my mind he had better have laid out his Money upon new Gowns for my Mistress.



Vertue, Isbell, Vertue's the best Ornament for a young La∣dy.



How like a Fool you talk now 
Will Vertue glitter at the Play-House?
Will Vertue distinguish her at Church?
Or Cloath her Nakedness?



As good go naked behind as before, the Temptation's the same, and a Woman's never more acceptable to us Men, than when she's out of her Cloaths But here comes my Master with Joy in his Eyes.


Enter Clitander with a Letter.



News, good News, Trick-well; good News, Isbell.




Has your Worship found either the Philosopher's Stone, or a Phoenix's Nest?







Nay, then good News say I I have been a long time starv∣ing upon single Tiff, and mouldy Cheese, but now I hope I shall revel in Frycassees and Marrow-Puddings Troath, Master, when you have got your Estate, take my Advice; don't spend it in Whoring and Gameing, as most of our young Sparks do now a-days, but keep a good House, Master; let the Chimnies smoak.



Thou art too hasty, Trick-well Tho' the Treasure is found, yet 'tis all contain'd in this Letter.



Oh Sir! an Estate in a Letter, is like a Marchant's Cargo floating upon some distant Sea I wish no Pyrate of a new forg'd Will may meet with it.



Oh, but I am Heir at Law.



That's nothing; if another sets up a new Title, and gives but double Fees, there are those that will toss your Estate in a Noncupative Blan∣ket from the Common-Pleas to the King's Bench, and thence to the Chancery, 'till they have shook it into a Consumption.



No fear of that, Trick-well  
Moreover, this Letter assures me, that my Uncle
Lies drawing on, past hopes, quite given over, as they call it;
And that my Aunt is almost in the same condition.



Send 'em a good Deliverance!
I mean from the Cares and Troubles of this World 
I long to be weeping for 'em in Sack and Sugar 
Five Hundred a Year will do very well, Sir.



Besides, there's sufficient lying by 'em,
That will serve for the present 
And I tell thee again and again, That
My Uncle is surely going to Heaven.



Or somewhere else But that's no matter to you: I'm sure you young Heirs do so rejoice at the death of your Parents, and Rich Re∣lations, that 'tis no wonder your Estates are no better blest when you have 'em.



Prithee, good Trick-well, no more of thy Morality I say that being thus assur'd as I am of my Uncle's Death, I am going to shew Mr. Maggot my Letter, and demand Amaranta for my Lot.





You cannot make use of a more perswasive Argument 
Mammon is the World's Idol 
Old and Young Ugly and Handsom 
Prince and Peasant nay, Spiritual and Temporal 
All lie prostrate before it 
But here's the mischief on't, you know
Your Mistress is put among the other Lotts, and
Another may chance to have her as soon as you.




Oh Trick-well, where is that Name of Faithful Servant, thou hast so oft pro∣tested to me in this days Adventure?



Why faith, Sir, I found it worn so thread bare in the Subscri∣ptions of damn'd complementing nonsensical Letters, that for my part, I was quite asham'd on't, and therefore flung it in the Fire However I may chance to prove a Man of Honour for all this, still.



But didst thou not assure both Isbell and me, that Amaranta shou'd depend upon thee? Oh, most unfortunate of Men! or rather, most accurst of Fools, to trust the happiness of my Life with such a Bull-rush of Iniquity as this!



Pray, Sir, lay not too much upon your poor Servant neither Am I Lord of the Stars, that hardly understand an Almanack? You know, Sir, Wedlock and Hanging go by Destiny How then can I prevent the Influences of the Seven Planets?



Oh Trick-well! Thy mean Soul was never yet acquainted with the noble Passion of Love.



Yes, yes, I have been in Love up to the Ears; but my woo∣ing (thanks to Heav'n!) ne're cost me so much as one single blast; no, nor a Pearl of Salt-Water She was as coming, as I was forward.



Was she so, Mr. Malapert? But she's quite off of you now again, I assure you No Flesh-pots of Egypt, unless you prove as good as your word.



Nay, then it shall ne're be said,
That Trick-well is not a Man of Honour 
Thou shalt see me lead Destiny in a string,
As Old Maids do Apes in Hell 
But harkee me, Sir,
Destiny's an honest Old Gentleman,
That love's a Cup of good Conversation.



Oh, I understand thee 
Thou woud'st have something to drink
With thy Friend Destiny, as thou call'st him 
There, there's Gold for thee, go and treat him handsomely.







This will do 
These are the little Circumferences, that
Incircle all the Temptations of Satan.
Cou'd a Man but wean himself from these Provocations,
There might be some probability, of his
Forsaking the Devil and all his Works 
But then again,
Why is the hunger of Gold call'd sacred? 
The Devil and Sacred, are two incompatible opposites 
And yet I'm sure 'tis sacred, because
Priests of all Religions love it,
And they are my Guides  
Well, Sir, I'le go drink your health,
And then consider what's to be done.





And I'le to my Mistress, and
Tell her the good News of your Uncle's dying.





I'le be with you instantly.













WILL Clitander be here, say'st thou?



Yes, Madam, immediately 
Lord! what makes you so melancholy?
Come, I'le sing you a new Song of my own making,
To divert you 'till he comes.



Prithee, Isbell, how long hast thou been a Poetess?



Oh, Madam, I love to be in the Mode 
Female Poets are now in Fashion.



Come, then, let's hear thy Song.




A New SONG,set by Mr. Akeroyde, and Sung by Mrs. Willis.


LOving, and belov'd again!
How terrible are our pains,
To live under the Roof,
Of a Father's Reproof,
Like so many Slaves in Chains?
Yet Parent Nature, well we know,
Freedom in Love allows to every Creature;
What Duty then do we to Parents owe,
Who break the Laws of their grand Parent, Nature.






''And when grown old,
''Think us as cold:
''But let 'em forget, and doat on,
''By their senseless Morals betray'd,
''For when all their Tittle-tattle is done,
'''Tis Nature must be obey'd.







So, Madam, I'me glad to hear you so merry.



Alas! I was afraid it had been some body else.




Y'are safe enough from being surpriz'd,
As long as Love is your Guard.



But dost thou not consider, Isbell,

That Love is blind;
So that there is no trusting to his Watch 
However I'le trust in Heaven,
I or they say, all Marriages are made there.



Yes, all but a Thousand for one that the Devil makes.



But is there no Faith in Man?
Has not my Father and Trick-well both assur'd us 



Troth, Madam, you are like the Man that believ'd himself no Cuck∣old, because his Wife said so But were my Case as yours, I'de trust neither Father nor Mother, Brother nor Sister, Uncle nor Aunt; no, nor ne're a Trick-well, or Lottery in the World I'de make sure of the main chance, Marry the Man I like, and take my pleasure, and then trust Fortune, as Usurers do their Debtors Poor Souls! 'tis a hard case when two Lo∣vers lie Parent-bound But I'le e'en leave 'em together; perhaps, when they're alone they may take one another's Word.




Well, Clitander, I have discours'd my Father since I saw you, and he's mightily pleas'd to hear your Uncle lies a dying.



Ay, ay: Your Father's like all the rest of the World; now he smells an Estate, he's willing I shou'd have his Daughter As if 'twere not better to Marry his Daughter to an honest reclaim'd Gentleman with a small Estate, rather than to a Wild extravagant Spark with a great one; that is resolv'd to sell all he has; and so the poor Wife comes home again to earn her living by stitching to the Sempstresses shops. The remembrance of a short plenty, is but a light weight to ballance the suffering of a long Life in penury and want.






Madam, Mr. Flash is come to wait upon you.



Say, I'me not within.



Oh, he'll divert your Melancholly 
Pray admit him.





Madam, your most humble Servant!
The Learned say, that all our Words, are to
Our Thoughts, but as the Cork is to the Bottle 
As the Wine can't be sill'd out, 'till the Cork
Is pull'd out, so neither can our Thoughts,
'Till the Mouth opens 
And so, as if a Man should say, with a whip
And a jerk, and so forth;
I'm come to give you the honour of my Company,
And to chat a while of things of profundity 
By the way, Madam, you must know,
That I slept bolt upright in my Bed
Last Night, for fear of the Fleas.



Bid him strew his Sheets with Bay-Salt.





D'ye talk of me, Madam?



By no means, Sir,
The incivility would be unparallel'd.



I'me sorry for't, for I love to be talk'd of 
I'me more plagu'd to make my self talk'd of,
Than I am to speak like Cicero, or Demosthenes 
I'gad, I'de be contented to be hang'd for a Plotter,
So I might but be talk'd of.



'Tis your modesty, Sir, to say so; for I assure you, the whole Town rings of you, as if you were the unknown Author of the whole Duty of Man.



Pshaw, Pshaw, Madam, naw, naw, 'tis your pleasure to say so, Ma∣dam, but let that pass 
Troth this is a very pretty House 

I swear I saw just such another, when I was at Rome 
Was it built in this City, Madam?





No, sure, I believe 'twas sent by the Post.



I'le warrant it made the Courier sweat to bring it 
But what Man would not sweat to serve
Such a Lady as you are, Madam!



Oh, Mr. Flash! I find you're a Courtier.




Yes, to my very Sword Knot  
This Ribbond I bespoke, Madam, and I desie both
The Universities to invent me such another Motto 
Imperial, Aerial, and Aethereal  
Only three Words, Madam, comprehending all
The Perfections of the Female Sex 

Imperial, to shew the grandeur of their Authority 
Aerial, to denote the variety and sublimity of their Inclinations; and Aethe∣rial, to signifie the Beauty and Graces, both of their Minds and Bodies.



Most superlative indeed, Sir!



Ay, Sir, you have Fancy,
For I find you apprehend me 
And so do you too, Madam, don't you?








I thought so; but let that pass 
Pray, Madam, was not that your Picture

I saw in one of the Rooms, as I past along?







By all the Honour of my Ancestors,
The Painter has out-done Apelles.


I shou'd have known you in the dark,
Tho' I had ne're seen you before 
I'le send for him, he shall draw me reading with a loud voice,
And my Foot-man standing within call,
At a Corner of the Room, where he mayn't be seen 
Your Painters now a-days have no Invention.



Alas, poor Fellows! they mind
Nothing, Sir, but the stroaks of their Pencils.



Now you talk of Pencils, Madam,
Pray, what think you of the times?




I never mind 'em, Sir;
Pray, what are your Sentiments of 'em?



Why Faith, Madam, the World's turn'd Topsy-turvy 
The Women wear the Breeches, and the Men the Muffs 
And then in the State 
All things off the Hinges 
The great Thieves, and the rich Rogues, they escape,
But the little and poor ones, they are surely hang'd 
Candles rise, and Soap rises 

  15I find that by my Landladies Bill 
Were I at the Helm 
But enough of this World, I'm almost weary of it  
Pray, what think you of the other World, Madam?



Which of 'em, Sir, there are two?




I mean the lower World, Madam,
To which most Men now a-days pay their greatest Devotion.







No such wonder, Sir,
For where one Man desires Heav'n to bless him,
You shall hear a Thousand cry, the Devil setch 'em 
But here come's a Friend of mine,

I must needs go and salute him.




Enter Mr. Finical, and his Boy.





Your most obsequious, very humble Servant!
What are you come to augment the number of the Virtuosi?





I am come, Sir, but as your shadow,
To make the lustre of your worth appear more glorious.



Lord, Sir! what d'you mean?
My Worth! is it for me to pretend
To Worth, or Gallantry, in your presence?








I beseech you, Sir!



By no means, Sir.




I protest, you make me blush.





Madam, this Gentleman's kindness and civility,
Had like to have made me forget my Duty, which now

I pay to your Perfections with a prostrate Devotion.



Oh Sir, you soar too high a Flight for me.



Madam, 'tis more than I dare attempt,
Lest the Rays of your Beauty should melt the Wings of my Fancy,
And drop me into an utter oblivion of my self.




I shall think the better of my self, Sir,
For the value which you put upon me.



Madam, your humble Servant 

I am just come, Madam, from a rich
Farmer's House in the Country, who had
No reason to repent of my company  
He told me, that one of the choicest pieces
Of Ground which he had, was so infested


With Moles, that 'twas almost spoil'd 
Presently, out of the quickness of my apprehension,

I bid him pave it with Free-stone.



How, Sir! so young, and so sharp-witted!
Surely, Sir, you must have been a great reader of Books.



A reader of Books, Madam? Yes Madam,

I have read a hundred Thousand in my time 
But very few pleas'd me 
A man must have a great Genius that reads Books 
But, Madam, I study Men as well as Books.



And Moles too 



Moles and Men, Madam, are the same thing 
They both work under-ground;
And truly Men of late, have cast up so many
Hillocks of Disputes and Controversies,
As have almost defac'd the surface of the Earth.



Why then, I think 'twould be the best way,
To pave the whole World with Free-stone.



Madam, I swear you are so ingenious,
And take a man up so quick at the first rebound, that 



Lord, Madam, I find you don't know this Gentleman 
Why he's a large Folio of himself, bound up in
Calves Leather, and gilt o'th' edges.



This Mr. Flash, Madam, will have his Jests 
But I never take any exceptions at what he says,
By reason he gives such an admirable Tour to all his Expressions.



Sir, you do me too much honour, I protest 
But let that pass  
That Copy of Verses you made upon your Mistresses Needle-case,
Was so sharp, and so well sown together,
That I never heard any thing like it 
But here comes Mr. Brush-beard the Philosopher  
Bless me!
What a strange Figure he is?


By the Ghost of Solon, I'le embrace him,
Were he as ugly as Socrates.







Friend, when you salute a Philosopher,
You ought to do it in form, as thus 
Every Learned Philosopher merits Honour, there's the major;

Now, you Mr. Brush-beard are a Learned Philosopher,
There's the minor; therefore you deserv'd
To be honour'd, there's the Conclusion.



I don't mind your Majors nor Minors 


I only say that  



You only say, Sir 




Won't you give me leave to speak my speech out?



No, Sir, not 'till your turn comes.



Then, venerable Sir, I beg your pardon
For this interruption; therefore pray proceed,
And enrich us with the Treasures of your profound Knowledge.



You dont mind Majors nor Minors 

Go to then, y'are a Fool 
Your true Philosophers mind little or nothing else.



Nay, 'tis most certain, that you Philosophers
Lead the most delicious lives in the World, for
You are always handling the Secrets of Nature.




And was it not a most stupendious Invention, to make a Saddle amble upon the back of a trotting Horse? And was it not, moreover, most transcendent∣ly found out, to tap both sides of a Man's Ribbs, and whilst his own Blood spun out of one side, to infuse a Rivolet of sheeps Blood into the other? A miraculous supply of Natures vacuum! And all this, that a Man might never want any other Cloathing, than the Wool of his own growth.







Pshaw, This is nothing 
I my self, by computing the Mites in the Liver of a Cod-fish, found out the full number of all the Men, Women, and Children, alive at one time in the World.








I never measure things by Inches and Feet as the vulgar, but by something ex∣traordinary! as the skips of a Flea 
As for Example, instead of saying England is so many Miles long or broad, I only say, England is so many skips of a Flea broad or long.



With submission to your profound Learning,
How may a Man know how far a Flea skips?



Th'art a meer Boy 
I'le tell you, rowl but a quantity of soft Wax,
As thin as a sheet of Paper, and as large as a
Beau's Cravat, then let a Flea loose upon't,
And your Compasses will tell you.





Oh, the sublimities of Philosophical Contemplations!



Then there's Cheese 
Some Men love it, and some Men hate it 
Now I have div'd into the nature of Cheese



And, pray Sir, what are your sentiments of it?



Why they that hate it, suck'd fowre Milk from
Their Nurses; that's the Philosophical reason of it 
They that love it 
Let me see 
They that love it 
But stay, who's this coming to disturb us?



A Friend of my Fathers, Sir, as you are,
That comes to look after his Lot.
Enter Doctor Non-such.





I am your's most obsequiously 
May the Fortune of this Days Adventure,
Prove as propiticus to ye all, as the humblest
Of your Admirers, and Servants does heartily wish.



Ch Doctor, you exceed in Gallantry,
As far as you transcend in Learning and Eminency,
The rest of your wise Metaphysical College.



Madam, I am yours eternally.



Who is this, I pray, Madam?



Don't you know him? 
He's the wonder of our Age, I assure you 
He's call'd Dr. Non-such 
He sets up, and pretends to be a Licens'd Physician, but is, at the best, but an Impudent Mountebank You'l hear presently by his Rodomontades, what he is.



Gentlemen, I find you don't know me 'Tis very strange ye shou'd not have heard of the Never born Doctor Nay, 'tis very true, I assure ye; for I was dissected from my Mother's Womb, and commenced Do∣ctor before I came into the World My Art and Experience, since that, has stretch'd my Fame throughout the wide Universe, especially in China, where I perform'd a very strange and wonderful Operation indeed Which was this, a certain Emperour that was newly dead when I came there What d'ye call him? Let me see . Pugh, I can't think of his Name now . He that I did the great Cure on that I told you of just now Ye have all hear'd on't I'me sure.



Well, Sir, and what of him?





Why I took his Head that had been sever'd from his Body, and buryed a whole Fortnight, and set it on his Shoulders again, and made him as brisk and lively, as e're I saw him in all my life 
And yet to think that I should n't remember his Name 
Oh, I have it now 



Ay, ay, a Pox on't, Prester John, 'twas he i'faith I might have had his Daughter, if I had not been a Fool, and have liv d like a Prince all the Days of my Life Nay, perhaps I might have inherited the Crown after his Death But a pox on't, her Lips were too thick for me And that I should n't think of Prester John!







Ay, ay, Gentlemen, I have done Cures beyond Sea that won't be believ'd in England.



Very likely, Sir, and Cures in England that won't be believ'd beyond Sea, nor here perhaps neither; for, in this respect, half the World are Insidels.



The Great Turk can witness the truth of what I say, tho'; for I'm sure the Eyes that he has in his Head, are of my making.



Then he was an Eye witness 
But I hope he wears Spectacles.



Why, you won't believe it, but I'le tell you, Gentlemen, and 'tis matter of fact, I cur'd the late King of Poland's Uncle of a Wart on his Nose, as big as a Turky-Egg; and Bethlem Gaber of a Ring-worm.



The one with raw Beef, and the other with some of Harbins's Roy∣al shining Ink, I suppose.



Pox of your Old Wives Receipts and Medicins; the worst of my Ingredients is an Unicorn's Horn, or a Bezar's stone 
Raw Beef and Harbins's Ink, quotha.



No, no, such a wonderful, a wonderful Cure, cou'd not have been done without Green sawce, or an Oat-meal Poultice at least.



In the last Siege of Namur, I gave a certain French Lady that the Governour had a particular kindness for, an admirable Receipt, to keep her Linnen from being Animated, tho' she didn't shift her self for a whole Twelve-month.




And that was beyond Scoggin's Fleas.



Why, Sir, there was never a Man in all the Kingdom of Fez, or Morocco, either French, Spanish, or Italian Doctors, but my self, that wou'd, or durst undertake to cure that Emperour of his Corns; but I did, and after that, I drank a Health to him.




That has confer'd Notes with the King of Morocco.




Alas, Madam, this is nothing 
I have eat and drank with the Pope and all his Cardinals.










And they have been very fond and proud of my Company,
And so have many Kings and Princes besides.



No doubt on't, Sir!



Why I'le tell you, Gentlemen, what I did,
A far greater Wonder than any of these 
As I was travelling with a dear Friend of mine in the Canibal's Country, un∣fortunately one Day we lost Company Well, a while after I happen'd to fall into the hands of about Threescore or Fourscore devouring Monsters, that were feeding on my Friends Body; in short, they had eaten the better half of him Well, you must needs imagine that I was not a little con∣cern'd at his misfortune (or rather mine) having lost so dear and worthy a Companion Now, what did me I, but immediately bethought me of a Powder that I had about me I put it into their Wine, which they had no sooner drunk of, but they presently disgorg'd their Stomachs, and fell asleep I watched my opportunity, and with all dexterity, gather'd up the miserable morsels of my Friend, and plac'd 'em together And upon my word, in less than half an hour, I restor'd him to as perfect Life, Health and Strength, as e're I saw him since I was born, and if he were here now, he'd tell ye the same.













I can tell you a thousand times more than all this.



That you can, I dare swear,
And all as much Truth as what we have heard already.



You're in the right, 'tis so 
But another time shall serve;

Sufficit quod super est, say the Learned, that is to say,
Enough's as good as a Feast.
Enter a Servant.



Madam, my Master desires the Company to come into the Hall, where they are beginning to draw the Lottery.



Come, Gentlemen, I'le show ye the way.



We'll wait on you, Madam.











FAITH, Isbel, I'm afraid

I shan't answer my Master's Expectations.




Why you have promis'd him so sincerely,
And sworn to him so solemnly, that should you
Not be as good as your word, you'd perjure your self
In the Court of your own Conscience.




But the Court of my Conscience is no Court of Record;
And you know, Isbell, 'tis such a delicious thing
To be counted a rich Rogue, and be out of the reach of the Law,
That I'm in a great quandary.



Thou talk'st like a Runagate from all Christianity.



Ay, ay, it may be so 
What of that? I find as little Religion
Among the Christians as among the Turks,
When they act for their own Int'rest.



Who the Devil taught thee this Doctrine?



Why when bad Company come once
To be pot Companions, they spoil one another 
Now as I was speaking one day to my Lady Fortune,

In my Masters behalf, she ask'd me
Why I did not speak for my self;
And at last, in the kindness of her Liquor,
Promis'd me the grand Lot.



So far you're in the right,
And then to give it your Master.



Not so neither 
If Amaranta be good for Clitander,


Amaranta's as good for me  
I am not the first Serving-man that has had
His Master's Daughter by the help of Fortune.






What, and leave thy own dear Isbell?




Not so neither  But marry a rich Wise
To maintain a poor Mistress as the Fashion is.



By my Troth, Sir, if I cannot be your Wife,
I'le ne're be your Whore 
So good-buy to you, noble Squire.



Hold, Isbell, hold  
These are but the first Temptations of Satan,
There's nothing as yet resolv'd on;
Therefore prithee be patient 
Hold, here come's one of our Customers:
Prithee be gone, and leave him to me.







Friend, a word with you.



Keep your Friendship and your Distance to your self, Sir  you're a little too familiar with one of my gravity.




For I make bold with all Mankind.



Say you so, Sir? why what are you?



An Author that writes Books.



Oh Sir! I know you now, your Name is Scribble You are one of those serious Triflers, whose Works are very serviceable for every thing else, but what they were intended for; and whose worth is never known 'till they come to the Pastry-Cooks, or Trunk-makers Good for nothing while living in the Book-sellers Shops, but many ways useful when pull'd to pieces.



But d'you hear, Sir, my Works are more estimable I am now writing a Book, which I intend to call the Mirror of the Age.



Then as a Friend, let me advise you to dedicate it to some Noble, Generous Patron or other, such as my Lord Rattle-brains, Sir Philip Whim∣sey, or that eternal Blockhead of a Beau, Tom Starch. I assure you, Sir, one of these noble Patrons, gave a Friend of mine no less than a whole round Guinea for the Dedication of one of his Plays; therefore you may judge by that, what your Reward will be.



How, Sir! But one Guinea?
Sure you're mistaken  

I have been told 'twas Twenty.



But one, upon my Honour!
And Nineteen lusty Promises.



Well, well, then the rest are in reserve 
He must have patience 
The same Misfortune happen d to my first Endeavours,


'Twas an Essay of Eatables and Potables.



Oh, I remember it 
'Twas a Manual compil'd in Three Volumes,
Which treated chiefly of the Original
Of sower-Whey, and Black-Puddings.



You're in the right; 'twas so.



Sir, I shall be proud to serve you 
What are your Commands?



Why, I am come for a Bird
That flies where e're you send it,
And neither eats nor drinks 

I expect it, as coming from this place,
To be a Black Swan 

Rara Avis in Terris 



You have hit it, Sir 
Your Black Swan is very well, but at roost at present 
You have mistaken the time, Sir, this is no Lottery Day;
Therefore pray be pleas'd to come to morrow,
And you shall have your Black Swan 
So in great haste, I rest your very humble Servant.




And impatiently 'till then Farewell.










My passionate Amour for Amaranta, and the uncertainty of en∣joying her, drives me almost to despair.



Truly, Sir, I am sorry for't but there's no remedy My Old Master indeed might have prevented all this, if he had pleas'd There∣fore I wish the Devil had made Pot-guns of his dry Bones Ten Years ago, for not doing it.





Thank you, Mrs. Isbell, thank you kindly, I have always your good word, it seems.



No, by my Troth, but you han't; I'de fain know for what Wou'd any Father 



Nay, but why so angry, Isbell?




Why so inhumane, Master, to expose your only Daughter to some Monster, for ought I know?





Good Mrs. Passionate, no Monsters come to my Lottery.



No Sir? But Men as cruel as Monsters, as ugly as Monsters, nay, and as beastly as Monsters do And what if such a one shou'd chance to have her?



Why then here's her Perseus to redeem her!



Vile Man! Thus to wrong the poor Gentleman's Love, abuse your only Daughter's Affection, and then laugh at 'em.



I must confess, Sir, Isbell's Zeal has carried her a little too far, thus to provoke you, but yet she speaks nothing but reason.



Nay, then 'tis time to leave you Two to one is odds.




What think'st thou now, Isbell? I'me afraid, as things stand, that between an Old Fool, and a young Rogue, I shall be left in Erasmus's Paradise.



I can't tell that, Sir, for I have one Project still in my Head, which is to make the Rogue drunk Scrape has promis'd to assist me, and then I shall dive into the Secrets of his Heart Farewell, Sir; I'm in la∣bour to be deliver'd of my Plot.



Good luck attend thee, dear Isbell So,


Here's now a Tryal of skill a Woman's Wit against a Man's; and 'tis a Cock-pit lay oth' Woman's side for an Amorous Intreague she'l not be the first, I'le warrant her, that will disgrace her Sex at a pinch of ne∣cessity.









Yes, Madam, I was just a coming to wait upon you; and to let you know that I am quite weary of these lingring dependencies upon Chance; therefore what think you, Madam, of descending (like a Goddess in a Machine) from your Window to Night, when your Father's fast asleep; the lawless Churches are always open for a matrimonial Fee.



I know, Sir, you'd not desire me to transcend the bounds of modesty so far, to give the World occasion of censuring my Love, as this rash Act wou'd do No, my Clitander, I hope you value my Reputation more than to expose it thus Besides, I'me unwilling to give my Father that advantage over us; therefore pray be satisfi'd, for let the Lot fall which way it will, you may be assur'd of my Resolution.
Enter Trick-well drunk.



How now, Trick-well! how goes the World?



Round Round, Sir, Hickup And the Sun stands still, for I think 'twill ne're be Night Hickup.





Why so hasty for Night, Trick-well?




That I may go to Bed with Isbell, that's all.



Are you married then? I wish you Joy!



No, no, Hickup Only one of Madam Maintenon's Weddings A Conscience Marriage, only for brevity's sake.





Where is he? Oh, where shall I find him? I'me ruin'd and undone:



What's the matter, Isbell?




Why that Rogue Trick-well, Madam, has stole my Gold-Ring from off my Finger Oh! Are you here, Sirrah? Give me my Ring, you Villain, give me my Ring, I say.



Hickup As I'me an honest Man, Isbell, I ha' none of thy Ring, not I.



Sirrah, Let me feel your Pockets then Slife I wou'd not lose my Ring for a Hundred Pounds; twas given me by my Grandmother, with a Charm in't I never fell backward since I had it; therefore give it me quietly, or I'le call the Constable.



Why you silly drunken Jade, I tell you, I ha' none on't; if you won't believe me, you may try 



Ay, ay, come, let's try.

Hey day! What's here, a tip of a Neats-Tongue, Bread and Cheese, and a Brandy-Bottle! The Rogue's mortally afraid of Hunger I find Here's Provision for another Siege of Vienna!



Help, help, good Folks: Murder, Murder! Bear witness, Gentlemen and Ladies, how she ravishes me!





Look ye here, Gentlemen, here 'tis; and yet this Rogue had the confidence to out-face me, and say he had it not.



Well, well, Isbell, come, 'tis almost dark; will you be as good as your word, hickup and go to Bed?



Ay ay, do you go first  When People are lawfully Married, then indeed the Woman goes to Bed first, but when they only take one ano∣thers Word, then, you know, the Man goes first.



Well, well, then I'le go  


You'l be sure to come?



I will, I will Man; never fear.





Incomparable Isbell! 'Twas dexterously done, upon my word.



I believe the Rogue wou'd live i'th' water, he drinks so like a Fish I assure you, if we had not ply'd him briskly with Wine, we had never conquer'd him.



Well, well, but where's the Ticket, Isbell, the Ticket, Child?



Oh, here 'tis Take it, Sir, and may ye both for ever live, and love like Angels.



Dear Isbell, thou hast brought me the Indies: I would not part with this Treasure, for all the Great Mogul's Territories.



Let me advise you now, to let my Master be at the op'ning of it.



Yes, and I think it very requisite too, that he shou'd open it himself



Right, Madam, and see yonder he comes.
Enter Mr. Maggot.

Oh Sir! Clitander has got the grand Lot!



Well then; now I hope you're both pleas'd you blam'd me for taking this course, but I look'd upon it the best way I consider'd how few people married for Love, how many in a frolick and humour, how ma∣ny by accident; and all to their continual plague and discomfort so that I was willing Fortune should dispose of my Daughter, believing that if she had a hand in t, that she'd be kind to a Match of her own making.



But i'faith, Sir, had I not been too cunning for Fortune and you too; I'me afraid your Daughter wou'd have had but a bad Bargain Come, come Sir, I tell you there were Rogues abroad, that 



The Devil's in these Appendixes to the Dressing Box If any thing be well design'd for their Mistresses, they'l be sure to assume the praise of it But I say, and say't again, that if Clitander's Uncle had not dy'd, and left him his Estate, I know Fortune's Mind so well, she wou'd have been hang'd before she wou'd have given the grand Lot to him.



By my Troth, I believe you 
No doubt but Fortune and you were agreed upon the Smith-field Maxim, you wou d have made an excellent No penny, no Pater-Noster Man.



Well Mrs. Manners, you will have the last word, I find, and so take it But come, where's this good luck in a Box, let me see't?



Here, Sir, here s the end of all my Troubles.




Why faith, as you say, Clitander, it wou'd have troubl'd any
  27
young Man to have lost Five Thousand Pounds, and a handsome Bed-fellow to boot Well, but who must open it?



'Tis in very good handsalready, Sir; therefore if you please 



No, no, here Isbell, thou lov'st Employment; prithee do thou open it.



Not I, by my Maiden-head, Sir; Men were always better at it than Women, therefore pray excuse me.



Come then, to end all contention, I'le open it So, now let me pull out my Spectacles and read 
Hold, hold, let me see, what's here?
A Pouch full of of of 
Here, Clitander, prithee do you read it, for I believe my Eyes dazle.



'Sdeath, this is the wrong Ticket Oh, Sir! it is Pandora's Box, for it has let loose upon me, all the Plagues and Miseries upon Earth.



How! Trickt thus, in the Devil's Name?
No, it shall n'ere be said a Woman was out-witted 
Come, Sir, let you and I go instantly and find the Villain out, and if I catch him, I'le pound him to an Electuary in a Drugsters Mortar, but I'le be reveng'd.





How are my Hopes deceiv'd, that am thus fall'n from a high imagin'd happiness, into a Gulph of endless sorrow!



Come, my Love, forbear to grieve or mourn. 
Fate may yet be kind, and give thee to these longing Arms 
If not, I have a Sword, and then let Fortune do her pleasure 





I over-hear'd them as hot as Bell-Founders; but I did'nt think it safe to make my personal appearance, out of the tender Affection I bear to my Bones Hold, yonder comes sweet Mrs. Isbell Had a Man Gyges's Ring, he cou'd ne're be invisible, I believe, from a Chamber-Maid Now will this my Iuno Elect, raise a most strange and hideous storm about my Ears, for I see soul weather gathering from her Looks.


Enter Isbell, who runs and catches him by the Ears, he crying out, help, help, murder, murder.



Now Sirrah, give me the right Box and Ticket, or I'le pull your Ears off, you Impostor, Cheating Rogue.



Hold, hold, dear Isbell, let me go, and I will.



Swear then, swear lustily.



By all my hopes of Paradise I will 

Now art not thou a Fool, Isbell 

Here am I studying to make thee a great Lady, and for the blood of me, I can't make thy mean Soul mount higher than a Chandler's Shop.



What, woud'st thou have me turn an Insidel, as thou art?



I'de have the turn with the Weather-Cock of the World, Interest; and steer thy Course as the general Magnet of all Mankind; thy own Profit directs thee.







Why l'de have thee Cozen, Lye, Swear, and Forswear; betray thy Friend, only keep out of the Clutches of the Law The Law in∣deed pinches a little too close, and like another Hercules, choaks a Man, as he did the Gyant, by lifting too high from his Mother Earth.



Oh, this is rare Doctrine!



No Doctrine, Child, but the daily practice of all Professions, even from the zealous Sect without Hat-bands, to the unbounded Atheistical Li∣bertine.



But will you make me a Lady, d'ye say?



I tell thee I will; I know where a Barronet's Patent lies to be bought at second hand 'Tis no matter for Merit, bought Honour will serve our turn well enough.



I tell thee what, Trick-well, thou art such a Faithless Politician, that one knows not how to Article with thee 
How many Maids shall I have?



Four at least; it may be the whole Parish-stock for ought I know.



But will you make me a Lady indeed, and indeed now?



Pugh! here's my Hand upon't 
Thou shalt be a Lady with all thy appurtenances, a Waiting-Woman, a lit∣tle Black, a Parrot, and a Monkey Thou sha't have a leetle, leetle Dog too, if thou wilt, to play with while the Child's at Nurse.







'Tis no matter for Swearing 
They that swear most, are the least Performers:



Well! what are poor Women?
Now do I begin to give already, like Linnen in wet weather.





That's well said, now I like thee 
There, there's a Kiss in earnest 
But leave me, my dear, at present, for I have business: My Head's as full as a General's before a Battel So, there's one Convert quickly made; and truly I find no difference; for Men will go to the 

Now Trickwell, briskly play thy part and thrive,
The tender-Conscienc'd ne're deserve to live.





I can't find him high nor low I have visited all his Haunts, but the Villain's under a total Eclipse. Had I met him, I had certainly put him to the charge of a Dog and a Bell.



In truth, Clitander, I'm very sorry for this Misfortune, but 



Nay, Sir, you might have prevented all this, if you had pleas'd, but you wou'd trust to Fortune, and see what comes on't.



Dear Isbell, what shall we do? Can'st thou contrive no means? Methinks thou shoud'st make thy last effort, to repair the scandal of such a gross disappointment.








Good your good Worships give a poor Cripple a farthing, or a halfpenny, and the Laud to bless ye, and restore it ye in Heaven!



How now! What more torments to perplex us? Prithee be gone, poor fellow, we have crosses enow of our own.



Alas, Master, I am but a young Beggar! my Father was as eminent a Merchant as any in all London, that dealt and traded for Scotch-Eggs, Irish Potatoes, and Spanish- Chess-nuts But Losses, and his own good nature, ruin'd both himself and all his Children.



Then why don't you keep to your Parish?



An't like your Worship, the Church-Wardens, and Over∣seers of the Poor, have so many natural Children of their own at Nurse, that there's no room for us.



Then prithee be gone, and make the best of thy Calling some∣where else I tell thee here's nothing for thee.





An't please your Worship, I hope otherwise, or I'm an undone Beggar.



An undone Beggar! how can that be?



Why an't please you, Sir, I laid out a whole Week's Earnings at your Lottery, and here I have got a Ticket They say 'tis worth some∣thing, but I must confess, I can't read very well.



How, Friend, can'st thou get Three Guinea's a Week by beg∣ging?



Oh! yes, Sir, that's nothing; for Charity, since she's turn d Chri∣stian, is like a Birch-Tree, especially to the Poor 'Twill bleed freely, if it be well tapp'd.



Well, Friend, come, let me see your Ticket Here, Isbell, do you read it.





Oh! Oh! unlace me unlace me, I say, or I shall swoon quickly, Oh! quickly The Vapours begin to rise already My Head swims, and my Eyes grow dim Oh! Oh!



How now! what ails the Wench? I'm sure there's ne're a Gor∣gon's Head in the Ticket.



I know not what you mean by a Gorgon's Head, but I'm sure there's an Ass's Head in the Ticket, to dispose of your only Daughter to a Beggar.







Nay, 'tis too true This Oh, I saint This Oh my heart! How it beats and pants This Raw head and Bloody∣bones, has got the Grand Lott.







Curst be my Stars, and doubly curst those Fools that trust to Fortune!



Come, Isbell, advance thy doleful Countenance, and read it out:



Yes, yes, Sir: I'le but wipe my Eyes, that I may see the better Hem! Hem!

Benefit by the Wheel of Fortune, the Lady Amaranta, and five Thou∣sand Pound.



Well, Clitander, you must have patience, there's no resisting the Decrees of Fate! And for you, my dearest Daughter, you must now learn to make a good Nurse, as well as a good Wife Come, come, leave off crying, Mony hides all deformities.



Hold, Sir, you may submit to Fortune, if you please, I never made her my Umpress; therefore touch her Villain, if you dare.
Better ten Thousand such Miscreants shou'd suffer, than she perish 












Hist, hist, Isbell 'Tis I 
Remember thou art to be a Lady.



Enough, enough Let me alone, I'le warrant thee.



All Reason's vain, when Love prevails I le hear no more.



Hold, Sir, let not Folly and Passion over sway you thus The poor Man has done you no wrong Had he drawn a meaner Trifle, he must have been contented.



Ay indeed, Mistress, and so I wou'd.



Besides, Sir, 'tis ungenerous to kill a poor Cripple The Law will certainly revenge his quarrel every way.







Why first, if you kill him, you'l undoubtedly be hang'd Or if you force my Mistress from him, being his Wife, then he admits himself pre∣sently in Forma Pauperis And I know so much of the Matter, that y'are gone both at Common Law, and Doctors Commons, if it comes to, that Therefore pray be rul'd by me; I have thought of an expedient.



No terms of peace, without the resignation of Amaranta.




That's it that I was about to propose You shall have Amaranta, and let him have the Five Thousand Pounds He does not care a half-penny for Amaranta, not he; 'tis Money he wants Now this is the best way that I can think of, to divide the Spoil equally between ye.



With all my heart I am content.




Come then, Friend, you see I have sav'd your Life, therefore pray do something more than ordinary for my sake, and remember the gratitude of the Blind Beggar of Bednal Green.



Well then, for your sake, Mistress, let the Gentleman take the Young Lady, and let me have the Mony Agreed, i'faith, let it be so.



Well said, and so thou sha't Here's my hand upon't.



Nay, nay Sir, I must have my whole Lott one way or other, a Wise, I mean, as well as Mony.



And so thou sha't What think'st thou then of this Girl; I'le warrant thee, she'l serve a Cripple well enough Or if she chance to be too many for thee, thou may'st call in thy Neighbours to help thee.



Dear Isbell, thou hast always made high protestations of thy Love to me Show it now, by laying hold of this opportunity.



Lord, Madam, what d'you mean? Wou d you have me marry a Beggar, and disgrace my Parentage?



A Beggar, Isbell! Thou'rt mistaken He's no Beggar, that has Five Thousand Pounds by him I'le warrant thee in a little time, this Beggar, as thou call'st him, when 'tis known how rich he is, will be made a Justice of Peace in Quorum.



Say you so? Well then, Madam, for your good, and to oblige you, Sir, I'le venture on him What say you, Friend, is it a Match or no?



Why yes truly, I think thou mayst serve my turn I desire but one lawfully begotten Son to inherit my Estate, and keep up my Family?
  32
as for the rest, I hope thou hast wit enough to contract beforehand, that their several Fathers shall keep them, or else thou art no true Chambermaid And thus I have got the first and worst part of my Lot But how shall I come by my Mony, Gentlemen, let me know that?



Why, we'l give thee a Note upon a Gold-smith, to be paid upon demand.



Pray let him be a very sufficient Man then; for since the late general Reformation of our Coin, we are as much plagu'd with clipt Credit, as we were before with Clipt Mony: Besides, I hate to go a Hunting in the Mint, of all the Parks in England.



Thou sha't have thy Mony paid down upon thy Marriage-day.



And both of ye promise me all this upon your Words, and Honours, and as ye are Gentlemen, and Sons of Gentlemen.



We do, upon our Words and Honours!





Why then, I'm your humble Servant 
Thus you see what Mony can do, Gentlemen 
It can transform Trick-well into a Beggar,
And a Beggar into Trick well!









Even so, Master 
Your quondam Honest Servant, poor Trick well;

But now, thanks to my Dexterity, as good a Man as your Worship.



The World may now see, what all Lotteries are 
They are Bawds to Fools; Decoys to catch Gulls;
The sport of Knaves, and the Loosers tryal of Patience! 
Well, since we had no more Wit, than to let
Thee out-reach us in all our Politicks,
I think thou deserv'st what thou hast,
And so much good may it do thee.



Nay, nay, take my good Wishes too 
May'st thou live to cheat all the World,
As thou hast fool'd us; and may
Fortune prosper thee in all thy Tricks and Villany,
As it has favour'd thee in this Day's Adventure.



I thank ye both, good Gentlemen. 
Therefore do'st hear, Isbell, sweet Spouse that art to be, prithee step in and fetch me my Gown, that I may appear like a Man of Gravity, and Honour Come, come, my Girl, a Doctor's Wife may take place of a Squire's at any time.



Ha! 'sdeath, what noise is that Quickly, dear Isbell, quickly, or I shall be torn in pieces.
Enter Noisy, Mrs. Proud love, Bullsinch, Lack-wit; Ninny, and seve∣ral others, as cheated of their Money.



Where is he, I say, where is he? Oh, here he is seize him Neighbour Lack-wit, and Master Ninny we'll Lottery him, i'faith, as he was never so Lottery'd in all his Life We'll teach him to put Tricks upon Travellers, and honest Tradesmen, I'le warrant ye.



Why, what's the matter, Gentlemen?



The matter, say you? Why the matter's plain enough We have all been trick't and cheated most abominably, as a Man may say; but now we have found him, we'll either make him pay us our Mony again, or we'll sirk him up up with a Ciserari.



Alas, good Gentlemen, I pity ye But what wou'd you have of a poor Snake, why he's not worth a groat.



Then we'll have his Bones Come, Gentlemen, fall on Mrs Proud-Love, let his Nose be your Province, his Guts and Garbage yours, Brother Pinch-belly; and his Eyes and Ears yours, Goodman Dash-well.




Hold, hold, honest People pray be pacifi'd a little, and let's hear what he has done



Why, Sir, you-must know that I'm troubled with a Wife (the Lord help me) that makes more noise with the Clapper of her Tongue, than Bow-Bells do on my Lord-Mayor's day or London-Bridge at low Water Now, Sir, I bought a House of this Villain, which he told me had that pe∣culiar Vertue belonging to it, that Women never scolded in it, so that I was in hopes to have spent the rest of my days in peace and quiet Now, what did me this impudent Rogue, think you, but bring me a Cossin, which made my Wife ten times madder than before.
Enter Gammar Whiteing.




Ay, ay, let me come at him 
I'le clapper-claw him, I'le warrant ye.



What has he done to you, good Woman?



Why, Sir, you must know my Name is Whiting;


I am a Fish-woman, I sold my only Daughter
Into Pensilvania, for Five Pounds, to buy
Me a Cure for all Diseases; hoping to have rid
In my Sedan; and what did me this Villain,
But bring me a Halter for my Money.



Ay, ay, come We'll hear no more 
Away with him away with him.



I'ray, Gentlemen Good, Gentlemen 


For Heaven's sake, do but hear me.



No, Sir, we have hear'd too much already 
Come, come, away with him, away with him.



Sir, worthy Sir, you seem to have
The chief command of these other Noble Persons 
Therefore, if you please, a word or two with you in private 
Here, Sir, here's something for you in particular.



How! Bribe a Man of Honour!
The Rogue takes me for a Sollicitor of the City Orphans 
I le have nothing to say to you.



No, no, we'll have no Bribes 
We are no Jury-Men.



Come, Sir, I think 'tis best for us to make off, lest we be brought in as Accessaries.





Oh, good Sirs as ye are Men,
And lawfully begotten by your Fathers,
Have pity upon the Son of an unfortunate Woman.



Yes, yes, all the pity we intend to show you,
Sweet Sir, is fairly to send you to Heaven in a string 
What say you, Gentlemen, is not hanging too good for him?



Ay, ay, hang him, hang him!



Here, Neighbour Bull-finch, here's the very Halter he sold me, to cure all Diseases.




Hold, Gentlemen, hold, have but
A moments patience 

I have but one short Prayer to make, of an Hour or two long,
And then you may do as your compassion shall direct you.




Does this Rogue look as if he e're said his Prayers? 
Come, come, hang him up, up with him, I say.



Ay, ay, hang him, hang him!




Help, help, Murder, Murder!




Stop him, stop him, stop him.






Enter: Maggot, Clitander, Amaranta, and Isbell: Trick-well meeting them, as running, and out of Breath.


How now Trickwell! How dost do, man?
Prithee tell me, how dost like the Roman Sport
Of fighting with Wild Beasts?



Gad, I'le get a Warrant, and bind 'em all over 
I'le Crown-Office the Dogs;
And if they don't find it worse, than being buffeted by Satan,
I'le be their Bond Slave.



Oh, my Dear, I am glad to see thee
In the Land of the Living 

I was horribly afraid, my Love,
That my Ladyship had been spoil'd, and
That I must have put on the Garments of Widdow-hood,
Before thou had'st made me a Jointure.



Ay, ay, That was my greatest grief, too, Isbell;

For 'twould have vexed any Saint alive,
To have been hurried out of his Matrimony,
And Five Thousand Pounds to boot 
But come, they have had their ends, and all's well 
So that now, if you please, Gentlemen,
We'll have a Song and a Dance or two,
And then every Man to his own Wedlock.



With all my Heart!



Come then, sit down, and let the Musick strike up.




  36A NEW MASQUE, CALL'D Love and Riches Reconcil'd.
A Symphony begins.
Then Enters Plutus on one side of the Stage, attended by Em∣pire, Labour and Industry; and Cupid on the other, attended by the Graces; they range themselves on each side of the Stage, and after a while, Plutus and Cupid advance towards one another.


POOR silly Diminutive Chit 
What fancy bewitches,
Thy little fantastical Wit,
Now to compare with the great God of Riches?



Blind Idol of the World, produc'd from dirt,
Thou, that neither Temple hast, nor Court:
Whilst I both Gods, and Men controul,
Enshrin'd in every Humane Soul.



Sure Heav'n and Earth did a Governour lack,
When they made a young Fowler,
Their Lord Controller,
That never was worth a rag to his Back.





Pride and Envy; makes thee bear me a grudge;
But Plutus, know, I scorn to be my own Judge.



How wilt thou avoid it?



Let Momus decide it.









Both. Come, come, away.





Why, why d'you stay?
Come, come away.


A Symphony of Haut-Boys.



Ha! ha! ha! What do I see,
The aged God of Wealth,
With this young little Elf?
Well, and how d'ye both agree?



'Tis thee we call 



'Tis thee we call.



By whom the Gods 



By whom the Gods,



Are quitted  







When they're at odds.



Be just, and end the strife,
Who bears the greatest sway in humane life;
This little Dandy-prat,
Or I, that am so glorious, plump, and fat?





I am prepar'd to hear both sides,
And then to judge as Reason guides.





Daughters of Jove, and Themis, we
Keep the bright Gates of Heav'n, and see
What passes in the Seats above,
Where all the Gods give way to Love.




Forc'd Neptune's Trident from his Hands;

Phoebus his Quiver durst not own,
And Hercules his Club laid down:

Mavors he made his Helmet quit,
Tore Hermes's Wings from off his Feet;
And which was yet a greater wonder,
Great Jove disarm'd of all his Thunder.





So feebly shou'd resist his Charms,
To whom the Gods surrender up their Arms.
Chorus of Cupid's Party.
No wonder then,
That mortal Men,
So feebly shou'd resist his Charms,
To whom the Gods surrender up their Arms.





After the Dance, Hebe and Hymen sing the following seven Lines in two Parts.


Short is what we have to say:
In the Circle of Mankind,
At Cupid's heels you'l surely find
Us, always merry, blithe and gay;
None, none can tell,
His steps so well,
For we trace him ev'ry day:








































Chorus of Cupid's Party.
Thus round, round, around, in a circle whirl'd,
'Tis our little God Cupid, sustains the World.


Momus comes forward and sings.



Come, I have something to propose,
Will bring ye quickly to a close.
Cupid and Plutus together.

Then to the point, and set us right.



Two Matches are confirm'd this Night;
Love makes the One, the other Gold,
Now which is longest like to hold.





The Dowry'd Wife imperious grows,
And fills the House with noise:



As loud the Monyless too crows,
For want of my brave yellow Boys.



Then Plutus, take the Day thy self,
The Night I give this little Elf:
Thus reconcil'd, shake hands 'Tis more
Then ever Momus did before 
So with a Jolly Dance, dismiss,
The Brides and Bridegrooms to their Bliss.
A general Chorus, with a Dance.
So with with a jolly Dance dismiss,
The Brides and Bridegrooms to their Bliss.
After the Masque, Maggot rises and speaks.



Well, Clitander, since I find you take your bad Bargain so con∣tentedly, I'le give thee a brace of Thousands to make thee amends My Daughter shall never be upbraided for a Portionless Wife, I'le tell thee that, Boy.

Clitander, Kind Sir, I humbly thank you;
Young Men in heat of Blood, their Flames approve,
But when all's done, 'tis Money binds our Love.



And for my part, I often have been told,
There's nothing like dancing to the Musick of Gold.

