





THis from Antonio? forbid it freindship!
He tells me that Miranda's false and loves me not;
If he be then that happy Rivall, why shou'd he desire
To take that life her Scorn can look away?



Goes it there I have the business now

But will prevent your designs my noble valiant Don.




This note's ten thousand daggers to my breast,
Cleaves to my heart like Hercules poyson'd shirt,
And tares my Soul in piecemeal.
Shall I go on? my friendship bars the way;
But mighty Love and Honour chide my stay:
Yes, I will go; I'le meet this treacherous man,
And stab her image in his faithless breast,
Or fall my self a Sacrifice to both:



That I must prevent, my good furious Master.




By Heaven he shan't enjoy her. I'le sluce my veins,
Let out a deluge of my bloud to drown 'em,
And follow 'em tho' rocks high as Olimpus,

Oppose and stop my way: Leap Aetna's hideous Va•lt,
Then catch 'em on the brink and plunge 'em in,
But I will have revenge, and such revenge
As Traytors, may the damn'd themselves yet never knew:
And I'le about it strait. 




So, now is he going to take Horse and Ride Post to the Devill.
A plague on these Female Succ•bu•'s, who o' my Conscience are good for nothing else but to breed and beget quarrells. Well faith I'le not lose a good Master so.




I'le get some friends and neighbours to assist me, then go with 'em to all the slaughtering fields about town and finde them out, and so prevent their duelling.



How's this! friends and neighbours to assist his Master, that must not be: Bernardo, do you follow Lopez when he goes from hence, and leave him not till night: I can away with your dilligence till to the morrow.



Till to morrow Sir?



Yes, till to morrow: business of importance obl•ges me to at∣tend the Vice-Roy: be gone.




What a pox has Antonio to do with his Mistriss? or can't he share her with his friend, I warrant She'le give 'em both enough, in as hot a Skirmish as this is like to be.



I must prevent his purpose and design. Lopez.



Bless me! what will become of me now, if this ill-natur'd Courtier has or'e-heard me?



I've heard from you your Masters rash design, of fighting with Antonio, and must your faith••llness and care commend.



I'd rather you'd heard the last Trumpet Summoning you to Hell.
Sir you may commend it, but I can hardly believe that you'l reward it.



Why Lopez, thy Master is My dearest friend;
Our hatred's fled to'th air from whence it sprung,
The date is out, and all the bonds are cancell'd:
Canst thou then think, •'de tamely see him fall,
And crack those strings which hold Ricardo's heart?
Friendship's a dearer name to me then Honour,
And I'le expose the one to save the other.







I will prevent their •ighting Lopez;

Or if that fail, I will assist thy Master:
But if his nicety refuse me that,
I'le stake the utmost cast I have to loose,
And run upon Antonio's Sword;
Then hold it close •nto my throbbing heart
Untill my dearest blood cool on the point,
And blunt the stroak of death to save Alberto.




Well Sir, since you are so resolv'd to serve my Master, I'le trust his safety for once with you, and humbly retire.










His safety, dull Buffoon, trust me for that:
Thou coud'st not chuse a better Guardian out,
Tho' thou hadst ransackt all the worlds below,
To cull a Villain of the blackest dye.
One thing I want to finish forth a Hero

But 'tis the meanest virtue brutall Courage,
Mallice I have enough, and witty mallice:
These greater qualities may infuse the less,
And then Ricardo has a Titans Soul 

Alberto's death makes way for my pretentions,
Unto the coy Miranda's heart; I will about it strait:

Itali•n spite assist me at this push,
Or bl•st Ricardo, or his Rivall crush.









Oh my Astella! what a tide of Joy
Streams in to Crown my yet imperfect Love!
'Tis rapture but to think he shall be mine.
To morrows dawn shall light our Loves for ever:
To thee I'le own my Fr•end without a blush
The Vestall fire which guards his Image here.



My Brother's too much blest, in your kind Love,
Nor cou'd his utmost wish desire more,
Tho' it were boundless as are your merits.



Why d'you prophane the Dearest of his Sex;
S•re nought that's mortall's worthy of his Love:
Were I made up of yet untasted Charms,
Such as wou'd pose the Painters noblest skill,
And dash his feeble fancy in it's flight,
Yet 't'were too mean a present for Alberto.

Oh! why are you so slow you tedious hours?
Blow fair my hopes, glide with a gentle gale,
To wa•t Alberto to his Mistriss Arms.



With what strange Extasies of Joy he'le wellcome
This so happy news from his Miranda's mouth:
But let me beg you share with me my Sister,
Le•t double passion burst my crowded breast:
My noble Brother has at last consented,
To consummate Antonio's happiness,
And Chain their friendships with another Link,
Soon as your father blesses him with you.



Soon as my Father gives me heav'n in him:
Why comes he not to hear the charming news
Sounds as inchanting as the Theban Lire,

Or all the musick of the Spheres at once:
O Love! forgive the extravagance of my desires,
Which have no bounds short of the noblest heart,
That ever yet your golden arrows peirc'd.





My Lord Alberto, Madam, is without,
Desires to know if he may have admittance:



Fly and conduct him in: now help me Sister,



To unlade my frait of Joys into his breast.



'Twere Sin to bar the freedom of your Loves:
And therefore beg leave humbly to retire.





Wellcome my Dear Alberto, for ever wellcome here;
But doubly wellcome now.



To hear my ruine!




Now I can charm your sences into wonders,
Make your chill blood dance to the tune to Love,
And sing your Soul into Elysian raptures.



O' fatall Beauty, and oh my cruell Stars!

Why was I born to love, and be despis'd?



Ha! why this distance, and that heavy sigh!
Why play not thousand Cupids in your eyes
In expectation of 'th approaching bliss?
But I forget, 'tis I must charm your Soul.
My Father now has warranted our Loves,
Which shall be doubly ratifyed to morrow:
Still senceless! 




Down, down the anger of my swelling breast
Fix me kind heaven, and clear my reason, lest

My hand shou'd antidate your vengeance on her,
And cut this beauteous weed of nature down.

Madam Hell and confusion! I know not what to say:
I wish you Joy.



Ha! wish me Joy, yet mention Hell Alberto,

The greatest blessing twisted with a Curse;
Oh all ye powers! Yet why my Lord, Oh why that wish?
How can you doubt my joy, when you're the Author,
My Heaven, my Paradice, my all I have?








Yes, my Lov'd Lord, you are my Souls desire,
Nor do I blush to speak a noble Truth.
But stay: mine did I say, my Lov'd Lord? O no!
It was a fond mistake, he's mine no more,
But false to all his Oathes and plighted Vows,
False to Miranda, that unhappy Maid.




Furies and Death! 'tis downright mockery.
But Madam, know tho' I appear to you
So still, so calm, so like a suffering Saint,
Yet know (I say) there is a storm lies brooding here,


Will like a furious whirlwind blow to dust
That Bane to Love and Friendship, False Antonio.





Antonio! unfold this fatall riddle.



Upon his heart I will.



By Heaven! by All that's Sacred 



Hold, hold, thou Lovely Perjur'd Beauty!
So well I love thee still, thou sha't not damn
Thy self to give Alberto satisfaction,
For that Antonio's life must give, not you.



Hear me Alberto, or I dye with grief;
Hear me before your rashness makes it quite too late
To hear: 'tis Death to think you may be slain for me,
(For my heart bodes some strange eruption
Of discontent and Passion which tends to ruine;)
And surely I shou'd grieve Antonio's loss
Since Innocent.



I know thou woud'st.



Will you be still unjust?
Oh torture! see he fears to let me know the truth,
And Cause of this Disorder, this strange mistake.




Ha! does she weep! O treacherous Crocodile!
But I'le be calm: Just heaven, why have you lodg'd
Such lu•king fiends, in this so fair a Mansion?
Why wink not all the Stars, and hide their heads
Since this bright Cinthia's fall'n from her sphere?
Can those tears be true? sure 'tis impossible!
But then if guilty, why shou'd she complain?
Oh! 'tis the nature of that co•s'ning Sex,
To weep, and smile, and yet be false, and fair:
Thus bigot Love mistakes the genuine Pearl
Deluded with a gaudy, glittering nothing.



Since then you'l not believe my Vows or Tears,
Clear with your Sword my injur'd Innocence,
And with my blood wash all my stains away.



Still weeping! Too well I know the cursed Cause,
Those tears yo• shed to your absent Lover
And only make a show of Sorrow,
To surprize me more.
Ah Cruell Maid, Thou poyson to our Loves and Friendship,
The only prop which dying Virtue leans on,
In one unhappy hour thou hast quite destroy'd,
And broke the Sacred Chain which link't our Souls.



Will you Condemn me, e're you hear me speak?
What has Antonio do•e, to move your hate?


Or how have I deserv'd this Jealousy?
Is not Antonio 



Ha! that name again!
By hell she doats and feeds upon the sound:

Antonio! Oh that word, that names a Charm,
A Charm indeed which has bewich'd Miranda,

And raz'd Heavens Stamp from out her fickle Soul:
O I could rave and Curse my Cruell Stars
Which have depriv'd me of my Joys and her:
But Love usurps the Throne and still's my rage.
Madam, I go for ever from your sight,
To meet a death from your Antonio's hands,
Or offer up my self a Victim to appease
His Angry Ghost, and glut Revenge and you.



Stay, stay Alberto, hear me but speak.



It cannot be, bid raging Seas to listen
When the Winds heave the billows into Clouds.



Stay, stay, but to see Miranda dye.




Mock not my reall griefs with thy false tears.



False tears! nay then I can endure no more.




Ha! does she faint! Return my fair Apostate,
Return, and hear the story of your Falshood;
Here I'le produce the clearest Evidence
Will prove you false, and trouble you no more.



Convinc'd I'me false, yet give no more, O horror!
Yes, I wou'd rip my heart out of this breast,
And give't a prey for Vultures to devour,
Sooner then wrong my plighted faith in ought.



No more, but read, read there your Crimes,

There markt in Characters too plain and foul.
Farewell for ever Madam, for I dare not stay,
To see your blushes blab my destiny,
But must in silence part and calmly dye.






False to Alberto, this the Evidence;
Is this the Gorgon turns his heart to flint?
I dare not see this narrow Vault of death,
(Not that I fear my death, for that were wellcome)
But yet I dread there lies some putrid earth
Couch'd in the dark abode, lest these black letters
With every turn shou'd curl into a Snake,


Will wind and twist about my dearest honour,
And taint my •potless truth with infamy.
Thus I secure it then nor will I trouble

My conscious innocence with false alarms,
But banish all encroaching passions,
(But Love and Grief,) from out this troubl'd breast,
And leave th' unerring Gods to judge the rest.





I care not, 'tis resolv'd.




I have no other int'rest but your peace,
Which to preserve, I'de shipwrack all my own.



How is my peace endanger'd in Alberto?




I'm hush'• Sir; he's my friend: only this beware▪




Ricardo your words hang ill together:
Disjoynted words speak a disjoynted meaning.
You talk as if there were some mistery
'Twere fit I knew, and yet you're loath to tell.
Is he not Loyall?



Loyall, he may be Sir, for ought I know,
I never fear'd the sharpness of his Sword,
Or to defend his Country, or di•turb it:
'Tis true in Peace, 'twill hardly rust within▪ the Sheath,
For •avern brawls and quarrells in the Stews;
Nor think I there, 'twill rust with too much blood:
Therefore your Daughter 



Speak, what of my Daughter?



There must he wound you Sir, there •ound the▪ vein▪
You think he loves her Sir, perhaps he may,
Who wou'd not love to be the Vice-Roys Son,
Courted, Esteem'd, nay more, Admir'd by all,
And held the Favorite both of Heaven and Earth?
But if (avert it Heaven) Experience tells you
He courted more tha• Title then your Daughter 



I know your meaning, but no more of that:
What I've decreed stands firm, sixt as a Rock,
Not to be shaken w•th your blust'ring reason.
Prudence in Rulers is the Helm of State,
Which lost, the wandring Bark's a Prey to fate,
Spl•ts on the Rocks and sinks into the Sand;
Reason that ma•n'd her, cannot then Command:
The Ribs are burst, the helm in pi•••s torn,
The Rudder lost, the Bark is surely go•e▪


Either you argue I've renounc'd that Prudence
In taking him into my heart and House,
(After▪ long wading into his inmost thoughts,
And sounding all the Shallows of his Soul;)
Or there's some hidden Cause for this aversion.



Pardon my Lord, the hasty zeal I've shown;
Some brandisht bolt be levell'd at my head,
And rivet me to earth, If I have ought
To move me thus but duty and my Love.



But see your Daughter, Sir.




T'was rashly done to tear the Letter,
Then leave it here;
For which forgive me Credulo•s Alberto.

Ha! my Father here!












Why does a Father's presence thus surprize you?
But that's a trifle, to those greater wonders
Which amaze me more: Why Child this strange disorder?
What mean those swol'n eyes, and falling tears?
Is this the Picture of Triumphant Love,
Drest in the Visage of a black despair?
Are shours the Prologue to the rising Sun,
Or Harbingers of an ensuing Storm?



My Plot has took; thanks to my witty Stars.




I cannot guess the meaning, sure Alberto

Must know the Cause, speak, was he here to day?



He was my Lord, Oh fatall interview!



Fatall, to what? be quick and give me ease:
Is it your speedy Nuptials that are fatall?
By Heaven if such a thought were starting in you,
After all your Pleadings, and my Conquer'd Pride,
You should be Married in the other World.



Alas! that heavy Curse comes now too late
Since Love has made me wretched beyond all hopes
Of ever being blest or happy more.
He came my Lord, but with a face so alter'd,
He rather seem'd the Ghost of my Alberto;

Then ey'd me as I were a Basilisk:
Revenge and Love jarr'd in his eyes a while,


But strait the fiercer passion gain'd the Conquest:
To all the Endearments of my joyfull Love,
He answer'd only with a Gloomy silence:
But soon as I discover'd your consent,
He storm'd and rav'd aloud, then wisht me joy,
Talk't of Antonio, falshood and revenge,
Whilst all my tears inflam'd him but the more.



I understand you not Ha! Ricardo!




You see my eye was piercing to discern.



Speak once again, but speak it to the dead,
For they'le solve such a riddle soon as I.



I am no Oedipus, yet can construe this:
He's false, or thinks her so, which is as bad, if not worse.



Oh! give me patience Heaven for this affront,
Which thus reflects upon my Masters honour,
And wipes the Sacred Oyl from off his head.
There's ne're a proud Italian of you all
Shall dare to ro•ze my fiery Jealous rage
And scape it's fury. Guards go seize the Traytor.



Hold, hold Kind Sir, and hear your Daughter speak.



Shame to my blood, woud'st thou excuse the Villain?
Breath but a word for him that dares abuse
Thy Fathers condescention and thy Love,
And I'le proclaim thee Bastard, and not mine.



I must speak, for Love like mine's invincible,
And like the Palm suppress'd, does higher rise:
I wou'd excuse him too, but impossible!
Perhaps some busy •iend has been at work
To interrupt the Calm which we enjoy'd,
And Shipwrack all our hopes with one dire blast.
What Virtue's proof against the assaults of malice?



That •iend is lodg'd within his treacherous breast,
There lies the Snake which stings my honour thus:
I• vain you'd bribe my Justice with your tears
The Ballance must fall down and crush Alberto.




Since you're resolv'd, oh hear me on my knees,
I beg of you this last, this only favour,
Load me with all the chains, his Crimes deserve,
And let my death glut your mistaken rage.



Fond, Love-sick Fool, then woud'st thou dye for him?



With as much Joy, as Martyrs for their Faith.
Dye to preserve him for anothers Arms,
And bless the Stroke which gives Alberto life.



I finde my resolution Staggers here


and thou hast tam'd the Lion in my Soul;




'Tis well; and fortune hitherto's my friend,
Did he secure him, there wou'd be a search

Deep in the bottom of my close design
And all my industry were countermin'd.
If that my Loyallty were not ill manner'd
I wou'd advise you Sir, to curb your rage,
Till proof imprint the Stamp of Justice on't:
And if your Highness shall think me worthy
I'le be the Argus to your peace and honour.



Thanks my Good friend: and to convince you that
Your service is not thrown away on me,
I accept of your advice; Alberto's free.
Now Daughter let us in, and sound the depth
Of all these wonders. Ricardo wa•t me here.





What lucky Planet rul'd when I was born▪
And mark'd me out a second Machiavell?

He Plotted but to gorge his vast ambition,
But I, to satisfie Revenge and Love,
The Darling Passions of the Powers above.
What's this, a torn note, expos'd to view?
I•e joyn the broken remnants close, and may


From every pei•• sprout up a Hydra's head,
To wound and quite destroy the Man I hate.
Ha! Confusion to my eyes! what's this I see?
The very Basis of my Plot o'rethrown;
The pin pluck'd out which mov'd my Study'd Engine:
My counterfitted Challenge here, and torn.
What shou'd this mean? Let me see!

No Yes Nay it shall be so:
I'le Counterplot the Coward,
And like the Toad suck poyson from each Verdant her•

And spit it in Alberto's face.




Is there no friend, will ease me of my doubts?
None to redeem me from this Maze of thoughts
In which I'm lost? Ricardo thou seem'st Honest,
And can'st not without trouble see me thus:


Give me some means to rid me of this Torture,
Tho' ne're so harsh, tho't be a fatall Cord
Or twist of roapy Venom for a Clue.



The fair Miranda has been at work for me,
And moulded him, as if she'd gag'd my wishes;

Credit me Sir, your grief distracts my Soul,
And all my Friendship must give way to duty.
My weak imagination can't present
A surer way to fathom his intents,
And punish 'em, then quite to cast him down
From that bright Heaven he once aspir'd to,
And bar all future claims unto your Daughter.



Friendship still softly pleads within thy breast;
Has not the Villain baulk't that punishment,
In leaving her, and plagu'd me with his falshood?
This mildness in my Friend's almost a Crime
When Titius's Vulture▪ or the rowling Stone
Are nothing to the torments he deserves.
Were but my fears confirm'd by certain proof,
What Patron God shou'd guard him from my vengeance?
Tho' Thunder back't with lightning fenc'd him in,
And Charms as great as Circe's did protect him.
Nay 
Tho' bury'd from my rage as deep as Hell,
Yet wou'd I force the Lemnian Bulworks; Scale
The Flaming Wall's, then ransack all the world below
To find him out, and having found the Traytor,
Tear out his false, disloyall, treacherous heart,
And grind it into dust, to heal my wounded honour.



This rage surprizes me: I thought your Daughter
Had fully satisfied and cured your Jealousy,
And nothing now remain'd but to revenge his Crimes.



By all that's good she has heighten'd it Ricardo,

Her tameness has but wounded me the more:
Tho' I had offer'd all the world to bribe her,
She wou'd but tell me, there was some mistake
And speak the rest in tears.




That Duty urg'd her not; when other women
Can speak enough unbrib'd, or uncommanded.
But I have happily found out a way
T'untie this Gordian knot.



Speak to the purpose.



T'was Fate alone, who pitti'd your concern,


And therefore in compassion found a Cure.
When you were gone, I found this torn note
Which put together spells a Challenge Read it

With this back-blow I wound 'em both at once.





Altho' the fair Miranda loves you not,
Yet I'le not bear a Rivall tho' unhappy:
Either renounce all title to her Love,
Or meet me single in the Parade
At six this evening, where I'le expect you
With your Sword to do me right, and
Satisfy the honour of th' enrag'd.
Antonio.
Ha! what shou'd this mean? my wonder but encreases
Still the more by this misterious Challenge:
How cou'd Alberto but in honour go,
When such a dangerous invitation call'd him?



Pardon me Sir, my courage wou'd not blush
To wave that Duell, which my Love forbids,
And more your Highness orders put a bar to.
But here's such treason, hell ne're hatch'd a greater,
So black a Crime, my Virtue shrinks to name.



It must be monstrous then, if fear'd to name




Alas! you take this for Antonio's hand▪




Antonio's, yes, why is it not?



By Heaven and Earth 'tis mine as much as his.



Then there's some horrid plot conceal'd in this:
Tell me the meaning good Ricardo, and

Construe these damn'd infernal Characters.



I think the words need no interpretation,
The meaning's writ in plain downright Italian,
(It seems he has not politicks enough
For a dissembling, false, and treacherous Villain)
Sir, this is but a Counterfeit of his,
With a pretence of fair Miranda•s falshood•

To varnish or'e his own ingratitude.



'Tis so, 'tis plain; ye Powers, and must I Live
To see my honours death? to feel my blood
Thus trampl'd on by an abandon'd Slave?



It works as I cou'd wish.




Sure there must be
In young Antonio some grounds for this,
Some glimmering, flas•es of a growing flame;
By all the Gods I'le Crown his utmost wishes,


And date his nuptialls from Alberto's death.
O where has all my i•jur'd greatness slept?
In what dull Lethe has my pride been drown'd?
Rouze up my Slugger'd fury, wake my rage,
Act such revenge shall fright the wondring Age;
Be like a Torre•t on Alberto hurl'd,
And like the Deluge to the Infant world.






Thanks my kinde Stars, ye Bawds unto my plot.
This rage will countenance Alberto's murder,
And make it seem an act of Loyallty.
But first I must expose this to the flames;
Then on to build the Fabrick I de•ign
Mount Pelion upon Ossa; bravely done,
Thus to ascend the Region of the Sun,
And see my glorious web, by second Causes spun.









COme on Gentlemen you have your instructions and your reward,
twenty Florins a man.



We have, and 'tis enough for this same small piece of villa∣ny:
Why Sir, we Souldiers, for half so much wou'd kill our Fathers
and Brothers, and after that Ravish our Mothers and Sisters.



Ay, ay Sir, Ravishing's nothing with us, 'tis our dayly practise.



Why I'le you Sir, an• o' my conscience 'tis true 



Conscience fellow Souldier, Zounds what hast tho• to do
with conscience?



Who I? why nothing; the Devill I think was in me for ha∣ving
such an unlucky thought. How a plague came I to think o• Consci∣ence,
that never had any such thing in all my life?



Zounds how I shou'd know, that know not what it means.



Well; certainly I am the unfortunate'•t Dog in the world 
but Sir, as I was saying,



Ay Sir, pray go on.



For twenty more, we wou'd cut your Honours throat, tho'
we are so much oblig'd to you for your bounty already.







If your Honour shou'd hire us, and pay us well for our pains.



Very likely, that I'de hire you to cut my own throat.



An you did, you'd not be the first by twenty, that have done it.



Come no more fooling.



Fooling! why I tell you Sir, 'tis our trade, we cannot live
but by murder and cutting of throats: for look you Sir, the blood we
drink, and it makes us fat; the hearts we broil, and eat with Salt and
Vinegar, and 'tis wholesome food, Sir: as for the rest o'th body, if it be
young and tender we make Venison of it, and present it to our friends
and Benefactoas, such as your worship, but if tuff and old we give it to
Dogs, 'tis not worth our care or preservation.



You say true but now to our business: when he comes, retire if
you can, so as to o'rehear us; but if not, I hope those same unknown
things call'd Consciences, that can digest murder so well, as without ma∣king
wry faces at it, won't baulk a little perjury, especially when
there's twenty good hard round pieces of Gold to help it down.



Never fear it Sir, 'tis another limb of our Trade; alass we
shou'd halt without it: why Sir we every day practice it for Widdows,
who out of tender care for their Children will Sequester some of their
Mannors to themselves, lest too much plenty shou'd Dabauch 'em.



And for such grave Statesmen as your Worships honour, when
they have a Suit in Law depending, or any Friend at Court whom they
wou'd give a good Character of to the Goverment.



These are fit instruments, as Hell cou'd send me,
And tho' he tamely yeilds him self a Prisoner
Yet shall these Hell-hounds still outswear him,
And baffle Justice with their Impudence:
Nor will the Vice-Roy now be backward to believe 'em,
Since rage has blinded him beyond his reason.



Sir, Sir, I hear some body coming, I believe 'tis our prey:
Now is my Appetite as sharp as my Sword to be at him.



Retire then and observe the Instructions I gave you.



We'le divide the spoil Boys, shan't we?



Ay, ay, Agreed: but come let's go.




Now Nemesis assist your Votary.






The hour is past, and yet he is not come,
As 〈◊〉 in Justice he allow'd me time


To think and Steel my Sword for Vengeance:
Yet why ye Cruel Powers!
Why have you doom'd me to Revenge,
The Quarrell of my Love upon my Friend?
Was't not enough to hear Miranda false,
(To find a spot in that Meridian Sun,
That Silver-Swan, who once like Leda's twins
Brusht the smooth surface of the azurd Sky
And glid along in gaudy Majesty,
Above the Common Glory of the Starrs:)
To see her quencht, quencht in an Asphalites,

And sprout up to the World an Ethiop?

(Oh 'tis a thought that grates upon my heart,
And screws the jarring string untill they crack.
But that my Friend, my Friend should plunge her in,
And be the Tempter of this fall'n Angell,
'Tis Hell, Damnation, and Eternal horror!



What a rare poyson is this Jealousy?
'That's workt, and almost scorch'd him into tinder
Apt to be fir'd with the least spark of passion.



Durst any other snatch her from my Arms?
How wou'd I hug the Stinging Viper,
Till I crusht out his Poyson with his life,
And smile to see his panting Soul
Dance on my bloudy point its way to hell.



Now is the Time My Lord!




Ha! What makes this Court-worm here, This Parasite,
Volume of words, and shadow of a Man?

Perhaps he has heard me •ighing out my griefs.



I have my Lord, and they concern me much;
And urge me to declare it to your face,

Antonio and you must never fight.



Must never fight? who dares oppose our fighting?
As well they might resist an Angry wind,
Or stop the Current of an Impetuous tide:
Not all the roaring of Carybdi• Gulf
Shall hush the Clamour of my loud revenge;
Nor Mists engender'd by the Queen of Love,
Shall hide her Darling Hero from my Sword.



To what excess of bravery you're rais'd,
And spurn your Absent Fo• like worthless dirt▪
But once more I must tell you Angry Lord,

Antonio and you must ne're engage.



'Tis false; Dally no longer with my fury,


Le•t it burst out, and blow thee into Air.
Where is the Man dares combat with my Anger?



What if the Vice-Roys Orders shou'd controul it?



I laugh at 'em. 
What has State-Interest to do with me,
When both my Love and Honour are at Stake?



What if the Fair Miranda should command it?



The fair Miranda! O thou hast hit the vein,
But call not back the Charmer to my mind.
Whom I've in vain attempted to forget.



Then still you love her?



Witness all ye Powers!
How much I love that dear Abandon'd Saint!
And with what joy I'de dye to give her •ase;
But cannot yield Antonio to her Arms:
Still the tough Mettal of my heart holds out,
And braves the weak efforts of my Ambiguous will.



Now then's the time to throw off all disguise.
Know then, I dare, and will prevent your fighting.



No more, be gone, wake not my sleeping rage,
To tread so poor an Insect into Clay.



That Insect dares your rage Proud Love-•ick Lord.



Thou art not worth my Anger: But mark me Statesman,
If thy Tongue breath a Syllable of this,
Or dares prophan• the business of my Love
I'le rivet it for ever to its roof:
By heaven I'le bath my Vengeance in thy bloud,
And send thee Herauld of this horrid News
To ope the Crackling Gates of Pluto's Realm
And wait Antonio's Coming.




Know'st tho• what I am?



A Statesman, and by consequence a Villain;
A Common Prostitute to every bribe,
Who Traffiques Justice for all damning Gold.



I've blood as pure as thine runs through my veins:
Nay more, I am a Lover, and thy Rivall.



My Rivall! Can any Generous passion enter there,
That Impregnable Garrison of Vice?
Or drast thou think to Violate my Love,
And offer up thy spurious Flames with mine?
As for Antonio, he indeed is worthy of her,
Fair as the day, and the first dawn of Light,
Before polluted with the Shades of Night,


And till this cursed Day a Pylades to me.



Your praise of him inflames but me the more:
'Tis I alone deserve her best, and will wear her:
I will possess her, rif•le all her sweets,
Whilst you gaze on, despair, and cursing, Dye.



Ha! sayst thou? but this arm shall bar thy way
And send to keep company with Ghosts:
There may'st thou revell with some Proserpine,

But never think of fair Miranda more:
Draw, if thy trembling hand can hold thy sword:




It can, and fix it in thy heart Alberto 




Come no more words, but prove it by thy deeds,
That side o'th field is more convenient,
Shaded with trees, and undisturb'd with noise,
Thither let's repair, but make haste Ricardo,

Le•t thou recover from this fit of Valour by delay.



On then, and let the Conquerour boast,
I think I am secure.







Hark ye Comrades, why the Devill shou'd we betray this gallant
man (who is our fellow Soldier,) for the pleasure of a cowardly Statesman,
who is of a profession, that is our greatest Enemy, and still plotting
for Peace, and to hinder our glorious rapines abroad, that they may
have the spoil of all at home.



Alas poor Pedro, and art thou troubled with a qualm of con∣science?



No faith boy, I'de have you to know that I am a Soldier, and
scorn any such baseness; but why shou'd not we commit this small peice
of perjury for a brave fellow that loves us, rather then for a Coward
that hates us?



Ay! but Pedro we have his money, and it wou'd be ingratitude.







Why a sort of current coin at Court Boys, that runs like
quick-silver from one to another: for look ye, don't we dayly see
what a crowd of Cringers press there every day, gaping like so many
Jack-Daws for preferment, and commonly such as have spent three
parts of their Patrimony in presenting, treating, and bribing this Lord
or that Squire, this Coxcomb or t'other Fool, and at last for amends, get
only a large sum of bare promises and shallow hopes (quite as shallow as
his Lordships little-witty quilted noddle:) therefore I'le have nothing
to do with it, but leave you all to the Devill to be advis'd.



By Saint Iago he speaks sense in that; and I scorn to be back∣ward
  18
in any virtuous act, therefore I declare for the Soldier.



I am half converted and of thy opinion too: but my safety
sticks with me, for this same Lord Alberto is on the other hand too
Virtuous, and overcharg'd Virtue, you know, is as ugly as when she
has nothing but skin and bones on her back.



Right: and therefore he'd thank us for saving of him, but hang
us for betraying the other.



Hum! and i'gad that may be: for faith tho' I love him very
well, yet I love my self better; therefore to conclude let us kill 'em both,
and then we shall shake hands and part with a merry heart, and a good
conscience.



No, no, the best way is to seize and apprehend 'em both for duel∣ling,
then shall we enjoy our prize by Law, & perhaps be rewarded by the
Government for our great Care and circumspection for settling and Se∣curing
the affairs of the Nation.



Well! thou hast a rare head-piece, a rare head-peice i'faith: I
shall live to see thee one of th•se days on the very pinicle of preferment,
for ahy Policy.



What dost mean, the Gallows?



Witty Dog, the Gallows! why faith as thou sayst, the gallows
is a pinacle from whence many a weather-cock has been whirl'd off, and
with as handsome a farewell as your protesting Courtier gives his hum∣ble
Servant, that is never to see him more▪



Well, well, I've policy enough for a Souldier▪ and I care for
no more.



Ay, ay, and so we have all: but see they're met, and coming
this way.



The Soldier drives the Cowardly Statesman lightning before
him.





O' Miracle! A Courtier and loose blood in •ight: but let's to
our work.




Ha! betray'd! unband me Slaves.



Slave us no Slaves, Sir, we've sav'd your life,, and you must
get your liberty as well as you can.



Come, since he's seiz'd return my Sword again,
That I may drein from out his heart his dearest blood
To fill my ebbing Veins: Come let me go.



Ha! ha! ha! what can the roaring Lion do when he has lost
his Claws and Teeh, but roar? Good noble Squire of the Court you must
hire Soldiers to murder a Soldier, and see what comes on't, I thank you
we've earn'd our money cheaper a great deal.



What mean the treacherous Dogs?



Mean, why we mean to secure you both: you for bribing us
to murder, and him for not bribing us.



Thus heaven can save the Innocent,
'Gainst all assaults, and make the worst of men
The instrument of good. But false Antonio,

False man, thus to conspire against my life,
When thou hast rob'd me of my Love, else how
Shou'd he have known it and prepar'd the means
For execution: Come Gentlemen, lead the way,
The way to Death, the end of all my greifs.



Our business is to lead you back to prison, since we have gi∣ven
you a reprieve and are taking you from the place of execution.



Wou'd you wou'd lead me to some Labrinth,
Where I might loose my piercing woes for ever,
And wander from my self,




Ten thousand plagues go with thee.
Did blood affright you Slaves, your dayly food
In peace and war? But come, unhand me now.



Ha, ha, ha! you think we're in jest, no faith Sir, you'l not
find it so: indeed I cou'd be Jocose enough sometimes, with such a friend
as you are, but that there lags behind (in such a case) hanging in good
earnest.



Hell and furies! they deride me too:
O' that I were a Basilisk for their sakes!
Yet think ungratefull Villains of the Gold.



Prithee talk not to us of gold, when our lives are in danger:
The Law runs thus, he that sees a duell, and does not call for help, or
seize the Combatants, is equally guilty of the breach of the Law, and
under the same penalty, as he that actually engages.



Does not your Conscience sting you for your ingratitude?



Conscience! we've got some Court Opium of you to lull that
asleep.




Gods must I then behold my great designs,
Unravell'd by so base and common hands?
But this defeat shall heighten my Revenge:
I'le call each fiend to harbour in my breast,
And prompt me to the wittyest Acts of horror:
Nay, I'le pursue him dead, and haunt his Ghost;
And tho' I'm sunk ten thousand fathoms deep,
Yet I'le be Aetna still, and spout up Flames,
Shall set the Heavens on fire about his Ears,
And with the mighty ruin ease my Cares.









Antonio, saw you your friend to day Alberto?




My Lord I did not, and it much concerns me,
That he should absent himself so long.



Nor did you meet my friend honest Ricardo?




Honest Ricardo, and but plain Alberto!

Sir, you surprize me.



I shall surprize you, Sir,
To tell you, he that is your friend, must cease
To be your friend, or I commence your Enemy.







Grant it propitious heaven, thou shoud'st have said.
Woud'st thou defile the e•mine of thy Sou•,
And mix with such a canker'd poisonous Beast?
Even birds of prey peck at their Dearest Mates,
When false to them, and common with another.



Oh hold! my blood chills at these injurious words
And cools the warmth which circles round my heart▪
My friend corrupted! no it cannot be,

Alberto's white, purer then driven snow;
The very emblem of Man's infant Nature;
And clear as opening heaven.



And yet as black as Hell:

•alse to his King, his Country, and to me;
But what is more, false to love and thee.



Impossible! It cannot be!



You'l not believe me then?



Pardon me Sir, if that I say I cannot;
For sure my friend can never prove Disloyall,

•alse to his King, his Country, or to Love:
When Gods cease to be Gods, and heaven is heaven no more,
Then will I cease to adore those Gods for ever;
But oh they're still immortall and unchang'd,
So is our friendship kindled by their influence;

Promethean heat did light it from above,
And none but heaven can e're put out the fire.
But Sir, your words imply the knowledge of something
Which for Alberto's sake I'de beg to share in.



No ripping up of Circumstances, Sir,


'Tis most unseasonable to our purpose now:
Dispell those Clowds, which thus hang o're your brow,
And now prepare to meet your coming Joy:
To morrows light shall give your long'd for Bride
Unto your arms, and tye you fast for ever:
You muse, I did not expect this from a Lover!



My Love and Friendship are so near akin
That one being hurt, the other feels the smart,
And eccho's to it's grief 
Just like a well-tun'd Lute's harmonious strings,
One being broke, makes all the rest to Jarr.



'Tis a fond Eccho of a troubl'd brain
And false as wandring Meteors in the night;
If for your friendship you'l be false to Love,
Your guilt will equal to Alberto's prove;
He but a lower friendship does decline,
But you'd Almighty Love for him resig•e.



How can I hope to have my Love secure,
When it's twin-brother friendship wants a Cure:
Besides my happiness depends on his,
Since his consent must consummate my bliss.



Let his consent give place unto my will
She's in my power and I will keep her still.



This Sir, wou'd too severe appear in you,
To hold by force what is anothers due.




Alberto's due you mean; young man 'tis thine
Thy due, nor is it his consent but mine
M•st rule my Daughter.



Ha! your Daughter Sir!



My Daughter? Yes; I know you think it strange,
And wonder at this unexpected change,
But I have found that you deserve her best
And 'tis Antoni• she must now possess;
I'le fetch her to you strait.




Guard me ye Powers!
Did he not say, or did I dream he said?
That my friends Mistriss shou'd be mine? Oh horror!
Weep heart at such a horid thought, weep blood,
And drown the Demon in the crimson flood;
Watch friendship, guard the fortress of my Soul,
And all this crowding heap of Ill's controul:
Fly fond ambition to thy stormy Cell,
Or rather sink into thy native Hell.
Avaunt ye mushroom glories of the earth,


Whose fading is as sudden as your birth:
Leave me t'injoy my Mistriss and my Friend,
And let me never, never these offend.





By all your hopes, Great Sir,
By my dear mothers Ghost, I do conjure you,
Revoke this cruell Sentence.




There's Fate in every sillable I speak,
And if you prize Alberto's life, receive him
As one who shortly must comma•d you.



Stand firm my friendship 'gainst the mighty shock.




I k•ow you do but try my constancy,
You'd curse me from your blood were I disloyall,
And false to him, tho' he's unkind to me.
How did you trembling stand, all struck with horror,
To think he shou'd forget his Vows to me,
And shou'd I coppy him?



You plead in vain,
His doom stands fixt, unless you repeal it;
I have no time to argue, think, and resolve:
Here's the reward of your long smother'd flames,
And fortune gives you an hour unask'd,
What you scarce dar'd to wish for untill now.
I leave her here, to clear the rest.




What mean these prodigies? but see she weeps;
Perhaps she thinks to thaw my nature by h•r tears,
And wash away my Virtue with the dew




Assist me all ye Powers that favour Love.
My noble Lord.




O strike me with some leprosy kind heaven,
Blot even natures genuine image out,
That I may be a monster to her eyes.



This musing gives a Vent unto my hopes,
Perhaps his friendship Struggles still for life,
And with some aid may yet recover breath.

That you are Generous, the World can witness,
Your bravery the haughty French do mourn,
And Naples sav'd, proclaims Antonio's Valour.







But there are virtues, which be•it a Court,
And sound much softer then the rugged stile of war.


Love, the prerogative of Heaven and Gods,
The Polisher of yet unfinish'd Nature,
Which separates and refines the dross of man,
And brings the golden Age upon th• Soul:
And friendship bears such sympathy with Love,
You cannot have the one without the other:
Once you did own a friend, and Love him too;
Once your twin-Souls did kindly mix together,
You hearts beat time, and measur'd every thought;
You squar'd your actions to each other's will,
And each desire did center in his friend.



We did, we do, and hope we ever shall:
There is Divinity in all you say?
But yet there still remains a harsh conclusion,
Why wou'd you then seek to destroy that friendship
To cancell all the Sacred bonds, and stain
Your Virgin-beauties with so foul a Crime?



Ha! what does he mean?



Think Madam, oh think:
Think of Alberto's worth, his constant Love,
How ill he merits from Miranda this:
But if you've cruelly resolv'd his death,
Let not Antonio be his murderer:
How wou'd the damn'd in Hell be ague-struck,
And double all their pains by contraries?
How wou'd they hate the abhor'd light,
And think the dismall shades the happier place
Where all such monstrous villany they shun,
But still repent for what on earth they've done?



Be witness heaven how Innocent am I,
And oh reflect Antonio on your guilt.
You've argu'd justly in your own defence,
Why shou'd you then betray so brave a friend,
And draw such vengeance on your guilty head?
But oh too late, as well I might call back
Times fleeting sand, or bid the labouring Sun
Turn retrogade in its diurnall Course;
For he is gone, for ever lost to me.
Yet think not that I'le quench thy impurer flames,
I'le sooner seek a Satyr of the Woods,
Embrace a Leopard, mix with ravenous Wolves,
For they're more clear, and more relenting far:
But oh! D•ath is the wellcom'st guest to me,
To embrace a shrowd, and kiss the weeping Marble,


Till we're Incorporate, both cold alike,
So turn like Niobe into a Stone.



Instruct me heaven what means this show of rage:
Madam you load me with a Crime unknown,
And still forestall what I wou'd say to you;
But let these fruitless accusations cease,
And tell me how I have betray'd Alberto.




Hast thou not? 







But here I'me lost again,
My Father charg'd me not to clear the truth
And Tyrant duty compells me to obey.


What means that ghastly look; Maria speak:
Dost thou bring ought of comfort or despair?



I'le speak the truth, howe're it fatall prove:
Just now arriv'd some Soldiers to your father,
Who say, they've seiz'd Alberto and Ricardo





What, and Imprison'd too?



Worse Madam, your enrag'd Father swears
His life is forfeit, and it shall be paid,
Yet now has sent to bring Ricardo to him.



Oh Tyrant Father! greater Tyrant thou,

Who Triumphs thus, over two bleeding hearts,
Which both expire by thy Treachery.



I'me at a loss for words to express my wonder;
Madam, I'me hush•, and will accuse no more
Since I'me confirm'd you love Alberto still,
But still unkindly you maintain your charge 'gainst me,
Fill me with blackest Ideas of a Crime
I loath to name. But I must tell you, Madam,
The fair Astella's Image is rooted here,
And not to be defac'd by all your Charms,
Nor think your Fathers grant, or vain Ambition
Can ever blast my love, and make me change.



Too late this forc'd Repentance comes from yo•

Since Death's his Doom, and not to be repeal'd.



I will make reparation, tho' not guilty;
Such reparation Madam, will convince you,
That friendship's dea•er to this breast, then life.



What can'st thou do to counterveil his death?



I'le save him tho' I perish in th' attempt:
I'le ransome from him his unjust confinement,
Or leave my life to appease your jealousy.



This will be noble, and may clear my doubts,
Go, and success attend your brave endeavours.
Away, and give me life or death; since my weak thread
Depends on his, and drops when he's cut off.





Alberto thus confin'd? It shall not be;
I'le snatch him from the very jaws of Death,
And shield him from the stroke of angry fate.






Turn thee Antonio, turn Ambitious youth.



My dear Astella here? O my fair Saint
This is a day of wonders, mighty wonders,
Such as must Separate a while my Soul,
And force me to thy Brother, and my friend.



Wonders indeed, that such a Votary
As you shou'd turn Apostate unto Love,
And pay your vows unto another Saint.



Ha my Astella! this is still more strange,
In what perplexity am I involv'd?
I think the Planets tread in mistick rounds,
And all the Stars are hatching fatall riddles.



In vain you'd seek a shroud to hide your guilt,
Loves jealous eyes with ease can pierce your Soul,
And mak't transparent as a Cristall mirror.



What a gross fat• has heaven allotted me,
To make me ignorantly thus a Villain,
A Villain to my Mistriss and my friend,
Yet cannot learn my Crime to either?



Yet my Antonio, why shou'd you prefer
The barren and uncertain joys ambition yields,
Before Loves calmer and more solid sweets?
How have you call'd yo• shining Orbs to witness
The purer flame which circl'd in your breast,
And swore the fixed Stars shou'd change their sphere,
E're you forgot Astella for another.



Was ever love in such a maze as mine,
That all her softness cannot melt my nature?
The rugged figure of Alberto's prison

Has rac'd out for a while the impressions of my love.
Credit me Madam, I can never change:


Then speak not words so fatall to my peace,
Nor from this sullen temper fondly gather,
I Love no more, but ange• clouds my Love.



Heaven knows and you what cloud eclipses it,
But I'le repine no longer at your choice,
Nor think I'm wretched, whilest Antonio's happy.
But let me beg you to defer your joys
Till I am wither'd by a milder grief,
And languish by a gentle death from you.



This kindness from her, wounds me but the deeper,
Since I want power to make a fit return:
By heaven my heart is yours, as it was ever
But I must pay a duty to my friend,
Which done I will return, and doubly blest,
Whilst he shall give your hand, but yo• the rest.




This ill-tun'd Joy's but a forc'd harmony,
These words are all but Mandrakes notes to me:
Yes my Antonio, thou art false, inconstant,
As the leaf that's blown with every winde:
I read it in his eyes, yet cannot chide,
It were not rigor shou'd I blame the false one,
And vent the sorrows of an injur'd Love
But oh I cannot be so much a Woman!
Ye Powers that form'd this peice of Misery
Why made ye me so soft, and him so cruell?
Yet er'e I will proceed some means I'le try,
Which if they fail, there still remains to dye.
Thus I'le r•deem the credit of my Sex,
For when my fatall Story shall be told,
Succeeding times shall change their harsh decree,
And with united Voices all agree,
That Man's the Emblem of Inconstancy.









Be true to thy Profit still say I Stephano. Ricardo has given me
fifty checquins to release him, and says he'le save my throat, and be my
friend at Court; when at the same time, her• are some come with Or∣ders
from the Vice-Roy to free him, which he knows not of. Again here's
  27
within young Antonio, who has given me a hundred more for his friend,
the Lord Alberto: now 'tis a Sin to refuse Iove descending in a gold∣en
shower into my lap, and a greater Sin to be hang'd: Well Stephano
lay thy wits together, and for once outwit a Statesman,
and out-promise a Courtier. who's there?




Is my Lord Ricardo ready yet?



Sir, he's a little busy at present, and desires no noise near him;
but if you'l be pleas'd to retire and wait at the door facing St. Iaques's,
I'le conduct him to you strait.



Well make hast honest Jaylor:




I think I nick't it, just i'th nick: Wit and Pollicy together, that's
too much for once; but now to my business 
My Lord you may come out, if you please.





What means this mercy from my Jaylor?



O my Lord, no complements: but stay a little and I'le fetch
you your sword.




Let fate interpret this misterious dealing,
For I'me invelop'd still in double night;
The light o'th Sun I yet may chance to see;
But oh Miranda!


Miranda's Set, for ever set to me.





Here's your accoutrements Sir; and he•e's a key which opens
the back-door leading to Porto Sancto, make hast, lest you be discover'd
and I suspected.



Fate niggard gives me happiness by halves,
Since I'me unable to requite this goodness. But here's to reward thee.




I am sufficiently rewarded, my Lord, in my own conscience,
and your Lordships innocency 





Be silent still the night, and wink ye Stars,
Guide me where I may find this faithless friend,
And all my sorrows shall for ever end.




So much for him: but now go on and prosper still say I; I shall
oblige 'em all three, and cheat 'em all three.













A friend: Is my Lord Alberto drest yes?



I'le go see, and if he be ready, I'le bring him to you.




Now shall we solve this Sophistry of Hell,
And kill the Hydra that invented it.




He fee'd me to free Alberto, from which I study'd your
Escape, and keep the other still in durance.



Excellent Engine, I'le improve his fee.
But how shall I escape undiscover'd?



Why Sir, you may traverse your ground here in the dark, and
go out without speaking to him, and at the door, I've plac'd some friends,
that will Conduct you to the Vice-Roy, since you say you're sure of being
wellcome to him.
Your friend Sir, will come out immediately:

Now I've got a hundred and fifty pieces, I'le fairly run away, and if I'me
catch'd, 'tis better to be hang'd with satisfaction, then to go to the Gal∣•ows
with a craving Stomach,

For a full belly will weigh down the Rope,
But p•nury must ne're a pardon hope.





I hear some tread; my dear▪ Alberto, Friend,
Where are you?



You shall be with your friend, ne're fear it: so farewell
If I can hit the door.





Wellcome my dear Alberto, to these Arms,
Wellcome to life, to friendship, and to love.




I hope I've sign'd our Friendship Sir in bloud.



Wounded! Oh Heavens! and by Alberto's hand!
Ungratefull Traytor! yet I'le know the cause.




You shan't, if I can possibly avoid it:
This is rare mischief, thus with a randome blow
To •ow such Serpents teeth, which when they spring
In hisses will each others requiem sing.




O Power of destiny to change a breast,
Which virtue seem'd to challenge as her own:
That he shou'd fear the presence of his friend,
And seek to give him death, who sav'd his life;
Horror choaks up my words, and damps my heart,
I feel his hand, and not his Dagger Smart.









Slighted again? what do the Slaves conspire▪
To make a mock of Naples second Monarch?
By all my wrongs I will endur't no longer,
But they shall feel the weight of injur'd greatness:
Where is Antonio? Guards go fetch him strait;
Hurl him through Hells of torture to my hands,
That I may heighten all his Misery,
And double all the wounds which he gives me.



O Sir, what villain has inspir'd this rage,
Or is it I that have inflam'd you thus?
Know Royall Sir,
'Twas I that breath'd the calm repentance in him,
And call'd his wandring Love to it's first flame,
Then fix'd his friendship to Alberto's name.



Friendship! I'le hew that title from between 'em;
Eternall Mi•ts shall seperate 'em for ever.
Friends; so were bloody Cassius and Brutus,

When they conspir'd great Caesars overthrow,
And all the world did mourn the fatall blow.
But Traitress thou that durst oppose my will
Shall be immur'd for ever from the day,
In some dark Cloister, sigh thy wearied life out;
There may'st thou tire the Saints with Orisons,

And each return a curse upon thy head.



Be deaf ye Powers, and hear not his request:
Till these last words you were an Oracle.
Oh! if Alberto's doom be not revers'd
Let me be the Companion of his death;
Then I'le enjoy him with a purer flame,
Then hand in hand we'le tread the milky way,
Whilst all the Stars shall wonder at our Loves.



Whilst all the Stars shall •icken at the •ight:
Enjoy him! no, by hell you never shall
I'le summon all that Magick art can do,
To ••og th• Soul in it's swift flight away
Tha• pois'd equally t'wixt heaven and hell,
Thy body here may rot on earth, thy Soul
Grow to one horrid Mass of black despair,


And hang a threatning Storm amidst the air.
Weep on, weep poyson to infect the world,
And plague mankind, as thou'st tormented me.

But here's a friend will countervail my griefs
Here let me ease my Soul into thy breast,

Here find a Subject, and a Child in thee:



How fares it with my Royal Lord?



As with the indigested Embrio of the World,
When infant Nature labour'd with a Chaos,

Wanting as yet the kind Almighty Fiat,

To midwife the rude birth into an order:
My Soul like the Seeds of being in their first mixture
Is grown a peice with grief and madness.



Trust me I weep for joy, and grief at once,
I grieve your sorows, and I mourn your wrongs,
But pardon me if that I joy to see you thus,
And find my honest nature constru'd right.
But, ha! the fair Miranda here in tears!



Mind 'em not friend, they're all but Bastard-seed,
The muddy offspring of a froward mind.
Begone thou Child of night, but mine no more,
Avaunt I say thou Poyson to my Eyes:
Leave me, for ever leave me; and may thy breast,
Feel torments great as mine, but never rest.




But never rest, this to your Daughter, Sir?



Be thou my Daughter, and enjoy my heart,
For all run Counter to my will, but Thee:
But speak what fortune has detain'd thee thus?



I fear to speak, since it sums up a charge
'Gainst two, whom till this night I most respected:
I fought Alberto in my Masters cause,
Whom he had injur'd by a proud disdain,
When strait some Souldiers seeing us engag'd,
Disarm'd and led us both to Prison: but
My Jaylors kindness free'd me, or his cruelty:
For strait I met Antonio in the dark,
Who with his Rapier made a fruitless pas•,
Glancing o're my shoulder: I clos'd with the Ass•sinate,
And with my dagger wounding him I broke loose.
Thus Sir I purchas'd my escape to you.



What, do they mean t'usurp my power then,


By cutting off it's sure•t prop that's left?
Or do they think I am my Masters Log,
A Passive thing for them to tread upon?



Now all my Plots are ripe; my golden hopes

Are ready for projection. Perhaps my Lord

Miranda was the occasion of this mallice.







Alas! what have I said indeed?

Per•aps   Miranda Sir 




Miranda Sir, why sticks your story there,
As if it ended in Miranda's name?



Nothing, but Sir, another thought disturb'd me.



Another? no Sir, 'tis that thought disturbs you;
You eccho'd to Miranda with a sigh:
I'le have it out, be quick and do not urge me.



Oh do not force me Sir to such a Crime!



A Crime! I'me amaz'd.



You will be Sir amaz'd when I shall tell it;
But spare my life, and grant me a reprieve.








Yes Sir my life, which if I speak is forfeited,
And I must disobey if silent:
Yet 'tis resolv'd, I'le dye a thousand deaths,
Rather then brand my Loyalty; but oh!
My words will strike it dead, and silence blasts it,
They blow away my fame so dearly priz'd,
And all for one rash error of my tongue.



I'me all dissolv'd in wonder!



Yet I will speak you've forc'd it from my breast,
And pull'd my heart-strings with it   Sir I love her▪
Now tread th'aspiring worm to its Element,
Now gather in your breath, rally the wand'ring attoms
To curse this proud Ambitious Traytor dead:
Yet why am I thus my own Accuser,
When I shou'd blame my fate, and not my will?
Forgive my heedless Stars forgetfullness,
And O permit the monster to retire
To the Chaos whence it sprung, and where it ever
Had buried laid, and in perpetuall darkness,
But that you Sir, by a Diviner influence,
With one Command like a prevailing Charm
Struck life into the confused heap of matter,
And usher'd to the light the unwilling birth.




Ricardo rise I find my Spirits sink,


Trembling to mix my Nobler blood with his;
Yet thus I'de cut Alberto to the heart 
Tying this knot, I untwine his thread of life,
And cheaply gain to rule his fate and him:
'Tis done, my anger has ore'come my pride;
And rage has conquer'd, what De•ert cou'd never.
Ricardo. 







Have you consider'd what you've said,
Or has my goodness thus embolden'd you?



I've weigh'd (Great Sir) your goodness, and your high descent;
On the other side, my weak and empty merits:
Your favour was the Air, in which I breath'd,
But soon as Justice had near gain'd the Cause,
Love, Tyrant Love, that Arbitrary Boy
Kick'• up the ballance, broke the Sacred Scales;
And like Divinity without respect
Is equally obey'd by King and Peasant.




Ricardo, Justice has obtain'd the Cause:

 My Son but take that title without her;
For when I think of her, the thought's a Curse.



Ha! do I dream, or did you say, my Son!
Let me for ever thus embrace your knees,
For Words wou'd be allay unto my gratitude.



Rise my best friend; and since it must be so,
To morrow she is yours







Yes▪ Spite of her resistance my Ricardo,

She's yours, or heavens. But now no more:
Th' approaching midnight warns us unto rest,
Sleep but this night my Son, secure from harms,
The next you Anchor in Miranda's arms.




Thus like an Eagle, when he Soars above,
And cuts the yielding Air to seize his quarry,
Basks in the Clouds, and glances tow'rds the earth,
Then seems to drive his flight another way,
But all is to delude his easy prey:
So I, like the new Marriners o'th Court
By different points steer to my wish•t for port;
By being •animede, I cozen Iove,
But since I'me favour'd by the Powers above;
Be still the rest, and be Triumphant Love;








Come my brave Friends let us attack these sawcy Walls that dare
con•ine my Master, treacherously betray'd into the Nooze by a Cowardly
Courtier.



What Courtier honest Lopez, I'le spit him upon the point of
a needle, unless he be a friend to our Society, a modish, foppish one.



Nay, then I have him fast▪  'Tis he that has kept all
this coil about fashions, who to please the Vice-Roy wou'd metamorphose us
all into Spaniards, that is, wou'd cut your trade shorter by the sleeves.



Oh how my blood boils against the Villain! what turn us
all into Children with hanging-sleeves? and clip our profit with the
shears of his ambition and avarice? my blood's as hot, as if there were a
100. fleas stimulating my courage.



What's his name, that we may go on? men never commenc'd
Heroes by talk but action. (Now I think on't these walls are tame things
enough, they'le suffer a blow without returning it, nor are there any
port-holes to kill a man unawares; if they within will be Civill, we'le
deal most manfully with the o•t-guards.)



Pray give me leave 'Tis he who wou'd banish long Toledo,
and wou'd bring in a new kind of a harmless Rapier of a foot and a half
long to prevent duells nay, he motion'd once, that Gentlemen shou'd
wear wooden blades, so that we shou'd not have had a murder in a whole
week.



O' the Villain, there's my occupation defunct; but who is it
all this while?



No matter: now to our business, know you for what you came
here?



Yes, to free your master.



Do you know how he came to prison?



Upon his legs; our business is to take him from it, and not to
examine how he came to't.



Then where's the justice of your Cause?



In our Swords, where shou'd it be? Cause q•otha! why
Lawyers deal with Causes, and they•re no fighting men.



Very wittily argu'd, but soft, who•s here? are they friends
or enemies? hark•ye my Lads▪ if these prove foes, stand •our ground
stoutly; while I valiantly qui• mine.







Now Heroes, since we are embark't so far on this honourable ex∣pedition,
let us consider further, what we have to do. This is all the
contrivance of that damn•d Rascall Lopez.



Hum! 'tis Bernardo, come upon the same design with me, but
I'le send him away Come on friends, this is the Servant to that Cour∣tier
I told you of, come to release his master, and hinder our design:
he has but two or three softheads with him; say, shall we let him?



No, no, knock him down, knock him down.



Hold, hold, I beg your pardon Seignior Lopez, what I said of you
was but a complement in Masquerade.



You have it for that •ine expression; but now I must chastise
you for something else.



Hold friend, I came not here to fight, nor am I at present in
case to command my army; for I am as impotent as an Eunuch, or a
Nobleman of fourscore, as hungry as a besieg'd City, and as dry as a
Dutch Commentator.



You'l be the easier conquer'd: come we'l rid you of all your wants.







By death Sawcy upstart; how dare you ask us questions?



Death! a pox on't, I care for't the least of any thing in the world:
'tis the very bane of greatness; a monster that devours more of all sorts
at a meal, then Taylors halfpenny loaves and pickl'd cucumbers, or
Usurers decay'd Gentlemen in a whole year. Gentlemen, I thank you
for your love▪ but I had rather continue my distemper than take such an
Antidote.



O Rascall! he abuses our calling: my honour's concern'd
now, and if you put it up 



Then am not I fit to command an army of brave Citizens. Come
to your ranks; are you all ready? I begin to grow hoarse with this com∣mand,
Hum, hum! what a thirsty thing this valour is?



What do you mean, will you force your remedies upon me?



Yes, if you won't take them civilly, or defend your self a∣gainst
them.



Come, will you chuse to dye in the bed of honour, or be buried
alive in the grave of infamy?



I must think of some means to escape these valiant Dogs: Oh I
have it now!  Generall Lopez, to save the innocent blood, let us
decide our differences by single Combat, and engage upon our military
honours, that our men shall not strike a stroke, till one of us falls.



Agreed, retire brave Soldiers  and d'ye hear when
his party•s gone, come you forward and rescue your magnanimous Gene∣rall Come Bernardo

Let you and I,
The Battle Try▪




With all our hearts, for 'tis cruelty not valour to fight when
there's no need:



But how shall I trust you?







By all my Pedigree, by the first founder of our occupation.



A long Oath Mr. Taylor, stretch'd from the beginning of the
world, 'twill hold And now Lopez, since we are engag'd to make our
men idle spectators, let's to our Combat but it must be the next time
we meet, and so farewell, ha, ha, ha!




Cowardly Dog! but 'tis the same thing: let's mind what we
came for, and now how shall we contrive to release my Master?



Nay, look you to that:



Why I do look, and may look long enough for ought I see, be∣fore
I finde any way: you shou'd have consider'd of that before-hand Mr.
Thimble.



I am not such a fool to make my self mad.



Why then I think the war's done, so let every Man retire to his
quarters but then I loose the hope of a reward and may starve too 
stay friends yet I had better grow tall and strait by famine, than mon∣strous
crooked by hanging: Besides there is a great deal of Pleasure in
dying in a whole skin, and in this adventure I may be Carbonado'd 
go get you home but then my honour a pox of honour, 'tis the
most uncivill thing, it never consults a mans safety upon mature de∣liberation,
'tis our will and pleasure that you either go or stay, and if
you disobey in our last command, look to't.




Well this is a fortunate business, we shall be accounted Heroes,
and be no more affronted by the Officers; nay, they'l tremble to appear
before us; and cease to make assignations with our wives to our fa•es;
again, Alberto will be ours for ever if he escape, and if not we are safe;
and all without bringing our valour to the test, or once confronting
the enemy. Come neighbours 'tis a rare adventure, ha, ha, ha!



Ay faith Neighbour so it is; ha, ha, ha!








Thus like a Ghost I wander in the night,
With discontent to seek my murderer,
To thunder in his ears his breach of friendship,
And be the Herauld of divine revenge;
Then silently retire to shades again:

  36But oh they're passable and light as air,
Whilst I've a mine of lead •its heavy here,
Presses my heart, and sinks me to despair.





Well I've dismist my popular Subjects, since there's no good to
be done: my Master must weather to'ther night out, and perhaps he may
sleep better there, for he'le not have the cruelty to wish his Mistress with
him; when in the Palace, he'le tire the moon with his sighs and hei-hoes,
devour a bed-post with embraces, and antidate all the reall pleasure by
forehand wishes and imagination.



What voice is this and in the dead of night
That talks of wishes and imagination?
Perhaps it is some Rivall in my misery,
That comes to weep his story to the Stars:
But sure they're Bankrupts now, since they have spent
All their malignant influence on me. But I'le listen.



I've been considering of a remedy, if my Master will apply it;
Can't he make use of my blew-ey'd Bianca, my delicate brown Angelica,
or my sweet short-nos'd •ortia, and think that he has his mistriss in his
Arms. I have heard •ome great Philosophers say, that all the pleasure of
Women is but fancy, and can't he then as well fancy one woman for a∣nother,
as fancy that to be a pleasure which is none. But whilst I think
of him, I forget my self: I am very sleepy, and must take up with the
large Canopy of Heaven for once: Well in the name of Satan, I'le lock
up my doors, and converse with my self for a while:




It is my Servant Lopez opportunely come,
For I shall have occasion now to use him: Lopez!




Ha! who's that? Now if this shou'd be the Devill come to take
me before my time, what a pickle shou'd I be in: well I'le cheat the
grand Cheater for once, for I'le lye as if I was Dead, that he may go
back to hell, and see for my Soul, and in the mean time I'le escape.








Ah, good Mr. Devill he's gone, quite congeal'd to a Jelly.



Rise, Sirrah, here's no Devill.




Oh, oh, I feel his cloven hoof scorch me thro' my breeches.



Get up, 'tis I, is the fool mad?



'Tis my Masters voice, it must be so; he has been Murder'd in
Prison; and the Devill is come in his shape to Barter with me. I'de fain
speak if I durst▪



Do so, and leave fooling.



Good Mr. Voice and Foot, what are you, to whom do you belong?



I think the Slave's distracted; I am thy Master, Alberto.




My Master! Oh no! yet I must be bold and speak.








First Master Devill, I must own you to be a Demon of Quality, by
your good manners, that you come in a shape so familiar to me, and that
you don't bring Hell with you in your eyes: But as for being my Master,
you know I have serv'd him faithfully in this World, and 'tis too hard
to serve him in both, at least till I am dead, and as pure a Spirit as he, and
it is not fair, that an honest Devill, as I hope you are, shou'd stretch
my service beyond the limits of Matrimony.



This is Frenzy beyond all patience!
Did ever madness run to such a height?



Prithee, •e not so impatient, but hear me out, an hungry Judge,
or Guardian Usurer wou'd be more conscientious than you: if you be
come to punish me for my telling of the Challenge, I answer, that truly
I did designe to prevent your fighting, but was or'eheard a plotting, by
your friend Ricardo.







Ay Sir, for he swore h•'d blunt your adversaries sword with his
blood; so I trusting your safety to him, retir'd. This is the Sum of what
I have to say in my own defence, and I refer my Cause to a Jury of Spi∣rits,
but let 'em appear invisibly, and if they finde me guilty, condemn
me to the Gallies of Acheron, if not, resign your black Habeas corpus, and sign my acquittance by immediate vanishing.



This might divert another, but not me.
This simple Story carries wonders with it,
For Lopez did not know the place appointed,
Yet was Ricardo ready with his Murderers.
Oh 'tis too plain! 'twas my false friends design;
But that's but small, for I was slain before
A moving lump of clay without a Soul.



Now is this Archidiabolo giving Instructions to the invisible Jury.




Lopez, throw off this fond affected fear:
Feel me, I'm flesh and blood▪ a Man as thou art,
And not the Demon of the murder'd Master.



Whose Demon are you then Seignior?




The Slave perverts my words to serve his folly;
I am alive, escapt from Prison;



That is as much as to say,
From Hell; did you leap the Walls, or shoot the Gulf?



Sure I'me mistaken all this while; art thou Lopez?




As sure as you'r the Devill. But who the Devill sent you to me?



Ridiculous! approach me and feel thou Infidell,
And then believe thy Senses.



Well, so I wou'd, if I were so stout but I'le make up that
  38
with policy upon these conditions, I'le approach; first, that you do
not breath upon me, and infect me with the air of Hell; 2dly. That
when I'm close to you, you don't contract your self into a mouthfull of
air, then leap down my throat, and by inspiration get me with Child of
a young Belzebub.



Will this mad humour never leave him? try me;



Well, i'le take your word for once: his worships well drest
flesh and blood upon my life but are you sure you are alive, Sir?



If ever thou didst know me so, I am.



Hum your pardon Seignior, a wiser man than I might mistake,
finding you here at this time of night, and so expert as to break thro'
your prison walls.



That misterie's too deep for thee to dive in:
But now retire and sleep, for I perceive thou want'st it,
And when the morning dawns I will awake you.



I thank you, Sir.






Hark! Something I hear again tread near this place;
Who shou'd it be? Antonio? no!
He lies secure within Miranda's arms,
Enjoys, and rifles all my hoarded sweets,
Then tir'd with bliss, and the excess of joy
Leans on her panting breasts, and falls asleep.
Oh my poor heart!




How have I chang'd my state of happiness,
And fall'n from all my hopes in one black day?
Like Oedipus I'me innocent, yet guilty,
But feel a punishment as great as his,
My freind and mistress fled away at once;

Astella! Oh my Love!



By hell, and all it's horrors 'tis he:
Oh my swoln heart, why dost thou tremble thus?
Thou that has fac'd Grim death in all it's Pageant-greatness:
When here's a greater foe before thee,
The Serpent rob'd thee of thy Paradice.



It is Albert•'s voice: Instruct me heaven
What's due unto my Honour and my Friendship.













He that was my friend, I think.







'Tis false, thou never wert my friend▪



'Tis well, proceed Alberto.




Yes Traytor, I will proceed,
Untill thy bloated face proclaim thy Guilt
And bursting, spit thy Venom out.
See•t thou not revenge Triumphant on my Sword,
(Which maugre darkness shines like the Meridian Sun)
Longing to quench its thirsty wishes in thy blood,
And glimmering in the Scarlet sky to set?
Be quick and satisfy it.



Not for the World,
Or purchase an Eternity of bliss,
Wou'd I Encounter on so light a Cause,
Just like two rushing winds, driven by chance,
Fight one another by a blind impulse.
Give me to know your Sorrows and my Crime,
Or find some other means for satisfaction,
I will not thus.



I'le tell thee when my Sword's imbru'd and reeking in thy gore,
But now to speak wou'd pall the Appetite of my great revenge.
Why dost thou thus delay?



Here take thy wishes then.


Since thou art false, deliberately false
My life's a burden to me.



Then throw it off;
I'le ease thee of that burden.



I did resign it, when I resign'd my Sword:
Now strike Alberto, strike through my heart
And to assure the Stroke, think on thy wrongs;
But to lift up my Arm against thee were Sacrileg•,
In every wound I should behold Astella wrong'd,
And shame my Cruelty unto her brother.
But thou delay'st too long, I am prepar'd!



Thou art a Fool,
I tell thee that wou'd blunt the edge of Justice:
What cut thee down, as the laborious Hind mows off the grass▪
Which by inclining seems to beg a Crop?

Antonio, no, you shall not dye so cheap;
I've begg'd of Heaven to make thee as strong as Atlas,

To brave my fury, like a well-grown Oak,
That I might wound and kill untill I fainted,
And my desires were baffl'd by my weakness.



'Tis well ye Powers thus to refuse me death▪
When life was Odious to me Cursed Fate!
How shall I work him to so brave a deed?

  40Rather let me fight,
Without the Violation of my Love.
Then ever think 



Damn thy dull thoughts,
Is this a time for Love? Equivocating slave!







Yes, Traytor, Villain, Coward.



Coward! that stings home, and wounds my honour:



Honour! thou hast none: that Roab of Glory
Thou hast quite thrown off, for thou art false and base,
Therefore a Traytor, Villain, and a Coward.



Thy Sisters Love secures thee still,
She calms the storm which swells within my breast,
And stills the rage of anger and despair.



My Sister, no Devil no, she never charm'd your Soul;
You Idoliz'd another Saint, as false as she was fond:
But she is gone for ever, lost to my remembrance.







She's dead and damn'd for loving thee.
I've Sign'd her pasport for another World,
And wait to send thee to her.



O give me Patience Heaven!





Yes, slain by me Monster.



Stay fainting Spirits, move not away so fast,
One short recruit before I leave the World;
I come Astella, I'le be with thee strait.
Friendship away; thus let me blow thee from me,
'Tis gone with that last sigh for ever fled.

Now I can meet thee upon equall Terms,
And like a hungry Lion, loos'd from my Chains,
(Friendship and Honour which had ty'd my hands)
Rush on my prey, and bear thee to destruction.
Why sink thy Arms as if thy rage did cool?



If this be true, then what a wretch am I;
It is Astella's Cause that steels his Sword,
Whilst false Miranda is the Subject of my rage.


Antonio, since one of us, or both may chance to dye,
When dead, 'twill be too late to clear mistakes,
Therefore by all that's good I do conjure you,
Resolve me one thing.



Be quick, perhaps I may.



Hast thou not betray'd my Love and me,
And treacherously won Miranda's heart?



If this continue, I shall survive my Love;
I have, therefore now revenge it.




Why were you then concern'd when I told you 



I know your meaning; I did it to deceive you:
Therefore fight, or I will kill thee at all Advantages.





Be quick as Lightning to Revenge my wrongs,
Or as the thought that Executes.



Thou seest me ready now for thy heart.






Ha! what noise is this that Interrupts my rest?
Hark, I think I hear clashing of Swords:



I think thou hast it there:



Nothing Sir, come on.




'Tis my masters voice; what do you mean? If you are not the
Devill, I think the Devil's in you: now I'le be hang'd if this be not some
Smock-quarrell; a pox upon all women, but Whores I say! Murder,
help, help, Murder, Murder!


The Gentlemen part them.


What Screech-Owl voice is that, that crys out Murder?



'Tis I forsooth, Madam.



Ha! Alberto and Antonio! Oh Heavens what do I see?
Crackt not my eye-strings, when I view'd this sight?
Is Nature quite dissolv'd and at an end?
Sure such an Act as this must needs presage it.

Alberto's wounded too; oh horrid night!



O Spare this cruell show of pitty, Madam;
You shou'd have search'd your Champion first.



I am not wounded.



No matter, 'tis a Complement stretch'd too high,
Thus to prefer her manners to her Love.



Still Jealous! but your wounds are dangerous
Else I wou'd clear the banefull source of all.



Go on, dear Madam.



Know then Alberto that your friend is Noble,
If this last Action does not prove him base.



That word from you does brand him for a Villain.



'Twas he releas'd you.



By heaven 'tis false, all false as hell.



'Tis false indeed, for he releas'd himself,
Paid me the bloudy Fees at his departure,
And like a Coward shrunk and stole away.



By Heaven a general plot upon my virtue!



Oh cease your wonder Sir, and hear me out;
Declare the meaning of that Note you left,
For there's the Fatall spring of all this mischief.



I gave it you to read.



'Tis true you did, but I tore it.



'Twas from Antonio, he knows it well.



By all that's good I writ it not,
Nor know I what he means!



O were that but true which now thou sayst 



How shall I prove the truth?



I know not since it is torn and lost.



Sir, I've b•en guilty, and I cry peccavi, and I hope I shall before
I've done, make you cry so, to this fair Lady, and that Gentleman. Ricar∣do's
man gave me a Note which he said dropt out of his Masters pocket;
I read it and found it a Challenge from Antonio to you: now suspecting
that to be the occasion of your quarrell, I kept it up, and here 'tis for you;
the rest I'le tell you anon.





I thank thee with all my Soul, for thou'rt my better Genius.

Now read it Antonio, but read it to thy self


Lest the Contagion should infect the Air,
And blast my understanding with the horrid Sound.



Oh credulous Man, how hast thou been mistaken?


This is not writ by me.



Canst thou deny it?



By all that's Sacred I do Swear, 'tis not my hand.



Then I am happy, and yet wretched too,
Happy to find my friend and Mistriss true:
But, oh I have profain'd her spotless Virtue,
And plaid the Tyrant, where I should adore.
Thus let me implore your pardon, Madam,

That goodness which cou'd Love me when unman'd
Plead for me now, since I'me restor'd.



You cannot ask my Lord what I'de deny.



Thus then I Seal my pardon tho' unworthy:

Now let me pay my duty to my friend.





That name is fled with my Astella's life,
Then I forsook it, when you renounc'd Humanity.



Is that the wound? know then Astella lives.



Lives! Oh my Joy!



How cou'd you think i'de be so barbarous

  43To kill my Sister, and doubly wound my friend;
I only did it to excite your rage.



Then I forgive the rest, since I perceive
'Twas fury workt you to that height to wound m•

When I releas'd you from your prison.




Then here's another riddle to be solv'd;
I saw, nor spoke to no one but my Jaylor,
Who guided me by a back-way from prison.



Then 'twas Ricardo, whom I met i'th dark,
And who's the Cursed Authour of all these ills,
Now I can hold thee without fear of stinging,
No Viper hid in this close Embrace.




Oh my brother, let me for ever thus Enfold thee in my Arms;
And you Madam, that could pitty my distress,
Let me for ever thus embrace and kiss your feet;
Thus like the Ivy twine about your knees,
And live to all Eternity thus over-blest with joy.



Oh rise my best, my only dearest Lord;
Rise, and be for ever happy in my Arms.



Oh 'tis too much, too much for me my Soul,
Thou only Mirror of all thy God-like Sex,
Sure thou wert form'd in Heaven by hands divine,
Whilst Quires of Angels hover'd round the shrine,
And smil'd to see a Saint so good and fair
Born, to enrich the world and be its Heir.



My dear Alberto you forget your wound:



'Tis but small, and will but serve to punish me
For all my Crimes, and breach of Friendship.



Come, no more, we have been all too blame,
Thus fondly to believe what was not so;
But now the dire mistakes are known and plain,
And we will never be deceiv'd again.



Now Sir, pray hear me, when you were gone, I was studying to
prevent your Duell, but Ricardo (how led there to hear me, the Devil and
he best knows) came sneaking behind me, and o're-heard me talking to
my self, then told me that he understood your design of Fighting with
Antonio, which he said he wou'd prevent, so desir'd me to Entrust him
with your Safety, S•••ring (enough to damn him, if false) that you
were his dearest Friend, and that when your twatling-strings broke, his
heart-strings wou'd crack, the rest you know better then I.



'Tis plain, Ricardo is t•e Engeneer,
Who has been buzzing in my Fathers ears,
To undermine our peace and comfort.



If I was not afraid of being hang'd for my policy I wou'd con∣trive
to countermine this fellow.



We are thine for ever Lopez if thou dost.



Why then Sir, lend me that Suit of Cloaths which you have on,
with which I'le personate you for a while (I hope you're not offended at
the Comparison) then I'le seek out Bernardo, his Servant, whom I will so
pump and wire-draw, that you may see through his Master, but leave me
•o manage the rest.



It has a face indeed.



To morrow thou shalt have it Lopez,

And I will ever acknowledge thy kind Service.



I humbly thank your Lordship.



In what a Storm this strange mistake had cast me,
Tost on the Gloomy billows of despair,
Which heav'd by winds of Jealousy and rage,
Had almost rack'd my harrass'd Soul to ruine:
But since we're now in view of distant Land,
Once more i'le beg thee of thy angry Father
And drive away those Clouds oppress'd his Goodness:
Grant Heaven a happy issue to our troubles;
Give me but once to touch the promis'd shore,
And i'le embark on this rough Surge no more▪











THe Mornings chearfull Ray, now guilds •he World▪
And darts a joyfull Omen to my breast:
The Early Lark, tunes his shrill notes to Hymen,

Whilst every Bird does warble out the Chorus,

And deafen all the Murmurings of my grief.



'Tis true, great Sir, but yet this glittering form

  45May be a painted Cloud that ushers in a Storm.



Can you suspect your Masters word Ricardo

That thus you mutter out your brooding fears?
Is that a posture for a happy Bridegroom
Clad in that gloomy Visage, and with eyes
Fixt on the Earth, whilst Mounting to the skies?



Has not last Nights uproar, yet reach'd your ears
Which so allarm'd your Loyall Subjects fears?



It has not yet.



Then I must be the Informer;
(Wou'd Heaven, my duty, wou'd excuse my •ilence;)
Whether their plots have all turn'd head upon 'em,
And so compell'd 'em to this act, I know not;
But once more they have combin'd Sir, to deceive you,
Hoodwink your reason, and ecclipse your Judgment,
And make your ignorance patronize their Crime•▪







Just as the Pallace Clock struck one,
I am inform'd there was a busteling noise,
Like the first puffing of an Angry wind,
Which swells and bursts at last into a Storm:
Strait clashing Swords disturb'd the Slumbring night
Which (eccho'd by a dreadfull voice of Murder)
Chas'd Gentle Morpheus from the Princes eyes,
(For by design 'twas done near her Apartment)
She rose, urg'd by her pitty to their danger,
And with a few Attendants, strait descended:
But (heavens!) what was her wonder when she saw
The two disloyal friends engag'd in Fight?









The same, my Lord.



What should the meaning of their quarrell be?



You'le please to judge Sir, when you hear the rest:
To Countenance her pitty, Alberto receiv'd a wound,
Which when she mourn'd for and Enquir'd the Cause
He with a whining Scorn accus'd her Cruelty,
And bid her help Antonio, whom she lov'd;
He seem'd amaz'd at the new Jealousy▪
And ask't the grounds: the Note was then examin'd,
Which he (as well he might) deny'd to be his hand;
Next comes a daubing Scene of flattering Joy,

Alberto kneels, and weeping, begs her pardon
As all had been a Mistery to him:
Nay more (oh heavens what Impudence is this?)

  46They lay the crime, the spring of all to me,
And have design'd this Morning to accuse me,
When he shall beg Miranda Sir, of you.



Beg her of me, sure 'tis Impossible!
That they should dare to look me in the face;
As well they might behold an Angry Iove

When grim revenge sits furrow'd on his brow,
Ready to scatter ruine on th' Assailers,
All Lemnos brandisht in his hands at once.



But they've a Mist to lay before your eyes,
Will damp the Force of your avenging Thunder,
And melt your rage, to a refreshing dew.



'Tis moulded proof, against their weak attempts;
But to begin, I promis'd you my daughter
And with her take my heart for ever.

Go call the Princess here.




Great Sir, she has prevented me, she's here.



Hell and Confusion! what's this I see
Or my sense fails, or 'tis Alberto with her.


By all my wrongs 'tis he! oh my salt bloud
Burst, burst your Channels, over-flow your Banks,
And let my veins be fill'd with Liquid fire,
Quite to devour this Gorgon, that unmans me,
Thus let all Villains dye.










Ricardo off, for 'tis in vain to stop me.



My Life Sir be the forfeit for th' offence,
Consider Sir who 'tis, that does oppose you,
'Tis I your Faithfull Slave, who wou'd rather dye
Then see your honour blemish'd by this rashness:
How wou'd the censuring World condemn you Sir,
If in your rage you shou'd Sentence one untry'd,
And be your self the Executioner;
Not but I wish his death, cause he deserves it,
But to dye thus wou'd make him Innocent
And •ame secure, he's punisht but by halves.



Why this contention for a wretched life?
Villain I know it is the game you hunt for:

But yet you think 'tis not toil'd enough for death:
You wou'd have me linger out a Hell on Earth
See you possest of all Miranda's Charms:

  47Bu• Traytor know, I have a Sword can reach thee,
And spite of Loyallty, respect, or Duty,
Rip out the heart that violates my Love
And cool the warmth which nourishes thy flame.



He has guest my wishes.




Yes, hellish Monster, know,
There's yet a greater bar to oppose thy way,
A Rock of Adamant, and so Impenetrable
That thou Villain with Legions like thy self,
No, nor the Hell thou carry'st in thy breast,
Can ever melt, or force away.



Insolent Pair! but now they've doom'd themselves,
And by my Masters Soul, they both shall dye.



Pardon, Great Sir, those unbecoming words
Forc'd by a just resentment of my wrongs;
I mean't not to defend that life which you had proscrib'd,
Thus I Surrender it unto your Justice.




We'l take the forfeit Sir, you need not doubt.





But to dye silent were a guilt too great,
To leave you in a wilde of treachery
Lost to your honour, govern'd by an abject Slave,
And fair Miranda Subject to his treason:
That I confess does make my tongue unruly,
Oh Sir, forgive that beauteous Innocence,
And leave her will as heaven has made it, free:
And here I swear by you bright Sun that Shines,
And by th' Eternal Mover of the Spheres,
To hush this rising tempest in my Breast,
And fall a willing Victim to her peace;



Oh my Alberto, your zeal is too unkinde,
Think not your Death can give Miranda ease,
For here I swear, by all the Powers above,
Your life and mine shall have an equall date.



Damn his hypocrisy, and thy foolish fondness,
by heaven the Spaniard is not in thee Girl,
But I delay: Guards seize that Impious Traitor.




Yet hear me Sir, before you throw away
That precious Gem upon a thing so vile,
And smear that Diamonds lustre with so foul a soil.



Silence that croaking voice, Perfidious Monster!
He is my Son, and each affront is mine:
But to inhance thy mighty sum of woes
Live to behold thy Iuno snatch'd away
Thy Soul rack'd in a Dungeon by delay,
A Cloud of darkness for the Suns bright Ray.

  48But yet in pitty, she shall stay a while
And all thy sorrows with her tears beguile.
Pitty? Yes Italian pitty! may her eyes
Each attome of thee, make their Sacrifice;
Be, like two Basilisks, which may devour
At each remembrance of their cruell Power,
Then flash thee dead, and kill thee every hour.




Why this is generous to spare his life:
Nay, let him talk long as he might be heard,
It is not I'me unjust then, but his fate.

Well, I'le away to young Antonio,

Tell him what? let me see! his Mistriss's dead,
Slain by Alberto: this will work him up,
And of his friendship, make an useless Cypher,
Which I'le fill up with horrid black revenge.
Then in compassion, I'le release Alberto

(Whom I'le infect with some new found Chym•ra)
And grant 'em both an enterview;
By this I make sure my game on either hand,
For both will seek to excuse me to the Vice-Roy:

Thus like the hidden hand of fate I work,
Kill and destroy whilst none can see the blow,
And friend and Mistriss be each others foe.




Oh my Miranda, 'twas a harsh decree
That I must never, never see thee more
Ne're (blest with Love, and surfeiting with joy)
Lean on the rising pillows of thy breast,
And there in gentler raptures dream the rest:
Credit me Madam, but 'tis wondrous sad.



Do not despair Alberto, my best, and only Love,
For Fortunes Cruelty, is as inconstant as her favour.
But let her vent her malice, still there's hope;
Time's but a rowling tide, which flows a while,
Stays not, but strait with murmuring joy does ebb,
Into the Ocean of Eternity:
Thither we'le launch; there Landed on the shore
Above the reach of Fate, or cruell Fathers,
We'le spend an Immortality of Love.



Oh my Soul! my blest Angell speak again,
Thy charming words and sight can cure despair,
They •ull my griefs asleep, and make me tame
And I am all joy, all extasy again.
But oh, I never must behold thee more
An angry Demon hurries me away

  49And drags me from the Heaven I now possess;
That thought renews my grief, and galls my heart;
There I confess my Courage shrinks and dyes,
More than when death was in my view in War,
My crowded breast teem'd with a thousand joys,
Which in an Instant are all made abortive,
But yet a single plague's too small for me,
For heaven has doom'd Miranda to a Villain.
That beauteous Casket to be rif•'d by a Slave.



Can you then still suspect my Faith Alberto?

But •ince (oh torture!) 'tis the last proof which I can give,
Hear me ye Powers, and you Alberto hear me,
If ever I consent to be Ricardo's
Tho' all the Tortures hell can e're invent
Combine to force my will, oh may I never 



Forbear, oh forbear that Cruel Sentence on thy self,
I have been impious, but forgive me heaven;
And oh Miranda live, altho' Ricardo's;
What hast thou done, that heaven shou'd punish thee?
Or how hast thou deserv'd to share my griefs?



Can Love then be so bad a Councellour,
Or can Alberto wish me so unhappy?
Perhaps you doubt the frailty of my Sex,
And think that death can shake my Female valour;
But know, when danger runs in a Carreer,
Love takes the wing, and soars above all fear.



By heaven I doubt thee not; but do not rob
The world, by taking all that's good away:



When you are gone, what's left that's worth my stay?



My Lord, your time is past, you must to Prison:



I will; but one look more and then I've done:
Here must I take a long farewell to Love.

Oh my Miranda, when the Fates allow,
That false Ricardo must possess thy heart,
When he shall reap the harvest of my joys,
Give but one sigh, one tear, to poor departed me,
And it will crown my wandring shade with peace.



Think not of dying.



Yes, I must Miranda;

For Death's the only blessing I have left:
Yet must I blame the malice of my Stars.
Then when I'de wandred thro' the Coasts of night,
To seek some comfortable streak of Light;
Then when my eye had Paradice in view,

  50Thus to Ecclipse my rising Sun anew:
Or as a Vulture when he ••ies the round,
To seize some spotless Dove, which havi•g found,
With greedy joy he mounts up to the skies,
Whilst he does Revell on his lovely prize,
And with a scornfull Gl•nce the World despise;
When strait some well-arm'd Eagle stops his Flight,
Forces the trembling Quarry from his sight,
And hurles him head-long to the shades of Night.
So, when I had reach'd thee thro' a dreadful maze,
And after all my doubts, my Soul found ease;
Midst of my Triumphs fo• my glorious prey,
The Tyrant Power does snatch thee quite away.










My Country Sir, I've told you is Sicily;

Whence banisht by my wants, I'me hither come
To find relief; my name is Florimo.




What's this to me? I prithee leave me Boy.



Alas I cannot Sir: I've heard so much
Of your Renown and Generosity,
That I must stay, and win your favour.
Besides I've heard you are a Lover Sir,
And such a one I wou'd desire to serve:
Sure this will sound him.




I was indeed a happy Lover once!




Ha! Once did he say? oh heavens, then 'tis too true:




But now my Love is gone I know not whither:
My Dear Astella, if thou'rt fled to heaven,
Oh let me know•t, that I may follow thee;
If still on earth, I'le pray the whispering winds
That they'de conduct me to thy dark abode,
I'le beg the Trees to bow their leafy heads
And point me out the Mansion of my Love.
What shall I think? for to suspect thy truth,
Or doubt Alberto's words, were sure a Crime.



I know not what this musing does portend,
But I will try him once again. My noble Lord,
Cast not a wretched youth to the wide world,
Who cannot live a moment absent from you.

  51Why are you sad? Give me to know the Cause

I'le sit and sing and charm your griefs asleep,
Lye at your feet like weeping Philomell,

And hush your sorrows with my pleasing airs:
And when the morning dawns, I'le be your Lark,
To wellcome with my joyfull notes the coming day,
Thus we'le perform, and pass the time away;
Thus spend the melancholy hours, making grief a pleasure,
And scorning all the follies of the laughing world.



Such pleasing softness did I never hear;
And still the more I look, the more I still desire;
In every feature methinks I read Astella;

The very air that bears the charming sounds,
Ecchoes Astella to my wondring ears.
R•se gentle Youth, so sweet an advocate
Must needs obtain the cause tho' ne're so hard:
If then (kind Florimo) you'd share in a disorder'd heart,
And be the sad Companion of my woes 
But do not, for they'l blast thy tender form,
And wither all thy blooming hopes to death.



Alas 'tis all the blessing I wou'd wish
To share your woes, since I'me already
More unfortunate and wretched then you er'e can be.



Oh 'tis impossible! but tell me how thou art wretched.



By Love that soft disturber of my peace,
And by my friend.



Grant heaven it be not so with me.




Doubt not your Mistriss safety, nor your Friend,
If conscious innocence says you love her still.



Love her! thy silly question stabs my very Soul;
None can behold Astella and not love her:
Not Orpheus when he charm'd the fiery gates of hell,
And gain'd an entry to the vast abiss
Had half that Love for his Euridice;

Nor when he rescu'd from the God of night
His beauteous prize, and the same hour lost her,
Felt half my hell of torture and despair.



Oh charming words! which like Promethean fire,
Kindles the embers of expiring life and love;
And like the Arabian Chimist can extract
A Ph•nix from the ashes of her Sire!
My Joy's too great to be contain'd:
Here let me breath my Soul out at your feet

And fly an Angell to the other world,

  52Refin'd by so divine a good as yours.



What means the Youth? Rise, and resolve my doubts,
Why does my declaration thus affect you?



Tune to his voice, ye musick of the spheres,
To finde such virtue 'mongst corrupted Man,
Is sure a Subject for Fames golden Trumpet;
To find your Love like Vestall fire guarded,
(When every foe does lend a breath against it)
Safe and un•ully'd in that hollow'd Shrine.



So nice a sence of virtue from a Boy
Is strange, and must proceed from •omething stranger.



I Swore to wander thro' the spacious world
(Till death wou'd put an end to all my woes)
To finde some Lover of so clear a truth,
The same when slighted, or his Mistriss dead;
And now I've found the noblest of our Sex
I'le be your Servant, or your Sacrifice,
And never part, till parted from my self.



I am amaz'd at such surprizing words,
But 'tis a pleasing wonder: Come my Boy,
I'le crown thy wishes, thou'rt mine for ever,

Instruct my Virtue, that seeing thee I may
Read Lectures of Astella every day;
But yet I want to know the Story of thy life,
The many wrongs thou hast sustain'd and pass'd
And all the pretty murmurings of thy grief.



By a long Siege I Storm'd my Mistriss heart,
And took the Guarded Fortress of her Love;
Next when i'de got my only friends consent,
The Brother of my destin'd Bride Lestella,

No Isthmus seem'd to bar me from my joys:
When on the fatall Dawn before our Marriage,
Urg'd by I know not what mistake, my friend
Went to his Mistriss, call'd her false and perjur'd;
Said, he or I, that Night must leave the World;
At night I heard of his Imprisonment,
Attended with a thundering peal of Curses,
From the fair Mistriss of my Friend: At length
I by my vows to free him had appeas'd her.
Madded with rage I did mind my own
Who with a charming grief reproach'd my falshood;
I had not time to answer her Complaints,
But flung away in hast unto my friend
Whom I releas'd, but he escap'd my sight

  53Strait I receiv'd from him a dreadfull Note,
Which stab'd me with the News of my Lestilla's death,
Who fell a Victim to his Jealousy.
Despairing, I abandon'd Sicily,

And careless of my fate, am hither come,
To wander like a banish'd Criminal quite forlorn.
This sure will try him since my other fails.




What words are these, or is it but a dream?
A Vision of Astella, thus adorn'd,

Who comes to try the truth of her suspicions?
If that my wonder (gentle youth) wou'd give me leave
I'de say thou hast sav'd me the unwellcome trouble
Of telling thee the Story of my life,
Since thou hast so truly weav'd it with thy own.



Not so I hope Sir, is your Mistriss dead?



There sticks my sate, and leaves me in a maze:
If dead, what then remains, but strait to follow her?



You speak, my Lord, in riddles;
If she be dead, you wou'd dye to follow her,
And at the same time own you Love her not.



Thou dost not understand me right my Boy▪
Be witness all ye Powers that knew our hearts,
How much I lov'd that dear departed Saint?







Oh that I cou'd resolve thee!
My Friend enrag'd told me he had slain her,
But soon recanted, and I as soon believ'd,
Yet now some strange suggestions press my heart anew,
And fix my wandring fancy to her Image.



I hope he'le not repent of this kind grant:

Shall I my Lord, to sooth your sorrows, Sing?



Do my Boy, whilst I repose me on this bank
And bear a part with thee.

Both sing. After the Song she speaks▪


Rise; Rise my Lord, I see one coming hither,
With a grave pace, as big with some design.



It is Ricardo; Florimo away
And wait me in the next walk.




This is the Cause I fear of all our dire mistakes,

  54Now Studying some new Plot: I'le observe him.



Thus Virtue's ever clouded with disgrace,
A Princes favour cannot dart a beam,
But on a Barren or Infectious land,
And always must be partiall in his choice.



He mutters State-Affairs: but let him on.



Therefore the two young Heroes of the Court,
Envy my Honour, and sicken at my greatness,
As if my rise must be upon their Necks
But still my Virtue shall out brave their little malice:
I will convince the unbelieving world,
There is a man that can be great and good at once,
And then retire to Solitude for ever.



Why this is strange!



But oh that cannot be 
There lyes some Mistery in the womb of Night,
Which Loyalty Commands me to unravell,
Besides to leave Antonio's Virtue toil'd,
Deluded by his friends Hypocrisy 
But that's a Plot, and I'me a base Informer
There's my reward but Virtue pays it self.



Each word does swell my wonder!




Alberto's Actions must have some design,
But let Heaven be Judge of that, not I.
This fresh account of Horrour I've receiv'd

Antonio must know Yes 'tis resolv'd,
Tho' for i• he call me undermining Traytor,
Yet I'le respect my conscience, not his words.



Each words a Thunderbolt, and strikes me dead,
No double-meaning can be hid in this.



Who's that? my Lord Antonio?








How does your Lordship?



Why well I think Ricardo;




Long may you be so:



I thank you Sir▪ But good Ricardo,

If I may be so bold, what were your thoughts
Employ'd about?



'Tis an Imp•rtant bus'ness which I think of,
How virtue does decay in every age,
And in particular that Cordiall Friendship
How Pylades's Examples are quite forgot,
And how the Sign of Gemini above,

〈◊〉•opied ill by Mortalls here below.







Therefore my Lord, beware
How you permit a seeming Friend to creep too close,
Le•t in the bottom there shou'd lurk an Adder.



Be plainer in your Counsell.




Too plain I fear for your repose!







Yes, so I said:
Your friend Alberto (mark me well) is false
The Wounds he gave, but seemingly he heal'd,
For they still rankle, fester, and eat the deeper,
And may in time destroy you.




You come not with your false deluding Beacons

To warn my easy nature from the Sands
That you may split my friendship on a Rock;
For if thou dost, death, hell, and ruine,
And all their black attendants shall not save thee:
You have had the mask on long enough,
Therefore now unveil thy self Ricardo,

And show the villain in his native dye:



This I expected; and therefore take my leave,
An honest man is never safe at Court;
Sir, you may find flatterers enough
To tell you what you wou'd believe, not what you ought to know▪
Who'l varni•h all your losses with a smile;
Nay, make you think the Sun shines in a storm,
When thickest clouds do interpose their shade,
And when the heavens are all in mutiny, rain fire
Rain blood upon your better part, your second self:
But he's a fool, who to convince another
(Whose looks speak hatred, and his words proclaim it)
Will hazard both his person, and his fame:
Such bigotted honour shall have no Prosolite of me.




Stay Sir, for to secure that fame you prize so much
It will concern you to inform me more.



Not when I know, I shall not be believ'd.



Now by my Sword, I'le force it from your tongue,
And if thou prov'st not every word thou utterest,
I'le hurl a heavier load of misery upon thee
Than that which Atlas with his weighty Globe
Does groan beneath.



How fond is Man, and easy to beleive,

  56When words are daub'd with flattery, and mask'd with Love,
But truth in its plain habit will not pass:
My Lord, to shew how I despise your threats
I'le ease my conscience of the mighty Secret,
But arm your self against the fierce assault
For horror dwells with every fatall word.



Why dost thou kill me with such cruell doubts?



I will no more: the fair Astella, Sir 




Astella, Speak; the very name's a Charm.



It must be Sir the name; that's all that's left.



Ha! what of her?



Why she is murder'd, base and barbarously murder'd.







By her own Brother's orders, murder'd.



Patience ye Gods, oh give me patience heaven!
One moments patience, and I'le beg no more.
By all things Sacred, in those fatall words,
Or one, or both of us are doom'd to dye;
If they be false, there's something worse then death,
Nay (if possible) then Damnation shall sure attend thee,
If true, then I'me the Victim.




A rough hewn fellow, Servant to Alberto,

Thus with a penitential look, accosted me:
Sir, by my Masters threats, I've been compell'd
To Act a little piece of Villany,
But my ill-natur'd Conscience flying in my face,
I thought to ease it by Confession,
I slew a Lady whom •e order'd me
Veil'd in a Wood; but that was nothing Sir,
Till I discover'd it to be Astella,

My old dead Masters only Daughter.



Furries and Devils tear the Barbarous Villain
Oh I am all a burning Aetna her• within!
But if thou prov'st it, I am satisfied.



Let the Revenge confirm it which I took
Impatient Virtue forc'd me to the deed,
I slew him strait, without as much as asking
Where the untimely Sacrifice was laid.



Enough, I am confirm'd she's gone.
Oh Tyrant-friend, was she a Subject for your rage,
Cou'd not those glorious rays from her fair eyes
Melt down thy icy temper to compassion?
But I forget, 'tis I'me her murderer,

  57And therefore thus will pay the cruell debt.




Hold, hold my Lord!





Wilt thou again give edge to my suspitions,
By hindring me of my desir'd bliss?
Death doubly is my due.
The morning wheels to gloomy night again,
To give directions where I shou'd reside;
The Sun seems like a faint and beamless fire
To warn the expiring Taper of my Life,
And all but you conspire to work my Joy.



By all that's good, I will not oppose it,
But yet you are not ripe enough for death,



Not when despair does call me hence?




Are you Italian born, or some hot Frenchman,

Who when capricious fortune frowns upon him
Strait punishes her crime upon himself;
At least since she does sit above our reach,
Let us revenge it on her instruments.



Touch not that string, for it inflames my heart,
And kindles wild-fire in my troubl'd breast;
I wou'd not think upon the Villain more,
And therefore I wou'd cease to think at all.



'Tis wonderous well! how will the censuring world
Say Naples is a Den of Caniballs,
Where Paricide and murder is a sport
And go unpunish't by the better sort?
By Mars your tameness does unspirit me
But I'le away, and take revenge my self,
Since such a Cause shou'd arm the world against him.





Stay, for I feel a glowing heat within me
Eat up my friendship, and I am all on fire.



What shou'd this mean?



Cherish the noble flame
And let your wrongs heighten the generous rage:
If Alexander for a Fav'rites loss
(Who peri••t by a Natural Enemy)
Made all the Eastern World his Funeral pile,
And glutted Death with crowded Hecatombs?
What shou'd you do, who see a Mistriss slain,
Slain by a Man, who call'd himself your friend?
Death, Hell, and Vengeance will you suffer it?
Methinks my Arm does tremble to my Sword,

  58And by instinct Commands me to unsheath it.



No, no, the brave Revenge belongs to me:
Bloud, talk of bloud; I will have bloud Ricardo,

But there's a Prison bars him from my fury,
Away Impediments, you shall not hinder,
For tho' he speeds away to Hell, i'le after;
Shoot like a flaming Vulture thro' the dark abyss,
Till I might fix my beak in his false heart:
Nay tho' the Christal Gates of Heaven were ope
And waiting to receive my Soul to joy,
In Hell i'de linger an Eternity,
That I might double all Alberto's Plagues,
And make it hotter with the Flames I bear.



Alas that Villain has infected him,
But I've an Antidote will expell the poyson.



Why this my Lord becomes your injuries:
Since you'r resolv'd i'le further your revenge;
Wait in this Garden at the approach of Night,
And i'le take care to send Alberto to you.



O kind Ricardo, in this obligation
You've reach'd the utmost bounds of my desire:
Wheel on the never-tir'd Post of Heaven,
Fly swiftly to thy wanton Goddess Arms
That I may fly to my revenge: Farewell,
When next we meet, expect to see me chang'd,
Roab'd like the Setting Sun in bloudy red,
Or pale as sickning Stars, and as spent Meteors dead.




I'le after him, and learn the mistery.




Fly to thy ruine, fond believing Fool,
Thou know'st not what it is to take revenge,
For Nemesis delights in Woods, not Cities,
In dark Cabals, and not in open War:
Yes my new friend I'le send Alberto to you,
And reconcile your differing Constitutions,
Both shall breath nought but sulphur and destruction;
Therefore some new Chimaera I will study
Which his friend Alberto must be sent to kill.





Well, now I have gotten these Cloaths on, methinks I'me as grea•
a Person as my Master, and for ought I know, 'tis the comely person with∣in
makes the Gentleman, according to the Proverb, fine Birds make fine
Feathers: Let me see 




If I shou'd tell him that his Mistress's false;
Ric walks off as in the Garden.

But stay that Topick's grown too obsolete.



Clean Limbs, handsome gait, Noble appearance! pitty these qua∣lifications
shou'd be thrown away upon a Serving-Man: Well, if my face
answers these, 'twill grieve me to retire to my primitive Rascallity, and

Heavens defend me! Seignior Lopez I shou'd as soon think it were an Angel:
now will I exercise my parts upon my self, for such an Object must needs
inspire Oratory, tho' I am brim-full of it already. Seignior, if Iupiter had
borrow'd one of your eyes for a dark Lanthorn, he might have fought his
Enemies with a double advantage: (answers) O Dear Sir, a little clear
and sharp indeed I must confess; I make use of 'em sometimes for my di∣version
to wound and kill poor silly Ladies, but for the rest Nay good
sweet Seignior, you ravish me with the Excellency of your gestures: every
part of you dances, as it were, to the Musique of the Spheres, and swims
like the Lambent fires above in a Caelestial motion. O Seignior 


Ha! interrupted? what Malicious Star envi'd me the happiness of hear∣ing
my self prais'd by so accomplisht a person of honour as Seignior
Lopez.



Confusion! what, Alberto here, and free?
Or does my wandring sense deceive me?
That it is he, 'tis plain; but how escap'd,
Or if escap'd, how venturing to stay here,
I must confess amazes me to think!



I'le vex this saucy fellow for disturbing me.




I'me on a R•ck, till I can learn the meaning:
With what a haughty negligence he bears himself?



I have a good mind to tell him to his face, he's a very uncivil per∣son,
and to make good what I said, if he threatens to beat me, i'le beg his
pardon. But then he'de discover who I am: no, no, that must not be.



There's no way left to sound this mistery,
But to begin the harrangue which I've prepar'd.
My Lord I have a secret of Importance 
Still the same port, that scornfull gay behaviour!
In what a mist of Errour have I been?
A Sacrifice here Staulks in State before me
And sleeping vice, still dreads to give the blow.
The place is silent, and the Aiding Trees,
With bended branches cover the offence;
Besides Antonio's rage will cloak the deed
And they'l condemn him for the Murderer:
It shall be so•; the next turns his last:
So 


End thus thy Pride and Love together.



Ha betray'd! my honour wounded?

  60Help, Murder, help: I am kill'd, I'me dead! oh!



His life is fled away with that last groan:
Now fly Ricardo, manage well this game,
And future Ages shall extoll thy fame.




So, is he gone? pox of his kindness: what's here! My voice has
alarm'd some of the Counrtiers, but I'le send 'em away like fools as they
come, I warrant 'em.






This way the d••adfull voice directed us.



And here's the occasion; Heavens! 'tis Alberto!




What horrid Mistery is this! how came he free?



And murder'd too? a Riddle by my Soul.
Let's to the Vice-Roy, who walks i'th' Garden,
For 'tis too deep for us to dive into.




So, I find I shall have now the whole Court about me: but i'le
prepare my self to receive 'em: I may thank my self for letting the sword
run betwixt my arms▪ I had been spoil'd else; I think I defended my
self as if I had eyes behind. Well now for my Glass; I fear this bus'∣ness
has disorded me pox o' your ill-breeding to spoil a good face,
and tumble ones perriwig and Crevat: I must not be seen in this
pickle, therefore i'le go home and new vamp my •elf. A plague of this No∣bility,
if for a fine Coat one must be continually in danger of having his
throat cut, or spitted thro' the loins like a Spar-rib of Pork. I'de rather
be hang'd than dye an untimely death, there's no satisfaction in't; but see
they are coming, 'twere best for me to be gone, lest I be taken, and put
in the bakers pulpit for counterfeiting.







Impossible! it cannot be Alberto.




Let your own eyes convince you Sir▪

Ha! where's is the dead man, fled away?
Some hungry Devill sure has seiz'd on him.



Am I a Subject of your Follies Slaves?



Pray Sir believe us: Alberto did lye here▪
But whither it was done designedly,
To colour his escape from Prison,
And co•sen us with his pretended death
That you might cease pursuit, I know not.



Or else perhaps the Murderers fearing
His corps being •ound, (a narrow search shou'd be about it)
Convey'd it hence and buried it:
But these two Gentlemen can witness,
That they too saw him dead.



My Lord we did.



'Tis strange, but yet I will believe it;

  61Death he deserv'd for his Ingratitude:
But tho' my passion boil'd a while, I'me glad
He met it from another hand, not mine:
For now with safety I bestow my Daughter,
And crown desert with what it long has sought.
Perhaps it may remove Miranda's Scruples,
And death may set her heart at Liberty:
Thus Providence is always heavens Avenger,
And weilds the Sword of Justice 'gainst th' unjust.
How'ere the Great resolve, and wise debate,
She rules alone, our happiness or fate.










LOpez have you perform'd, what you engag'd to do?
For in that riddle is my fate Entangl'd.







Thou hast! that word is Musick to my Soul.



But first Sir, as a reward, satisfy my inquisitiveness, and inform
me what trick you've got to break thro' Prisons, and shake off your fet∣ters
thus?



Know then a wedge of Gold has knock'd 'em off,
A Golden Key has charm'd the Prison doors;
My Jaylor too, whom I assur'd of safety
(To help my escape) has lent me this disguise.
For tho' my Stars have frown'd so long upon me,
I doubt not but they'le smile, and look serene again,
And my Innocence shine in its proper sphere
Whilst Treachery is drag'd unto the Center,
And sink into the Hell from whence it sprung.



Well Sir, I have unlockt Bernardo's tongue too, but without a Fee;
in short, he has laid all his Masters damn'd Villany as open to me, as if he had
been Ricardo, and I his Ghostly Father; he has confirm'd your suspitions of
the Note, and moreover his Masters hiring some hackny bloud-hounds;
(whose game is death, and reward Damnation) to murder you▪



What niggard mixture of Felicity
The angry Gods allow me;
Twice have they snatch'd me from the jaws of death,
Twice have they freed me from a loathsome Dungeon,
That no Corporeal pain might e're obstruct
My relishing the torment of despairing love;
But now a comfortable dawn of hope

  62Reflects the promise of a coming day.
Where is Bernardo, that kind Engeneer
Who has blow'd the Villain up with his own hellish train?



Where is he Sir? why I have done with him as spunging Courtiers
do with their Clients, squeez'd all the honey out, and then thrown away
the useless comb, and the Drone that made it:



Why dost thou serve they Master still by halves?
Run and conduct him to me, fly quickly:



As quick as lightning; Sir.







Let these effeminate Sluces be dam'd up,
It is a grief too light to Solemnize
Murder'd Astella's Funeral Exequies:
A silent tear shall trickle from my heart,
At each remembrance of her bloudy fate,
But if in spite of me you'l play the woman,
Be like the Marble, when the Conquering flames
Dilate its well-knit pores, and drein its moisture,
Spring from an inward Stimulating heat,
Scorching as is the sweat of Heaven, when the air
Is rent asunder, by the warring Clouds.




Antonio here! Good heavens how kind you are,
To crown my wishes at their very birth!




Take heed Sir, here•s some bold Ruffian in disguise:



Fear not my boy, my Stars are not so kind.



Sir, I wou'd entreat a word with you in private.

Alb. takes him apart & disco∣vers himself.



Ha! do I dream, or is the Villain here?
Away my Boy.



I cannot leave you here.



Away you must, you shall, deny me not.




'Twas my desire too that he should leave the place,
For now I've time to tell thee all my fortune,
The various winding of my restless fate.



What means the Traitor?




Besides I must enquire,
And you can give me best intelligence;
Why does my Sister thus absent from Court,
And dim its lustre by her close retirement?



Hear Heavens this matchless impudence, and blush,
Does not that name like a loud night alarm
Spread a chill horrour thro' thy trembling veins,
And chase thy bloud from out the desert Channels?



Good Gods this tune again!





  63Dost thou not see the Monster that pursues thee?
Look how it yawns like a devouring whirl-pool,
As if it meant to swallow thee alive:
His eyes are burning Glasses, whence proceed
Such sulphurous flames, whose Stench will blast thy senses;
What noisome mists are belcht from his gaping mouth?
His tongue spits floods of Venome, and his reaching tail
Sweeps down whole Mountains: on his Cristed back
So many massy Spheres arise, that you wou'd swear
Whole Armies came to your destruction.



I can see nought.




Draw and prepare to meet it's fury.




I fear you rave; what must I fight with shadows?



Then to be plain, it lodges here Alberto,

Here is the Den of the Infernal beast,
Which gnaws upon my Bowells, till it finds
Its destin'd Prey; Its name's Revenge.



Revenge from you indeed does seem a Monster.



Curse on your Cowardly delays, wilt thou draw?



Not till I know the cause of this strange fury.



I scarce have so much patience as to tell thee:
Thou hadst a Sister, I a mistriss once.



And hope I have one yet, why what of her?



Ha! has that name no horrour in it yet;
Canst thou remember her without a blush?



Yes my Antonio, when I think of her
I have less guilt than I expected;
For if my wronging her's my only fault,
Heavens knows I am innocent.




Hell is then Divine
Less Tyranny and horrour harbours there:
If for to kill a Sister be a Virtue
Let me be vicious heaven.



What means this passion?



Ha! is she dead then? oh my misconstruing Soul!
By what untimely fate?




I shall grow mad: give me some temper Gods!
No, No, it cannot be her murder'd Ghost
Lashes me with her bloudy dabled Tresses
And prompts me to revenge; thus I will take it.



O stay your barbarous hand from this black deed,
Which but to speak of wou'd canker the mouth of fame,

  64And make your memory infectious.



Away, or thro' thy heart i'le force a passage.



Thro' it then Sir, rip every Artery,
How willingly i'de part with all my blood,
To quench this raging fire in your breast;
By all the powers we serve, you shall not pass
Untill you tell the cause that moves you thus.



Insolent feeble thing stand not the blast,
Which dire Revenge is pouring on its prey.





No, let him come, for I'me prepar'd to meet him,
Nor will I stir, unless discharg'd by death,

Untill I learn the Story of my Sisters fate.





My Noble Lord, give me to know his crime,
And with this arm i'le further your revenge.



Oh Florimo! thou dost renew my grief:
Is't not a crime my Boy to kill a Sister
So beauteous, so divine? (oh my sad Soul!)
That heaven has lost the mould it form'd her in,
And grieving at the matchless work it made
In envy cropt her in her early bloom.



And is't for this, you've griev'd since first I saw you?
Was't for her you shed so many tears,
And follow now those showers with a storm?



Is there not Cause my Boy?



Oh my Charm'd Soul?
Keep still that love, unless you'de have me dye.
But follow not this false deluding Fire,
Which draws you to the ruine of your friend:
Your Mistriss is alive, your words have rais'd her,
And look how in my habit she appears.



By heaven 'tis she! oh to my arms my Love,

Yet closer; in this circle let me grow▪
Speak once again, speak thou Charmer of my Soul,
Whilst all the Ravish'd Spheres shall cease their noise,
And listen unto thee: Forgive me Heaven,
Who dar'd to call your Bounteous care in question.
But speak; Dear Saint, say what relenting God
Has sav'd thee from those sacrilegious hands
Which sought to ruine so divine a Fabrick.



O forbear thus to reproach your friend,
Some Villain has betray'd you to this rage:
I thought you false when so reserv'd to me,
And in this habit came to try my fate;

  65But since I've found the error of my Jealousy
Let me cement your seperated friendship,
And gain my pardon, by restoring him.



Thy pardon! Oh that word's a dagger to me,
And makes me see the foulness of my crime,
A Crime for which my expiating tears,
Can never merrit pardon from Alberto;

How shall I dare to look on so much goodness,
Which I've prophan'd with my unjust suspitions?



Your constancy in love has cancell'd all.



Is such Divinity then left on earth,
Shall these unhallow'd arms have leave t'embrace thee?



Thus let us quite forget our dire mistakes.





But I must ne're forgive these credulous ears,
Which listen'd to Ricardo's painted tale;
Oh! such a dismall Scheme of horrour he had drawn
As stifl'd all consideration in me:
So that when e're a start of reason bar'd me,
The black Idea flew before my fancy
And drove the murmuring vanquisht from my breast.



But now my friend, since the dire Vision's fled,
Let us away, and Court the Vice-Roys favour;
For by that happy instrument, my man,
I've gain'd a spell to Charm his Spanish rage.



I will: but thou my Love retire, and appear
No more my Servant, but the mistriss of my Soul.



This habit has befriended me so much,
That 'twere ingratitude to throw it off,
Untill my joys compleat.





This was a treacherous trick Lopez, but I'le forgive you, if you'l
make good your promise. Sir since it must be so, I here stand ready to
witness all that I have said.




ne're fear it; tho' every word were false:



'Tis well: but yet to gain the Vice-Roys credit,
'Tis requisite the Soldiers shou'd be there:
Art thou acquainted with them Bernardo?




As well as they are with their Trade of Murder Sir▪



Go find 'em out, and bring 'em to the Pallace.
Now Friend and Sister let us hast to Court,
And with enflam'd desires let's all entreat
The Guardian Powers of innocence above,
To punish Villany and smile on Love.







I beg you Sir, dismiss these needless fears.



O' thou'st undone me with they Loyalty,
Thou like a blasting-winde did'st rove about
To seek a breath of pestilentiall air,
Which having found thou drov'st it not away,
But enviously scatter'd the death around,
And blew the dire contagion into me.

Mendoza's▪ family is quite extinct,
The only Branch that's left is withering,
And leaves the Sapless Oak to mourn its loss.



Not so my Lord, a Virgins tears flow easy
And naturall as tydes; and like to them
They've all their ebbs. Tho' she may mourn awhile,
Time and the grave will banish dea•Alberto,

And give admittance to another Lover.



But time and she will not be long ally'd,
A Winding-Sheet must be the geniall bed,
A Funerall-Dirge the Hymeneall Song
And greedy Worms the only joyfull guests.
Had'st thou but seen, how when I did approach her
With rowling eyes she wander'd o're my Visage,
And learn't the story e're I was aware,
But when my foolish tongue explain'd my looks,
She stood all Pale and motionless, as is a Marble Statue,
And with a silent glance reproacht my joy,
Strait starting as she were upon the wing,
She snatch'd a Dagger offering at her breast,
Which when our hasty zeal disarm'd her of,
Then came the storm: her golden tresses torn,
Two different elements warr'd in her cheeks
The air that swell'd 'em, and the fire enflam'd 'em,
Whilst the obstinate strings above, congeal'd and wanting ven•,

•efus'd a drop to quench the eager flame:

  67Her breath too, which before was calm and Spicy,
As is Arabia's gentle eastern breeze,
Which fanns and opens all the balmy sweets,
Now sends out nought but rage 'gainst the heavens,
Mingl'd with curses of her cruell Father,
Strait like the dying Portia she exclaim'd,
Altho' this fails, there are a thousand ways to dye,
Kind Death will lend a dart to them that seek it,
Nor will his arrow suffer a repulse,
How'er vain man thinks he is arm'd against it.



Oh! how he stings me with his Eloquence,
His rage the hinge on which my fortune hangs,
Will be quite melted by this foolish mourning.
Aside
My Lord, you'l give me leave to wonder, that
So mild a temper shou'd be thus enrag'd.



O' thou'rt a stranger to that fatall passion:
Does not the gentlest Stream when 'tis oppos'd,
Break out into a rappid inundation?



But when the Cause is spent it fed upon
'Tis hush't; so may your Daughters sorrow too.
Go to her, and try her Sir; Duty will plead
In my behalf, and since Alberto's dead,
Urge her to accept the man whom you propose.



Ha! this to me again? O'ye good Gods!
Is thy ambition swell'd to such a height,
That thou woud'st have my Daughter spite of death?
Is this thy Love? Lust by my Soul! Damn'd burning Lust!
But since your Saucy haste has thus provok'd me,
I'le to that drooping Flower and there enquire,
What anger did refuse to hear before,
And if I finde what I suspect Ricardo

I'le heap such loads of misery upon thee,
Shall crush thy Soul, and sink thee into Hell,

Italian spite, and Spanish Jealosy
Shall twine their Snakes, to lash and torture thee.






Nay then, I'me ruind, and for ever lost.
How sweet is hope to man's aspiring thoughts,
Which makes 'em like Camelions live on air,
And hug their slender plots? But when that's fled,

  68Then comes the dismall sad Catastrophe.

Those threats were vain, for I've a fury here
Begins to lash and sting my guilty Soul,
Conscience that blood-hound, which tracks falling Greatness▪
Had but my shafts hit right to my desire,
I wou'd have laugh'd even in the face of heaven;
And rais'd in raptures equall to the Gods,
Brav'd all the force of Hell, made Envy gnas•,
To see me mounted above its reach▪
But now Alberto's death beats an alarm
Unto my guilty Conscience: my affrighted blood retires
And leaves my trembling arms, shaking like tender willows
At the northern wind:
My feet the feeble Basis of this tottering Pyramide,

Cleave close unto the Earth, whilst my erected hair
(Stiffer then bristles on a shooting Porcupine)
Stares in the very face of angry Iove,

As I were thunder-stoork.


Ha! the ill stomack't earth, vomits her dead
To torture me! Am I inviron'd round with Ghosts?
Hide me ye Powers from their amazing looks,
Spread an eternall darkness o're the world
That they may wander still in ignorance,
And never finde me out:



What horrid sounds are these? and from Ricardo?

He takes me for a Ghost; away my friend,
Attone the Vice-Roys anger, whilst I, here
Humour this Villains mistaken penitence.



We will, and may success attend you.




Will nothing then conceal me?



Heaven cannot hide you from my just revenge,
Without the forfeiture of goodness▪ Murder
That crying Sin, has like a powerfull spell
Summon'd my scarce cold corps from out its Urn
To force an accusation of thy Conscience.



Mount, mount my Soul, and with the swiftest winds
Fly to some unknown Land, where the affrighted Sun
Ner'e yet durst enter, nor the astonish'd heavens
Think on a place so horrid:

  69Where Death surfeits his fatall arrow, and
Each funerall knell yel'd by a dying Mandrake
Proves still the dirge of an ensuing frailty.
O' my sick Conscience! is there no cure?
No Sanctuary for my poor relenting Soul?
Let me then sink, sink to the Center,
Release those Captive Gyants that now groan
Under the heavy weight of mighty mountains,
And hurl 'em all, all one me, to press me down
Beyond the reach of Register: let me not suffer
Even in their Annalls, but let a sad mortality
Of remembrance seize succeeding times,
That I may fall forgotten by all the world▪



Is this the way to expiate thy Crime?
Are prophane wishes thy repentance? Oh take heed!
Do not precipitate thy inclining ruine;
Pull not that hovering Justice on thy head,
Lest it shou'd fall no less than fatall on thee.



Pardon Blest Form my rash Devotion!

Entomb Revenge among those Sacred reliques,
And let thy incens'd Ghost sleep in its peacefull Urn:
Draw hence those looks fill'd with such killing horrour,
And every day shall add new trophys to thy mercy.



Think'st thou my patient Ghost can rest secure,
Whilst thy Majestick cruelty does trample
Or'e the ruines of My Love and Honour?
And shall no pious envy seek to abate
Thy triumph? Shall wrong'd Innocence lye unreveng'd?



Is their no expiation for my offence?
Withdraw thy anger, and i'le renounce my Love,
And yield my title to the fair Miranda;

She shall embalm you with her daily tears
And offer sighs like incense at your Tomb▪



I dare not trust you.



Hear me ye Powers above:
When next I name my Sacrilegious Love,

May I be haunted by thy Murmuring Ghost,
May all the plagues which Crimes like mine deserve,
(Arm'd with a double force) light on my head:
But hast and signe the Warrant of my peace.






Oh to my Arms, Thou Noble Generous Youth,
And look a kind forgiveness to thy Father,
Else I shall faint beneath my load of guilt:
What Floods of Penitential tears can e're
Wash off the stains are printed on my brow,
And drown the memory of thy mighty wrongs?



Oh let me pay my humbler duty thus.

By heaven my Loyal heart does bow within me,
And I must sink beneath the grave to adore you,
Unless you'l raise me by some kinder words.



Wilt thou then rob thee of thy Virtues due?
Thus I will pay it on my trembling knees,
Spite of thy obstinate humility.




If you will kneel, kneel to those Guardian Powers
Who've freed you from the toils and Treacherous snares
Of that false Man.



O rise, and since thy goodness can forgive me,
Let me put on the Lion once again,
And fix my Justice on that horrid Slave.



Then he is living, and I am deceiv'd,
Wheedled to ruine by a trick of Conscience:
I thank ye Gods for your little honesty!



Where are my Guards; go take that Traytor hence,
'Tis Justice now, not Tyranny Commands you.



Stay till I make my peace with this most wrong'd,
Most innocent, gallant, brave young Man.

Here let me beg a pardon for my Crimes,
If Gods have power such injuries to forgive;
By all your wrongs I mourn my black designs,

'Tis worse than hell to think I did attempt
To Murder you and yet to miss my aim 











Or he will say my presence shades his guilt.



'Twas basely done: for he is Brave and Noble,
And I a Villain thus to abuse his goodness,
And fool to bar that Love which heaven Cements;
Love is a pure and immateriall being,
Which graspt by such polluted hands as mine

  71Does vanish and leaves an empty Cloud:
Why shou'd I then oppose the Stream?
No, let me to some private Cell resort,
Learn to forget the pleasures of the Court,
My guilt and folly be my Grief and sport.




Impious Traytor, who with the self-same breath,
Vows penitence to heaven, revenge to hell.





Your Daughter Royall Sir,
Desires your Company about some business of importance
Relating to your peace and hers. Alberto here!
Alive! nay then it will not be a barren plot.




We will attend her instantly.




How fares my Angell; how does my Life, my Soul?



You'l know too soon.




Ha! not look upon me?
O' my misgiving heart!



Fear not my Son,
Only some Clouds are gather'd by your death,
But soon your presence will dry up her tears
And clear her brow:
Lead on, no longer I'le defer your Joys.




O' how I tremble at the dreadfull Scene!

But since a beam of light does warm her hopes
And hath dispell'd the Vice-Roys jealous storm,
Fain'd death shall grasp 'em in a pleasing form.



A Cup by her. She rises.


What's Death, that silly Mortals thus shou'd fear it?
Only a passage to a better Life,
When the imprison'd Soul throws off its fetters,
And flys into immortall Liberty:
Then wellcome Death to Love so pure as mine,
Which shall imprint an Angells stamp upon it,
And free my Soul to meet Alberto in the air.
I come my Love, the thoughts of thee so charm me
That yet methinks I feel no pain at all;

  72The fatall Potion tasted to my pallat
Like the rich Nectar that preserves the Gods,
And I'me methinks in health: only a pleasing faintness
Glides thro' my fancy with a cold alarm.
Here will I sit, till I can see my Father,
To tell him, fate has granted me a pasport;
Then take the wing and fly to endless bliss.










Eternall horror Seize me, if she does not smile too:
So the Sun shines amidst the fiercest showers.
But why my Daughter? speak, for it racks my fancy!
Rise and speak.



O' I must never rise,
Till I mount up an Angell into heaven.



To heaven! O' my fears!
Wrap me Eternall night:
Are these my promi'st joys?



O' rise my Child:
I know it well thou mourn'st Alberto's loss,
But here is magick in this face to cure thee.






Alberto! O' ye Powers, then does he Live?



He lives, my Fair one: but oh that life's a Curse,
Unless you'l raise that beauteous Map of Heaven,
And say, why dost thou grieve, that he's alive?



Have I not cause to grieve and curse my Stars,
Since we must part, for ever part Alberto.




For ever part thou kill'st me with the sound:
Art thou then false? the very thought's a Crime.
Thro' all this mist, I see thy constant flames
Dart their kind beams into my tortur'd breast:



Why dost thou talk of parting, when thy Father
Stands here to heal the wounds of injur'd Love?
Here take Alberto, take him to thy arms.





O Stop that breath of kindness, 'tis Infectious,
And tortures me more then the working poyson.







What says my Childe?



The fatall deed will out

  73I thought him dead, and therefore I contriv'd
To drink a poys'nous draught, which working up
Thro' all the pores of Life, shou'd drive the Soul,
And send it panting to the other World.
Forgive me Love that's all I ask oh heavens!



I'le •ear no more 
Where's Providence and all those Sacred Powers
That secure Innocence, are they all asleep?
Or is the frame of Nature quite dissolv'd?
I've heard how at her latest pangs, the World
Will strait roll up into the endless heap:
The Sun be Extinguisht like a Lamp that's spent:
The Moon withdraw its Crescent into Night;
The Stars like pointed Meteors shoot to Chaos▪

The Elements shall run to meet each other,
And blindly mix their jarring principles,
And when this beauteous Harmony must dye,
Shall not one Attom of it cease to move?
Yes I'le begin the fatall Sacrifice,


And tell the World what's due to so much beauty.



Hold, or you heap new loads of guilt upon me:
What must you suffer for my impious rashness?
No let me dye, (the cursed source of all)
The Gods themselves are pleas'd when Great Men fall.



Forbear, or you will hurry me away
In a Tempestuous grief. Why Father, why Alberto,

Why shou'd you dye? I charge ye Live,
Or you will torture my departed Ghost,
Which swift as light'ning shall avoid your presence.
By heaven you've rais'd a strugling in my breast,
And peacefull death's become a spectere to me.



O do not plead against thy self Miranda:

Why art thou poison'd but to follow me?



Because my Father wou'd have forc'd my Will,
But now relenting nature yields to Love,
And he has given you all that's left of me.





I see it works.




That makes not me less Guilty;
Death, Hell, and Vengeance why was I good too late?

  74So the fall'n Angells saw their wretched state,
Repented, but alas! their heaven was fled,
And left 'em for reward Despair and Hell:
Then shall I, O black ingratitude! shall I,
For all the smarting wounds which I have made
Return him nought, but cold M••anda's Corse?
A precious Salve to cure a bleeding heart!



My plots are ripe, and I will give 'em birth:

Great Sir, upon my knees • beg you'l hear me;
If heaven restores, your dying poison'd Daughter,
Will you continue in this resolution,
And give her (as sure you ought) to Brave Alberto?




Why dost thou ask that strange untimely question?
Cou'd she be sav'd but 'tis impossible;
Altho' the Sighs of injur'd Love ascend like incense,
Yet my loud Crimes will drown their softer murmures.
By all their wrongs I'de drein my dearst blood
To quench the raging venome in her breast;
Then with my latest breath bequeath her to Alberto.




O' Sir! these generous words


Like Charms shall have the Power to raise the Dead.



What a Successive change of wonder's here!



Thus I'le apply their Virtue Rise Madam.








I beg you Madam rise:
Think that Alberto may, or will be yours,
And strait your Pulse will beat as brisk as ever,
The blood shall dance and flourish in your cheeks,
Except what too much grief has d•ein'd away.



Ha! does she Live? speak but that word Maria,

I'le give thee all my treasure:







She Lives my Lord.



O' 'tis enough Maria!




It is too much: thus let me kneel my Saint,
And look and gaze unto Eternity.



Not all the transports of your eager Love
Must rob me of the Duty of a Father.



I was too blame Here let us kneel Miranda,

As to a pardoning God, and wait our Doom▪



You take me for the cruell Father still;
O' rise, and do not cloud this Scene of joy▪

  75Come to my arms Miranda still thou fear'st,
But thus I'le crown your happiness, and my peace:





Which thus I Seal. But kind Maria, say,
How hast thou wrought this Cure? Or do we dream,
Rais'd by a false imaginary Joy?



Her fancy'd pain indeed is but a dream,
But thus I clear your f•ars and doubts, my Lord,
I griev'd, Great Sir, your kindness for Ricardo

Must Sacrifice the affections of a Daughter,
And promist to prepare the Potion for her
(When urg'd by grief to that Extremity:)
But hoping you'de revoke the cruell Sentence,
When fearing the effects by such a loss,
I workt her fancy to believe that Poyson
Which only dull'd the vigour of the Spirits.



I was mistaken, but yet so kindly
Id'e wish for ever to be so deceiv'd.




Antonio, pardon all the wrongs you've born,
And take my friendship as return in part.




Great Sir, this grace has more than cancell'd all:
But let me beg your Highnesses consent,
To make me happy in this fair Ladies Love.








Astella Sir, my Sister.



You have it Sir; but why in this disguise?



Plung'd in the same mistake that threatn'd all,
She came on some designe to try my Love.



Sister (for so I must for ever call you)
Pardon my forc'd neglect of you unknown.



Your own misfortunes are a sufficient plea.



with his Sword drawn.


Great Sir, Ricardo breaking from his Prison,
Comes like a Torrent Spite of opposition;
And forcing all the Guards, that bar'd his way,
With a drawn Sword wrested from their hands

•s entring here. But see he comes.






Infernall Monster! was ever sight like this,
That Villany shou'd make a Coward Valiant?
Can hell breath virtue? Yes, a brutall one!
But thus I'le meet and crush the monstrous birth▪



Here Sir, wreak all your fury on this Villain,
Think not i'de offer at your Sacred life,


Death I am come to seek, but since your Guards
Have fail'd, and I've the Noblest from your hand,
Strike Sir, for I'me prepar'd.




When Thousand Crimes like weights press'd down thy Soul;
Yes thou art ready Slave, for hell thou'rt ripe:
Lust and Ambition have rac'd out the Man,
And being a Devil thou long'st to be at home.



'Tis true, I'me worse then you can paint me Sir,
Therefore to ask a pardon were to arraign heaven•s Justice
And make its Mercy Pandar to my sins.
Why are you slow then to be Heavens Avenger?



I will avenge it, but another way,
Guards seize him once again, and mark me all
Your Lives are forfeit for the next escape:
In chains he shall behold Alberto's Nuptials,
That he may swell with envy till he burst.



By heaven, not all your Armies here should seize me:
Pardon me Sacred Sir, I say they shou'd not,
Not that I dread to see the happy Nuptials,
For every binding word wou'd ease my Soul;
Yes Sir, I joy more for their happiness,
Than I can grieve for my own sordid baseness▪
But to lye lingri•g in a lazy prison,
Wou'd rob expecting Justice of its prey,
Therefore to satisfy the hovering Sword,
Thus I'me Ricardo's Executioner.




Hold, and may heaven forgive what's past as I do now.
O Sacred Sir, or if the name of Father
Can plead more strongly, pitty this Penitent,
I read a deep Contrition in his eyes;
Let him not fall a Victim to despair,
When one kind breath can blow away his Crimes,
And cause the horrid Leprosy to vanish.



This goodness from you, Noble, Generous Youth,

  77Sinks me the deeper; O restore the dagger,
For since all hope of pardon's fled away,
Nothing can torture me like this delay.



To recompence the wrongs which you've sustain'd,
What is't I wou'd not do? but Son beware,
Take heed how you believe these new-coin'd looks,
And these false sighs, lest they shou'd prove infectious;
For Proteus-like he can take every shape
Scrue himself up into an humble Saint▪
To serve his black designs, and if that miss
Strut like a Peacock in his gaudy trim,
And shew all Lucifer; nay, he can make
Even Contradictions meet to gain his ends.



Therefore kind Sir, kill me lest I work more mischief.



But now that borrow'd habit's quite thrown off,
Stript by the Vulture Conscience of his Plumes.
Kneel, kneel Ricardo, for methinks I see,
A calm of pitty gently chase the Tempest,
And smooth the furrows of his angry brow.

Think of the power of Love Great Sir; what heart is proof,
What Virtue is so strong and Adamantine
Which the resistless heat of his Attacques
Cannot melt to Vice?



Rise both; Ricardo rise;
For sure such Generosity must awe thee,
And force each start of Envy to retire;
Therefore I pardon you your life, but for your Crimes
Banish you for ever from our Court.



Ha! pardon did you say? name it again,
For yet I cannot trust my Credulous ears.







O Sir let me devour your feet,
Gr•w to the Earth in prostrate Adoration,
And end my life in this so happy Transport▪
Hence to some gloomy Desert i'le retreat,
Black as my Crimes and my deserved fate
Where no kind Cell, or Neighbouring Lodge is found
But wild Campain, and bare unhospitable ground;
There from my breast vollies of sighs shall rise
Shall thaw th' Avenging Justice of the skies
To mercy; while the pittying Gods shall dain:
To give me back my I•nocence again:

  78There my last stake in Penitential tears,
In rigid Pennance, Fasts, and Midnight Prayers•,
I'le spend, till heaven and you I can attone,
And merit this forgiveness you have shown.







May it please your Highness 



What means your Insolence?



This Importunate fellow, because he help'd me to save that
Lords life, pretends I owe him something;
Now I make your Highness my Judge;



I understand you; therefore let each man
Have Twenty Crowns:




Lopez, I shall reward you for your care.



And you Bernardo may remain with me.



I thank you Sir, for I was terribly afraid of my Master.



But all their Services had been in vain,
Had not Maria brought this last reprieve,
Which I shall Study how to recompence.



Now my Miranda, since the fates are kind,
We may reflect upon our dangers past:
(As a befriended Traveller returns,
And when his Country's grown familiar with him,
His fancy roves o're all the dismall Scene,
The roling Seas, the fearfull beasts of prey,
And all the Terrours that beset his way,
Whilst every horrour swells his trembling joy,
And still renews those pleasures which wou'd ••oy:)
Then for a Monument we'le Erect this Rule,
And fix it on the Portall of Loves School;
Few Lovers can be always in the Right,
Mistakes and Quarrells heighten their Delight.

