



LAPELLE, from Lord Morden's dressing-room, looking at his watch.
TWENTY minutes past ten! a shameful time of the morning for a gentleman's gentleman to be disturbed. My Lord has lost his money, can't sleep himself, and won't suffer others to take their natural rest.



LAPELLE, Mrs. PINUP, from Lady Morden's dressing-room.




I declare, upon my honour, this is a most monstrous time of night for a lady's
  2
gentlewoman to be kept up; dozing over a dull novel, or nodding in an antichamber and an arm chair, while others are taking their pleasure, and losing their estates, among their friends.



Good morrow, Mrs. Pinup.




Good morrow, Mr. Lapelle! Good night, you mean. I have not been in bed yet!








That vile bedside bell! They'll wear me haggard before I am old! Knew I should not rest long, so threw myself down in my clothes; and, just as I was got into a sound sleep, tingle, tingle, tingle; up I must get, to dress my lady, who, for my part, I believe, never sleeps at all.



Why, yes; your fashionable folks are a kind of ghosts, that walk of nights, and greatly trouble the repose of valets and lady's maids and late hours, like white paint, are excellent promoters of crack'd complexions.




I declare, upon my honour, I am as tired as as 



A hackney coach horse, on a rainy Sunday.




Yes and as drowsy as 



An alderman at an oratorio Your Lady had a deal of company at her rout Was Sir Frederick Fashion there?








He is a prodigious favourite with your Lady, I think.




Favourite! There are strange doings in this world! Staid I know not how long, after every body else was gone!



What, alone, with your Lady?




Alone, with my Lady!



Indeed! Was Mrs. Modely at the rout?




Yes but don't ask me any questions; it's impossible I should say ten words more: I am talking in my sleep now. When I get up, in the morning, that is, about three o'clock in the afternoon, I'll tell you all; so good night.






A wonderful change in a short time! Lady Morden, young, handsome, and full of spirits, was, not a month ago, reserved in her conduct, fond of her husband, contented with home, and, indeed, a miraculous kind of exception among wives of quality. Whereas, now, she has suddenly turned fantastical in dress, capricious in temper, free of speech, and, what we half-bred folks should call, light of carriage. She games with the women, coquettes with the men, and seems, in every respect, ambitious to become a woman of fashion. As for my Lord why he is a man of fashion.








Is your Lady up, Mr. Lapelle?



Yes, Sir I believe she has never been in bed.




Who what do you mean?



My Lady had a rout last night.




A rout and never in bed? Impossible!



Yes! but it's very true, Sir.




Lady Morden! She whom, but a few weeks since, I left so singular, so eminent an example of simplicity, and purity of manners!



Sir Frederick Fashion was here.








He staid after every body else had retired.




What! alone, with Lady Morden?



So her Ladyship's woman, who is scarcely yet undressed, informed me.




 Why, then, all hopes of goodness, in this world, are vanished! Go bid my daughter, my Emily, come to me.



She is not stirring, I fancy, Sir.




But I fancy she is, Sir; I am sure she is. What, Sir, she had not a rout, to keep her up all night!



She was of my Lady's party, I believe, Sir.




 Go go pray, go, and do as I bid you.







What will this town, this world, come to! The only perfectly amiable, the only enchantingly virtuous woman I knew, fascinated at last, and sinking into the gulph of depravity! She will drag down my Emily too! No! I'll hide her in a forest, seclude her in a cave, rather than suffer her to be infected by the pestiferous breath of this contagious town. But is she not already tainted? Of my Lady's party! She that I left her with as a pattern,
  5
commanded her to observe, to study, to imitate, in all things!








Well, where is my daughter?



I have called her woman, and she will call Miss Emily.




I'll call her myself and it shall be the most ungentle call she has long heard from me.




LAPELLE, HARRIET, in the dress of a Croat.



Who comes here? Some foreign sharper, I dare say One of my Lord's morning duns for last night's debts.



 Hark you, young man; may I be asking you where I will find my Lord Morden?



He is not come down, Sir.



Oh, that, I suppose, is becase he is not up.



My Lord told me he expected a gentleman, or two, would call but he has had so many calls lately 



That he is a little slow in answering?



Rather Riches, regularity, and roast beef, will soon, I fear, take their leave of our house.



Faidth, and that may viry will be; for they are all three become great vagabonds. Riches is turned Amirican pedlar, Regularity a Prussian grenadier, and as for Roast Beef, why, the Frinch are now so fond of good ould English
  6
fashions, that poor Roast Beef is transported alive to Paris.



My Lord, I believe, is a little out of cash, at present.



Will, now, that is viry prudent of him to put it out: for, whin a man finds he can't keep his cash himself, he is viry right to lit odther people keep it for him.



Nay, then, I don't know a more careful gentleman.



Careful? Why, sure, always whin a a man of spirit begins to take care of his money, 'tis becase he has none.



Well, Sir, if you will please to leave your card, his Lordship, I suppose, will know who has called.



Indeed and he won't.



How so, pray, Sir?



Faidth, for a viry good raison He niver saw me in his life.



Who then shall I say? 



And is it my name you would know?







Let me see What the white divle is my name now? Oh! Char-les Phelim O'Fireaway; an Irishman by accident, a gintleman by policy, and a captain of Croats, in the Austrian sarvis, by design. Do you understand that riddle now?







I did not intind you should What time can I see my Lord?



Most likely, about one.



Will, then, give him this litter, and inform his Lordship I will take the liberty of calling, this afternoon, to bid him a good-morrow.












So! here he comes, already.  My Lord.




What time is it?



Eleven o'clock, my Lord.




What a damn'd night have I passed! Is my coffee ready?



I'll go and see, my Lord.





 This head ache! No rest! Oh for half an hour's sleep! A cursed silly course of life, mine! But there is no accounting in the morning for the conduct of over-night.








This is not half strong enough get me some as strong as possible. Any message? .



This letter, my Lord.





From Lady Westbrook, I see.  Um A young lady in disguise! um Will relate her own story! um um Rely on your honour to keep her secret, and serve her cause!
  8
 Would have addressed myself to Lady Morden, but for reasons which you shall know hereafter! 








Who brought this letter?



An Irish gentleman, in a foreign dress.








Said he would call about one, my Lord.




Shew him into my room, and inform me the instant he comes.



General Burland is here.




 General Burland! Zounds!



Came to town late last night, my Lord.




Tell him I am come down.





Must not let him see the present temper of my mind My guardian once, he is determined never to think me of age I need not his reproof to increase my present chagrin; my own follies, and Lady Morden's unexpected, unaccountable reverse of conduct, are sufficient He will lay it all to me; and, perhaps, with reason! Heigho! Here he comes Really, one of these very prudent, plain-spoken friends is a very disagreeable person, in these our moments of folly. Well, I must assume a cheerfulness I don't feel, and ward off his wisdom with raillery.







Good morrow, my Lord.









You seem scarcely awake.




 Slept ill troubled with the night-mare.




Your troubles, I am afraid, are rapidly increasing.









Lady Morden had a rout, last night!




Oh! and forgot to send you a card, I suppose. Is that my fault?




You are merry, my Lord; but he who drinks poison, out of a frolic, will soon be glad to send for a physician, out of fear; and the chances are the doctor will come too late.









My Lord! my Lord! this levity is unseasonable: blushes, and shame, would better become you.




Pff! They are out of fashion.




Yes, you leave your friends to blush for your faults.




My friends are very good; nay, indeed, generous; for, were they but to spare a single blush for each of their own faults, they would have none to bestow on mine.




Fie! The mirth of a mad-man is sport only to boys I was your guardian, I wished to prove myself your friend. 'Twas I first discovered that, then, angelic woman who is, now, Lady Morden; I was the cause of her
  10
union with you; and I am, therefore, accountable to myself, to her, and to society, for her conduct.




That is, you are a kind of second-hand sponsor Godfather-in-law, as it were.




Very well, Sir! proceed! despise reproof! ridicule advice!




Nay, good doctor, you really wrong me; 'tis not the advice, but the physic, I hate At least, I hate the form under which it is administered But, pray, tell me; when last you saw Lady Morden, did you perceive any symptoms of that degeneracy, in her Ladyship, you, now, complain so loudly of?




None! I thought it impossible!




And is it not rather extraordinary, then, that my example should, so suddenly, subdue what, within this month, seemed so invulnerable?




 It is extraordinary, my Lord! most extraordinary! but not less true; and, had you any sense of your duty to yourself, your family, or society, the truth of it would make you tremble!




See how differently different people understand things! My acquaintance are, every day, wishing me joy of her Ladyship's reformation; and telling me how surprisingly she has retrieved her character, in the world.




 And Sir Frederic Fashion, no doubt, among the rest!




 Hem! yes yes. He is one of our very first men, you know; and he is quite in
  11
raptures with her swears she was born to lead and outshine us all.




 The approbation of so great an adept must give you vast pleasure!




Hem! a infinite! Not but this sudden change has, rather, surprised me.









Just as you left town, her Ladyship's melancholy seemed increasing wandering over the house, like a perturbed spirit, as the play says, mournfully clanking her chains, and frightening the gentle smiles and pleasures from her, she seemed to way-lay me, and, with moving look, and melting eye, intreat compassion; till, egad, I, really, at last, began to pity her.









Yes But, suddenly forsaking the penseroso, she broke in upon me, one morning, and, with an air of levity and good humour, and a small tincture of reproach, then, and there, read me a very pretty, wifelike, remonstrance.




To which you listened with a truly picktooth insensibility.




Yes You know my way.




And what was the subject of her discourse?




Why, chapter the first was a recapitulation of my agreeable follies, and her own perverse virtues. She was no partaker in my pleasures I had forgot every endearment She was left to dine, sup, and sleep, by herself I dined, supped, and slept, nobody knew where. She more recluse than the abbess of a convent:
  12
I more uncertain than the price of stocks, or the place of prime minister.




 And what did you say to this?




 I must face it out.  Say? What could I say to such a simple woman?




You did not attempt to deny the charge, then?




What should I deny? 'Twas every syllable true; and every syllable in my praise.




 Humph! Then you do not think, the sweets of affection ought, sometimes, to alleviate the bitterness of neglect.




Sweets! pshaw! they are too cloying to the stomach, and ought to be taken sparingly. I am fond of sweet music, but too much of it sets me to sleep. Besides, a wife, like a barrel organ, can only play one set of tunes.




 Well, Sir, but the conclusion?




A very unexpected one, I assure you I misunderstood this for a declaration of war; and, with a smile, was very obligingly about to intreat her Ladyship would hatch her melancholy into mischief her own way: when, turning short upon me, she curtsied, seemed abashed, began to apologize, applaud my conduct, ridicule the silliness of her own, and promised to become as fashionable a Lady as I, or any Lord in Christendom, could wish.




Your increase of happiness is, then, prodigious?




Hem! a unspeakable. Lady Morden, I own, was, certainly, a kind of 
  13
Demi-Angel, tho' my wife but, then, her her goodness seemed to throw one at such a distance so much in the back ground that there was only one figure noticed in the picture!




'Tis well, Sir, you are so perfectly satisfied.




Nay, General, I will own, I have often felt a kind of inclination, a sort of wish, as it were, to become very prudent, and wise, and and all that but, really, one has so much to do that one does not know where to begin. Besides, you very good kind of people, you upon my honour, you are, in many respects, the most queer, precise, particular, species of beings, and have such strange notions! Instead of taking one's pleasure, and doing just what one likes best, which, you know, is so natural, one must live for the good of one's country, love one's wife and children, pay tradesmen, look over accounts, reward merit, and a thousand other of the the most ridiculous whims and what nobody, absolutely, nobody does.




Intolerable profligacy! I have listened to you, my Lord, with grief, vexation, astonishment, and pity! Your mind is degraded; and the more dangerously so because you believe your worst vices to be your greatest merits! You have had honour, happiness, and pleasure, of the most perfect kind, within your power; and you have rejected them, to clasp their shadows! To merit pity by misconduct is humiliating; but, by misconduct to incur contempt is, to a manly spirit, insupportable; and the latter will, I fear, be suddenly your Lordship's fate. Did not the remembrance of your noble father affect me, I should look upon your approaching punishment
  14
with apathy; because you wilfully have plunged to perdition: but, for your Lady, if I cannot retrieve, if I cannot save her, I shall mourn indeed!







Faith, this good general is, like a cuckoo, always in a tune.  He has reason! I have laboured to laugh at my own follies; but the farce is over, the forced jest forgotten, and the sorceress Recollection conjures up the ugly phantom Disgust! Why, what a child am I! Oh! Lady Morden pshaw! absurd! I will not make myself the butt, and by-word, of my acquaintance I I I will laugh ha, ha, ha! laugh at my Lady's gallantries. I jealous! I! that have daily made jealousy a standing jest; the criterion of an ill-bred, vulgar, mind! No, no, no. 








 No, no, Sir Frederic; you are partial.




Not in the least, Madam.




Yes, you are good morrow to your Lordship yes, you are. I feel, I still retain a leaven of former silly prejudices; but a little collision, among you people of superior fashion, will soon wear these asperities smooth, and bring them to bear a proper polish.




Ah! Madam, you have a leaven of something celestial; which we inferior people wonder at, but cannot imitate!









 Fie! flatterer! but you are always saying civil things; and that, I fancy, makes you so agreeable.




 No, Lady Morden; you wrong me my tongue is forced to give utterance to the effusions of my heart By heaven, you are an angel! and I am, involuntarily, obliged to repeat, and repeat, and repeat, that you are an angel! You must not be angry with me, for I cannot help it.




No, no angry! no Tho', I really believe, I do improve don't I, my Lord?









Yes I have discovered that one of my most capital errors, formerly, was being too sensible of my own defects. I find that to wear, on one's countenance, an open, and avowed, consciousness that one possesses every grace and perfection, is the grand secret of really possessing them: or, at least, of persuading the world one really does, which is the same thing.




Your Ladyship is very right; nothing can put a face of real fashion out of countenance: the placid features are all fixed.




Oh, immoveable! Like the owner's names, cut in brass and nailed to their doors.




Ha, ha, ha! Charming!




Do but observe one of our well-bred beaus, at a public assembly, and you will see him enter, plant himself in a spot, elevate
  16
his eye-brows, fix his eyes, half open his mouth, and stand like an automaton, with its head turning on a pivot. 




Ha, ha, ha! Charming! Charming!




 But, don't you think this a little tending to the ridiculous, Madam?




Oh dear, no! Nothing can be ridiculous that's fashionable.









Formerly, I should have blushed if stared at; but, now, I find, the only way is to stare again without looking that is, without betraying the least indication of knowing whether one is looking towards the man, or the wall thus.




 Ha, ha, ha! your Ladyship is very right: modesty modesty is an obsolete bugbear.




Yes, and, like the the ghost in the tragedy, has been stared out of doors.




Oh, the very quakers despise it, at present.




Yes 'tis a shabby fellow, whose acquaintance every body wishes to drop. To be sure, I was a most absurd creature: was not I, my Lord?




I upon my honour, Madam I you no no not absurd no.




Oh fie not absurd why, do you know, Sir Frederic ha! ha! ha! I ha! ha! ha! I was, downright, in love with his Lordship.




Ha, ha, ha! in love with his Lordship?




Ha, ha, ha! upon my honour, 'tis true! is it not, my Lord?




Ha, ha, ha! ye ye yes Madam, yes.




Thought him the most charming man in in in the whole world!




Ha, ha, ha! Is that possible?




Why, it it is scarcely credible! But but such is the fact Nay! I doated on him and continually reproached myself, for wanting power, and attractions, to obtain my Lord's affection! For I never blamed him Ha, ha, ha! I ha, ha, ha! I used to sit whole nights, while my Lord was out, watching and weeping; and whole days studying which way I could regain his love!




Regain, Lady Morden! Why, was his Lordship ever so unfashionable as as ?




As to love his wife Why, yes, really I I do believe he was so singular, for for a whole fortnight.




Why! ha, ha, ha! Why, were you, Lord Morden?




 Ha, ha, ha! I I   I don't know, Sir, what I was.




Nay, don't be out of countenance, my Lord! You hear, I have the justice to relate my own foibles, as well as your Lordship's and mine mine were infinitely the greatest. It is exceedingly strange, but, so fascinated was I that, ha, ha, ha! I ha, ha, ha!  I am verily persuaded, I could have died, with pleasure, to have insured his affection.




Ha, ha, ha!   I cannot bear it.




Ha, ha, ha! These things are unaccountable.




 Ay, one wonders how one could be so weak! Oh, Sir Frederic! I am going to Christie's. There is a painting I have a mind to purchase. They tell me 'tis very fine.




What is the story, Madam?




The Metamorphosis of Actaeon.




Ha, ha, ha! A fashionable subject.




Yes that tha that is the very reason I wish to have it. Poor Actaeon is taken at the precise moment when the the change is taking place.









Yes. I am going down there, now; will you go with me, Sir Frederic?




With pleasure, Madam Ha, ha, ha! poor Actaeon!




Ay, poor Actaeon! Adieu, my Lord.







Madam!  'Sdeath! what am I about? Shall I, at last, sink into one of the vulgar; and become jealous? Wretched about a oh, no! Actaeon!  Sure all men are ideots, and never know the value of that most inestimable jewel, a lovely and a loyal wife, till in danger of having it purloined. .








LAPELLE (coming from the door of the antichamber, as if he had been listening).

SO, Mr. Irishman, by accident! A lady, in disguise! That's the riddle, is it? But, hush!



LORD MORDEN, dressed, HARRIET, (from the antichamber.)




 Leave the room I am sorry we were disturbed; your story, Madam, has interested me deeply: though too reprehensible for the irregularities of my own conduct, I cannot but condemn the licentious libertinism of this Sir Frederic Indeed, I I have reason, perhaps, to dread it.



A man of honour, among men, the ruin of woman he thinks as necessary to his fame as to his pleasure; and, like too many others of your cruel sex, holds it no crime to make war upon those who cannot defend themselves.




But what do you propose, by this disguise, Madam?



There is a contract, which I, indeed, refused, but which he forced upon me, to demonstrate, as he said, the purity of his intentions,
  20
wherein he bound himself, in a penalty of ten thousand pounds, to marry me within a month: for, in his fictitious raptures, he protested no sum, no proofs, could sufficiently express the ardour, and sanctity, of his affection.




And have you this contract?



Oh, no! The day preceding that on which it was my good fortune to discover his real designs, he asked to see, and artfully exchanged it, for a counterfeit copy.




This contract you wish to regain?



If possible; or some other unequivocal means of detection.




And force him to marry you?



Oh, no To own the truth, I have a generous and a constant lover, who, perhaps, has been a little ill used.




As most generous and constant lovers are.



'Tis too true. To avenge him, and humble the pride of one who thinks himself too cunning for our whole sex, is my determination.




Well, Madam, ours is a common cause But, as we have both been imprudent, and invited misfortune, we must both endeavour to conceal our true feelings, mask our suspicions, and Hush! Here he comes; and with him a lady, whose principles are as free as his own; but who has had the art so well to conceal her intrigues, and preserve appearances, that she is every where received in society. I will introduce you, in your assumed character.



Not now; let us withdraw when he is alone. The fewer eyes are on me, the less liable I shall be to a discovery.



(Lord Morden and Harriet return to the antichamber just as Mrs. Modely and Sir Frederic appear.)







Really, Sir Frederic, there is no accounting for the strangeness of your present taste! I pity you! I foresee the downfall of your reputation! What, you! who have vanquished so many elegant coquettes, and driven so many happy lovers mad; you! who were the very soul of our first societies, and whose presence made palpitate the hearts of belles and beaux; the first with hope and delight, the latter with fear and envy; you! sighing at the feet of a prude, and become the rival of a husband!









Have not you, for this month past, buried yourself in Lady Morden's sober society, and dozed over crown whist with her, night after night? Nay, have not you attended her even to church; and, there, with a twang, joined the amen chorus of charity-children, paupers, and parish-clerks; sitting with your face drawn as long as its shadow at sun-set; and a look as demure and dismal 




As poor Doctor Faustus, waiting for the Devil to come and fetch him Ha, ha, ha! Granted.




And what do you think has been said of you, mean while, in the polite circles you have abandoned? Your very best friends have been the very first to condemn you.




That's natural When we are guilty of any folly, our very best friends are always
  22
the very first to condemn us; to shew they neither advise nor countenance us.




I thought the gay, young, beauty, besieged by pleasures, surrounded by flatteries, who believes herself the goddess she is painted, to fix her wandering fancy, to humble and bring her to a sense of frailty; or, to supplant the happy, the adored, lover, while yet the breath is warm that vows eternal constancy; these, I imagined, were the only atchievements worthy Sir Frederic Fashion!




These have their eclat. But, to initiate a youthful, beauteous, wife, who, from her childhood, has been accustomed to say her prayers, believe in virtue, and rank conjugal infidelity among the most heinous of the seven deadly sins; to teach her to doubt, fear, wish, tremble, and venture; to be a witness, afterward, of her repentance; her tears involuntarily falling, her eyes motionless, her form fixed, and the severe saint transformed to a statue of weeping sin; to read her fall in the public papers; be praised, reproached, admired, and curst, in every family in England; in short, to be for ever immortalized, in the annals of gallantry, and the hero of the tea-table for a whole month, for this will be no common vulgar wonder, this were glory equal to my ambition! And this glory I am determined to acquire: nay, it is, already, within my grasp. This day, or, rather, this night, this very, blessed, ecstatic, night, shall I gain the greatest of all my victories!









Nay, my dear Mrs. Modely, you know my enthusiasin, and must not take exceptions Nor can I, surely, be blamed. Lady
  23
Morden is a concealed hoard of native sweets, that delights the senses: while the made-up beauties we commonly meet, like artificial flowers, are all shew, and no fragrance.









Inferior to her, in form and perfection, as the Venus of a Dutch image-hawker to the genuine Grecian Antique!




It matters not wasting your rhetoric on this topic; for I will not give my consent to your pursuing this affair any further, Sir Frederic.














Ha, ha, ha! Don't provoke me, my dear Mrs. Modely; don't provoke me.









Ha, ha, ha! Well To arms then War is the word.




The choice remains with you.









Lady Morden is my relation; and, though I despise prudery, and know the world 




 That you do, indeed!




Yet you can hardly suppose I will silently acquiesce in her ruin!




Ha, ha, ha! You you forget yourself, dear Madam These qualms would do vastly well, in some places; but, to me! 




And why not to you, Sir! Though I do allow myself a little liberty of conscience 




Not a little. 




And though you you know I do, must I In short, I have another favourite
  24
project, which I am determined not to give up.




 Oh ho! But it will be best to avoid a rupture.   May I ask what this favourite project may be?




You know the public affront General Burland gave me, last winter; and you cannot suppose I have forgotten it.




 No; I know you better.   Oh! the General is an eccentric mortal; licensed to say any thing; and, instead of being listened to, is laughed at.




Yes; but I am determined he shall be punished.









His daughter, Emily, is a pretty, simple, girl I mean, untutored, in the world.









To see her married to a man of fashion would, at least, break his heart.









Your fortune, I believe, Sir Frederic, like your family seat, begins to want repairs; and she is a rich heiress, with twenty thousand pounds at her own disposal, beside the General's estate, which must be hers Why do you laugh so?




Oh! the delights of anticipation!









 It is a part of my plan to carry her off, I mean, to let her carry me off, this very night.



















This active, this important, this blissful, night!




Lend me your eau de luce, you divle!




Ha, ha, ha! This surprise from you, Mrs. Modely, is the supreme of panegyric.




And have you made any advances to Emily?




Yes, yes Ha, ha, ha! I made advances to her, and she made advances to me The conquest was too easy Were it not for the circumstance of the elopement, which will give the sauce a flavour the food wants, it would scarcely invite my appetite.




But Lady Morden 




Is mine, whenever I please to make my final attack. I am no bad orator, in general; but, in company with her, I seem inspired am, absolutely, astonished at my own eloquence! Nay, I have several times spoken with such energy, enthusiasm, and momentary conviction, in praise of virtue, that I have, actually, been in imminent danger of making a convert of myself!




In praise of virtue?




In praise of virtue. There is no making one of these virtuous visionaries rational, but by flattering their bigotry, and pretending to adore their idol; by pursuing which method, I have inured her to, and made her as familiar with, what is prudishly called vice, and vicious sentiments, as she is with her own thoughts.




Yes, yes, vile rake: but, remember, I'll have no concern in this affair! I 




Oh, poh! Ay, ay, that is understood You
  26
wink and know nothing of the matter.




Nay, but I, here, publicly protest against your proceedings!




 And will privately do your utmost to promote them.




I exclaim against such licentiousness!




I know you do But, if you are thus tender of her Ladyship's reputation, you will feel no repugnance at assisting me to irritate hi• Lordship's sensibility.




What do you mean?




To confess the truth, I am a little piqued at Lord Morden's want of feeling I wish I could make him jealous.




Jealous! Fie! He is too well bred.




That's unfortunate. The antics of a jealous husband add highly to the enjoyment, as well as the reputation, of an amour. The poor man is so injured, so enraged, so distressed, so industrious to publish his calamity, and is so sincerely pitied, and laughed at must, positively, rouse my Lord to a sense of his misfortune; or it will want poignancy A turtle feast without French wines!




Well, should I find any opportunity of aiding you 




Ay, ay; I have no doubt of your zeal in the cause.




Nay, but, don't mistake me I only mean as far as teazing his Lordship is concerned.









If his Lordship had any real
  27
cause for jealousy, I should, for Lady Morden's ake, be the the the the the most miserable creature upon earth.









But you seem mighty secure of your conquest.




I am no novice; I can tell when a woman's time is come. Besides, her Ladyship has granted me a rendezvous.









Why, this very evening, to be sure.









Here, in this very house.




Since you are so very certain, how came you not to take advantage of being alone with her, after the rout?




I did: that is, should have done, had we not been interrupted.









A new footman an odd kind of Oh! here the very fellow comes.









What does the rude lout peer at?








 Did did did your Ladyship's honour call?








 I I thought, mayhap, you wanted my Lord.




What should I want your Lord for, think you, friend?



Nay, marry, that's more nur I can tell.




What is your name?



Gabriel, an't please you. In my last place, they used to call me the Sly Simpleton.




And who did you live with last?



Why, you an heard of my Lady's brother, the rich nabob, that be just come over fro' th' Eastern Indies?








Ees. I do come fro' his estate, out o' Staffordshire.




You are part of the live stock?








Were you in his service?



 N E Ees.








Better nur a week.




What sort of a man is he?



Humph! A be well enough, when a's pleased tho' I canno' say as I do like him much, for a measter.








Because a'l neither let a servant tell lies nur take money.








No A'wonnot whereof, here, I find, I canno' please my Lady, if I donna tell lies; and, I am sure, I canno' please myself, if I donna take money.









Ha, ha, ha! So, he did not suit you?



No. A's too high flown, as 'twere, in's notions 








A makes a great case o' what a calls friendship, and honour, and honesty, and such like; and, you know, if a poor sarvant gis heed to that there sort o'stuff a's not likely to get rich.









So Mr. Wilmot's head is full of such nonsense, is it?



Oh! a's brimful of such nonsense and so were I, while I lived wi' he; which wur the reason, as I do suppose, that they called me a Simpleton but I am not so simple as folk think me.




 My dear Mrs. Modely, leave me, for a moment, with this fellow. You'll be upon the watch, to throw in any hints, or aids, you happen to see necessary, and apropos?




Yes, yes that is, for Emily, and the elopement but, be cautious; a defeat would turn the tables upon us, and make us the jest of the whole town, friends and enemies.




How can you fear it?




Nay, I do not; I know my sex, and I know you.








Gabriel is your name, you say?








You seem a sharp kind of fellow, and one that understands his own interest.



Ees I understand my own interest.




Are you, if occasion should offer, willing to do me a piece of service?



Humph! What will you gi' me?




I see you are a sensible fellow▪ and come to the point, at once.



Ees. I love to come to the point.




And you would not betray me, to any body?



Why not unless somebody were to pay me better.




Upon my honour, thou art the honestest rogue I ever met with.



Ees that I be.




Here here is money for thee and, observe, as thou seemest perfectly to understand a bargain, thou shalt have more, in proportion to thy fidelity and capacity; and, moreover Canst thou read and write?








Well, then, be faithful, and I will get thee a place in the excise And, now, observe I I have a very great respect and friendship for your Lady.



Ees, ees As we sen ith' country, you have more nur a month's mind to her.




How, sirrah! Dare you suppose I have? 



Nay, now, belike, you think me a simpleton too! Your great folk supposen a sarvant has neither ears nor eyes But, lord, they are mistaken! Ecod, their ears are often plaguy long. What, mun, I wur no' so fast asleep as you thought me, i' the passage, this morning.








Belike, becase I be a country lad, you reckon I should think it strange, like, that one gentleman should teak a liking to another gentleman's wife; but, lord, I know, well
  31
enough, that's nought, here I ha' learned a little o' what's what 




Nay, friend Gabriel, I am more and more convinced, thou art a clever, acute, fellow.



Lord, mun, your worship need no' be so shy, like You do know, you ha' promised me a place an places that are no' bought one way mun be bought another.




Well said, friend Gabriel.



An, as for keeping o' family secrets, donno' you fear me; becase why, I do find they be a sarvant's best parkizites For, an it wur na for family secrets, how should so many poor country Johns so very soon become gentlemen?




 This fellow's thoughts run all in one channel; his ruling passion is money; the love of that sharpens his intellects, and opens his eyes and ears. Well, Gabriel, you shall find me generous as a Prince, provided Here's somebody coming go into the next room; I'll speak with you presently.



Ees. But I do hope your honour's worship wunna forget the place, like?














My angel! My life! 



Hush! My papa is coming, and wants to take me away with him, home.








Yes hush take no notice.








Come, Emily; are you ready?



I am always ready, and happy, to obey my dear papa; but, surely, Sir, you will not let me leave Lady Morden, without so much as bidding her adieu?




I'll write a card of thanks to her Ladyship, with your respects, and as many compliments as you please.



Nay, but, dear Sir, consider it will seem too abrupt. Lady Morden is so good, so kind I would not give her a moment's pain for the world. Besides, I have so many obligations to her Ladyship.




I begin to be afraid, child, left you should have too many obligations to her Ladyship.



Let me only stay to-night, and to-morrow morning I will go, with all my heart, and as early as you please, if you desire me.




 I protest she is bantering him! Oh! the charming malicious little angel!  Ay, General, let Emily stay to-night; I will answer for her, she will go to-morrow morning, as soon as you please, if you desire her.




You will answer for her! 




Yes Won't you permit me, Emily?



 My dear papa knows I never attempt to break my word.




Yes, my child; I do know, you have, hitherto, been unspotted, and pure, as the morn blown lily; and my anxiety that you should remain so makes me thus desirous of your quitting this house. When I brought you here, these doors did not, so easily, fly open, at
  33
the approach of such fine, such accomplished, gentlemen as Sir Frederic Fashion.




 By heavens, he anticipates his misfortunes! 



 Do, my dear papa, consent only for to-day; I don't ask any longer.




 I could hug the charming hypocrite!




Well, well, Emmy; you know, I never deny you any thing: for, indeed, you never yet asked any thing that could give the most anxious and affectionate father a moment's pain.



 I thank you, dear, dear Sir; you have made me happy.




By my life, I shall find this a much more agreeable affair than I hoped! Yes, General you you are a very good papa.









Yes I do, upon my soul.




Then I am what you, I am afraid, will never be.





Ha, ha, ha! He does not suspect we are so soon to be so nearly related Ha, ha, ha! I should like to be present when he first hears the news He he will foam and bounce like a cork from a bottle of champaigne.








Well, Sir Frederic, is her Ladyship returned?




Yes; she is dressing for dinner. She bought the Actaeon.









Oh, yes. She is a charming woman! the eyes of the whole room were upon her. There were some smart things said One observed a likeness between me and Actaeon; another thought it bore a far greater resemblance to your Lordship.




Ha, ha, ha! About the head, no doubt?




For my part, I said, I thought the likeness was very capable of being improved.




You were very kind.




Oh, pray, have you heard that Sir Peter Pry is going to sue for a bill of divorce?









'Tis very true. I should not have suspected Sir Peter of such vulgar revenge; but, I find, our married men of fashion are far less liberal in their sentiments than the Ladies.




Ha, ha, ha! Yes; they often want a woman's philosophy in these matters.




Yes they are wasps, that fly and feed wherever they can find honey, but retain a sting for any marauder that shall approach their nests.




Somewhat selfish, I own.




Much more liable to be jealous than the women and jealousy, your Lordship knows, is the most ridiculous, ill-bred, contemptible thing in nature!




Ha, ha, ha! Yes, yes ha, ha, ha! Perfectly despicable.




Oh, nothing so laughable as the
  35
vagaries of a jealous husband: no creature suffers so much, or is pitied so little.




Ha, ha, ha! Ay the thefts of love are applauded, not punished.




Yes, and the poor robb'd husband, watchman like, twirls his rattle, alarms the neighbourhood, and collects assistants, who never fail to aid the thief, and laugh at him and his loss.




Ye ye yes. Ha, ha, ha! A husband is a very strange, ignominious animal.









A paltry, mechanical 




Without an idea of life, or manners!




Ha, ha, ha! Very true But, come with me; there's a young gentleman, in the anti-chamber, of a good family, who wishes to be introduced to you A very pretty fellow Has an ambition to do something which shall give him eclat, and is, therefore, desirous of being known to us men of the world.




Well! I am yours for a few minutes; but I must attend Lady Morden at her toilette, presently.












WELL, my Lord, is Lady Morden to be seen?



Oh! Ees, your worship, hur will be, anon; for yonder is Sir Frederic, helping the maid to dress her ladyship.




Helping to dress her Ladyship?



Ees They sent me for some milk of roses, here   and, would you believe it, I wur sich an oaf, I had never heard, before, that roses gave milk.




Ah! You are some half-taught country booby.



Why, so I do find; for, in the country, the folk do only clear-starch their aprons and ruffles; but, here, ecod, they clear-starch their faces.




Well, go, carry in your milk; and inform her Ladyship I am waiting her leisure  



Ecod, here they all come, your honour; and rare and merry they be. But you• Londoneers do lead a rare, ranting, life!









Ha, ha, ha! Oh! You whimsical toad! You Ha, ha, ha! You have half-killed me! I am glad to see you in town, General We have been drawing the characters of our acquaintance, and Mrs. Modely, and Sir Frederic Fashion, have been so droll, and so satirical!









I could not have thought there was so much satisfaction in remembering the failings of one's friends.




Oh! It makes one so cheerful!




And keeps one so charmingly in countenance!




 Which you stand in very great need of.




I assure your Ladyship, you have an exquisite turn for satire; you cut with excessive keenness; and, yet, with a dexterity that makes the very patient tingle with pleasure.




You are partial, A little more experience will make these things quite familiar; but habit only can give one perfect ease.




Oh! Habit Habit is a wonderful thing! Have you heard the anecdote of the Newmarket-Jockey?




No; what is it?




Why, a Jockey, having had a bad run at the last October meeting, was willing to correct the errors of Fortune by turning his lead to gold; accordingly, on Epping Forest, he stopped Major Warboys, and bade him deliver; to which the Major, being one of those singular officers who think it some disgrace to be robb'd, replied by firing his pistol The ball happened to be fatal the horse set off and, to shew the effect of habit, the body of the Jockey kept its seat as far as the stable door, and there deliberately tumbled off; nay, some go so far as to assert it was seen to rise in the stirrups; but that, I believe, wants confirmation.














Pshaw! You tragi-comic wretch!




I think you had not much company last night.




Your Lordship was so well bred, and made your visit so short, else you would have found a great deal.




Oh, yes, they poured in, from all quarters.




Sir Nathan Neaptide, the yellow admiral, came.









Oh! rude as his own boatswain.




Would teach a starling blasphemy, rather than want good conversation. 














That makes him so much respected.




Yes; like a chimney-sweeper in a crowd, he makes his way by being dirty.




I protest, your Ladyship is prodigiously brilliant to-day!




No, no Though I am a vast admirer of wit. A person of wit has one very peculiar, and enviable, advantage.




What is that, madam?














Yes. A wit has more ideas, consequently lives longer, in one hour than a fool in seven years.




For which reason, your Ladyship is, already, three times the age of old Par.




Dear, Sir Frederic, that is so gallant.









Why, yes This is the first time I ever heard a Lady told she was old, and receive it as a compliment!




But, your visitors Who had you next?




There was Sir Jeremy Still-life.




 And his bouquet. He primmed himself up in one corner, and seemed to think that, like the image of a Saint on a holyday, he was powdered and painted on purpose to be adored.




He was not singular in that.




Oh, no; there was a whole row of them that, like jars and mandarins on a mantle-piece, look'd vastly ornamental, and served charmingly to fill up vacancies.




Every trifle has its use.




Lord Index came, and stalk'd round the rooms, as if he had been loaded with the wisdom of his whole library.




Yes, he look'd as solemn as a monkey after mischief.




 And drew up his face in form, like a writ of inquiry into damages, with a Take-notice engrossed in front.




He would not stay late, for his Lordship is as careful of his health as he is vain of his understanding.




And, yet, he is but a kind of rush-candle; he may glimmer a long while, but will never give much light.




It seems strange that your people, who have acquired a little knowledge, always think they possess an infinite deal; while those, who are the best informed, appear continually conscious of wanting more.




Not strange at all, my Lord. Amassing knowledge is like viewing the sun through a telescope; you enlarge the object, but you destroy the glare.




Did not you observe that, notwithstanding the pearl-powder, my Lady Bloom's neck looked remarkably sallow?




Oh! As a Jew's face under a green umbrella.




The widow Twinkle, as usual, talked a vast deal about reputation.




One is apt to admire a thing one wants.




She always takes infinite pains to place her reputation, like broken china in a buffet, with the best side outward.




She may plaister, and cement, but will never bring it to bear handling.




Mr. Pensive, the poet, came in, too.




Yes, but as nobody took any notice of him, he presently went out again.




A great proof of his good sense.




Your poets, and sheriff's-officers, are a kind of people every body has heard of, but that nobody chooses to know.




Or, if you are under the necessity of receiving a private call from them, now and then, it would be quite disgraceful to be seen with them in public.




Your Ladyship used to be very partial to Mr. Pensive.




Yes, her Ladyship used to have many singular partialities. She was once partial to merit and virtue, wherever she found them: she had a partiality for order, oeconomy, and domestic duties, likewise: nay, she even went so far as to cherish a partiality for your Lordship!




Ha! ha! ha! Odious partialities!














Ma Ma Madam! Odious?




Ha! ha! ha! To to be sure, Sir! Is it not odious to be unfashionable?




Certainly Ha! ha! ha! ha!




Ha, ha, ha! I protest, General, you Ha, ha, ha! You are too severe.












Ha! ha! ha! You are, really.




Ha! ha! ha! Yes, you are, indeed, General.




Ha! ha! ha! Yes, yes, you absolutely are.





Humph Why don't you laugh, my Lord?




I do. Ha! ha! ha! I I I do, General Though, as to severity, I own I I don't see it in that light.









No I cannot accuse myself of any fault; unless the love of pleasure be one.




Hah!  And your catalogue of pleasures, I fancy, is pretty extensive.




Not half so extensive as one could wish.




A dice-box, for instance, is one.




A very principal one.




My short experience hardly entitles me to venture an opinion, but I find a wonderful similarity between gaming and a cold bath You have a a tremor a a hesitation, at first; but, having once plunged in, you are thrown into the most delightful glow!




Oh, an ardent tingling 




Beware, Sir, that a shivering fit does not succeed.














Ha! ha! ha! You really have no mercy, General You hit so often, and so hard, egad!




I'm vastly happy to see you
  43
all so merry Tho' upon my honour I can't find out the jest.




That is strange, when you yourself make it.




Not in the least There is many a professed joker who does not understand his own wit.




 I am tired, disgusted, with this mixture of folly and wickedness   May I intrude so far upon your Ladyship as to obtain half an hour's private conversation?




Why Upon my word General I I have so many affairs on hand, to day, that I must beg you to excuse me: Tomorrow, you may command me, for as long as you please.




Ay, do, General, have the complaisance to wait till to-morrow, when my Lady will be more at leisure.




 Well, madam▪ I did not use to be thought an intruder, by your Ladyship, and will not begin now But, since I cannot have the honour to tell you privately, I still think myself bound to do my duty, and inform you, publicly, you are in the hands of sharpers, "who will filch from you your good name"   Nay, perhaps, you are on the very eve of destruction! Oh guile! Can it be! My heart is full! I   Lady Morden I have no utterance But, if there be such a thing as sympathy, some small portion of the horror I now feel will communicate itself to you.





(Lady Morden seems affected, Lord Morden deeply so, Sir Frederic and Mrs. Modely disconcerted.)
A PAUSE.



 The the General has the strangest way of affecting and harrowing Has not he, my Lord?




Ye yes Upon my honour, he he I don't know how  .




Ha, ha, ha! The General The General is a true Don Quixote. He first creates giants, and then kills them.




Yes. Ha! ha! ha! His head is full of of windmills to grind moral sentiments But, come, Mrs. Modely, you have not seen my new purchase.




Oh, what the Actaeon?




Is it come home?




Oh, yes I could not rest till I had it. 




Come, my Lord I long to see it!




The tints are charming!




So I hear The grouping excellent!

















 Oh! Well, Sir, how proceeds your amour? I thought you had been busied in schemes about that affair.



Faidth, and I am so But I don't believe I can succeed, without your assistance.




Perhaps, you are a little scrupulous about the means.



Me! Indeed and you have mistaken your man Why, you don't think, Sir Frederic, I regard the complaints or tears of women! You and I, sure, seek our own gratification, not their happiness For, if the love of man sought only the happiness of woman, faidth, there would be nothing but dull marriages, fond husbands, and legitimate children; and we should lose all the satisfaction of seducing wives, ruining daughters, and of bringing so many fine, sweet, innocent, craters upon the town!




Oh, it would strangely reverse the order of things.



Order! Faidth, and it would occasion a blissed confusion in Doctor's Commons.




For my part, present pleasure is my pursuit; I never disturb my imagination with dismal conjectures, on future consequences.



Faidth, and you are right For, as you say, it would be dismal enough to trace these consequences into into streets, and hospitals, and places that the imagination sickens at.




Marriage, you say, is not your object.



Oh, no! I don't like that said matrimony music.




A mortgaged rent-roll, only, can make it supportable. A wife is like a child's whistle, which every breath can play upon, but which no art can make melodious.



Faidth, and you have viry proper notions about wives. So, whin the dare crater gave a marriage hint, why, I told her a dale of boister, consarning an old cross fadther, and being under age, and that I could not marry these three months. For, you know, one does not stand for a good double handful of oaths, and lies, whin one wants to ruin a sweet, kind, angel, that one loves.




Ha, ha, ha! Suppose you were to make a sham marriage.



A sham marriage? Faidth, and I would make that, if there were not a parcel of low rascals, that make halters.




Pshaw! That's a paltry, mechanical, fear.



But, you you were telling me, you know, of a scheme 








Ay, faidth! The contract. You said you would shew it me.




I will I have brought it for that purpose . I, lately, found it an efficacious expedient.








Would have been, but for an unlucky accident.



But there is one small impidimint.













Baw! A house of cards.



Oh, and that it is; for 'tis supported by knaves, and full of tricks.




Here here is the very contract I myself gave.








And here a counterfeit copy, with a few slight, but essential, alterations.



I understand To put the change upon her. 




Which you may easily take, or make, an opportunity to do.



 Will, thin, lind them both to me; and, faidth, you shall see fine divarsion.




No I I'll have them copied for you. This is signed, and sealed



Arrah, what of that? Ha! ha! ha! Sure, you are not afraid you would be obliged to marry a man?




No The only danger, in trusting them to you, is that of losing them. And, even then, there could be no ill consequence; except by falling into the hands of one who is far enough from London.



Ay, ay, lit me have them I give you my honour to make a proper use of them.




Ha, ha, ha! You are a promising youth, and it would be a pity such talents should be baulked So, here here.



Promising? Oh, faidth, and I hope to surprise even you, yoursilf. You shall prisently hear of the succiss of your schaimes.







 There a' goes Hop, step, and jump!  (Pause) Ecod, she does it featly!




She! What's that you say?



How a' skipp'd into the carriage! There! Off it drives! Whur-r-r-r! Rattling away!




What does the fellow mean? S'death! Sure! Who are you talking of?



Why, of that Irish, gentleman-like, Lady.








I wur coming straight to tell you There is a plot, mun, against you!








Nay, you are too late! A's gone! Three streets off by this.








Ees She means to breed a confusion.













Harriet! By heavens 'tis she! 








Secure fool! Ineffable ideot! And, yet, in that disguise, Lucifer himself could not have discovered her! And who told you?



Why, his worship's gentleman, Mr. Lapelle A' o'erheard her tell my Lord aw her plot.




What course shall I take?



Suppose I wur to watch, and, when she comes back, let your worship know?




Do so But be very careful And be very secret.



Ees, ees; I remember the place, mun.




Away be watchful and be rewarded.





This is a thunder stroke! Lord Morden in the plot, too! It will come to Lady Morden's ears, I shall be blown, all my plans disconcerted, myself laughed at, and my reputation eternally ruined!   Ha! There is one way to prevent the mischief, yet By heavens, it cannot fail! I will go to Lady Morden, and, with feigned penitence, tell her every circumstance, myself; only making her believe I knew Harriet, when I returned the contract. She wist admire my candour, think my contrition real▪ and thus will I turn this seeming disaster to excellent account, by making it an additional proof of sincerity, and affection for her Ladyship! Dear Wit, I thank thee; thou never forsakest me at a crisis! Indeed! My Lord! And my young Lady! Ah, ha! But you shall find one, perhaps, who can plot, as deeply as yourselves.
END OF THE THIRD ACT.










INTO what an abyss of evils have I plunged, through inexperience, want of reflection, and an absurd imitation of fashionable follies! Lapelle.








Is the young young gentleman returned?



 No, my Lord.




I am on the rack! The liberties in which Lady Morden permits this Sir Frederic are insupportable! Unable to be silent, and ashamed to complain, I am tortured, by contending passions. Lapelle Let me know the instant the the young gentleman comes back.



 Yes, my Lord.




Stay   What if I were to inform Lady Morden of this affair? Surely, she could not shut her eyes against such a palpable, such an unprincipled, attempt at seduction!   Go, and tell your Lady, I beg to speak with her, a moment.





What an absurd being is man! Not a fortnight ago, Lady Morden was totally indifferent to me; and, now I am in danger of losing her, I find I love her To distraction love her! Yet to sink into a civil, sober, domestic, man To become the standing jest of all those highspirited companions whose society I have courted, whose maxims I have pretended to admire! 







So, my Lord, in melancholy contemplation; and at home, too!









Lud! I wonder how your Lordship can endure home! Of all places, in the world, home is, certainly, the most disagreeable.




Did not your Ladyship meet Lapelle?









I I wished to see your Ladyship.




To see me! What can your Lordship possibly want with me?




To speak to you.




Speak to me! You perfectly surprise me.




On a subject which I I scarcely know how to begin.




Ha! ha! ha! What can have made your Lordship so serious? Ha! ha! ha!
  52
I declare, I never saw you look so grave before! This must be some very important secret, that can occasion your Lordship to look so very dismal! I vow, I am quite impatient Come, my Lord Why don't you proceed?




I I begin to find I have been very foolish.




Ha, ha, ha! Is that the secret?




I I feel I have been to blame.




To blame, my Lord! How? Which way? Or, if you have, how does it concern me?




Your Ladyship used to think our interests inseparable.




For which your Lordship always laughed at me. And, I freely own, I was a very silly out of the way woman.









How, my Lord! Not? Your Lordship is very polite, but you know very well I was.




Lady Morden, you once loved me You yourself, not long since, kindly owned you did.




Very true, my Lord; but why why now should you reproach me with my follies?




I feel the severity of your reproof It is no more than I merit!




 I, really, don't understand your Lordship! I I meant no reproof We loved each other as long as it was agreeable to us, and, if my passion happened to out-last your Lordship's, that was none of your fault. These are the principles of of all rational people, you know, my Lord.




They are principles, madam, that, from my soul, I wish I had never heard!




Upon my honour, you astonish me! Have not I learnt them from you, yourself?




Unjustifiable, madam, as my conduct may have been, I never carried them to the same excess as Sir Frederic Fashion.




 Sir Frederic Fashion may, perhaps, be as capable 〈◊〉 reformation as your Lordship.




Your Ladyship may may 〈◊〉 partial.









Who so great a libertine as 〈◊〉 Sir Frederic?




Has been He has 〈◊〉 enough to confess it.




Has been! Madam, 〈◊〉 exists a present proof of deliberate seduction! An injured Lady! 




 Oh! What the 〈◊〉 the Croat.









What's your surprise, my Lo••▪ Don't I tell you he has confessed all his follie•〈◊〉 me?




But, madam, did he menti•• the contract?




To be sure! And the 〈◊〉 counterfeit copy With the generous manne•〈◊〉 which he, just now, returned Harriet the origin••▪ though she thought he did not know her.




I am petrified! Lady M••den I perceive, I have lost your affections.




My Lord I am above dissimulation. Yes I own I have a passion, too permanent to be shaken; and the satisfaction of a self-assurance that he who, at present, possesses my heart, will not, so soon, be weary of me, as he who had it before.




You cut me to the soul! Did you know what I feel!




Feel, my Lord! Ha, ha, ha! Oh fie! Your Lordship is a man of fashion, not of feeling.




Hovering mischief, madam, has quickened benumbed nature in me.  Oh! let me conjure you, Lady Morden, to reflect on your present situation! I have conducted you to the horrid precipice of guilt, and destruction! Oh suffer me to save, to snatch, you from danger!













Ha, ha, ha! How now, my Lord! Ha, ha, ha! Making love to your wife?




Ha, ha, ha! Oh! Sir Frederic, if you had but come a little sooner, you would have heard the most delightful morality!




Ha, ha, ha! Morality from my Lord?




Yes, Sir, morality from my Lord!




Ha, ha, ha! Nay, I assure you, he is quite serious. 




Rejected! Ridiculed! Despised! Their sport! Their scorn! Their subject for open sarcasm, laughter, and contempt! Oh! Insupportable. 








Ha, ha, ha! My Lord has a mind to fall in love with me, once more.




Nobody, but my Lord, madam, would ever have ceased, a moment, to love you!




Well, Sir Frederic, and may I, then, at last, flatter myself I have found that sympathy of soul, for which I so long have sighed?




Alas, madam, I dare not rank myself your equal! No, I dare not! There is such infinitude of perfection in your every thought, look, and expression, that to merit you were to be, as you are, something celestial! Yet, such virtue as mere humanity may arrive at, I will exhaust nature with endeavours, and weary heaven with prayers, to acquire!




There is, surely, some secret charm in your words.




Did I think the gratification of any sinister passion influenced my present conduct; were it not my hope to remove you from the cold embrace of satiated apathy, to the swee and endless transports of love, founded on, permit me to say, on a congeniality of soul and senriment; did I not feel an innate conviction that there, already, subsists, between us, a tie of the most indissoluble nature, an immaculate tie, a
  56
marriage of the mind, superior infinitely to all human institutions; did I not think, and feel, thus, I would, instantly, dreadful as the image is 〈◊〉 thought, renounce that heaven which I have had the presumption to contemplate, nay aspire to possess!




And if, after all this, you should prove false, Sir Frederic!




False, madam! Oh! Let me conjure you to inflict any punishment on me, rather than that of suspecting my sincerity! Thus, ••eeling, on this angelic hand, I vow 








I cannot resist the impulse which How! Sir Frederic!




 My Lord. 














You can listen to morality from •••ers, madam, if not from me!




Oh! I I have no dislike to a •••non, when I admire the preacher.




Madam If you have no respect 〈◊〉 my honour, you might have some for my feelings, and 




 A, a Hold, ••ld, my Lord You are beginning your dis••••se again; but I am in a hurry, and will hear 〈◊〉 draw your conclusions some other opportu••••▪









Nay, I will, upon my honour.








Hold, Sir; a word with you, if you please.




With me, my Lord?









Willingly. Your Lordship seems in so pleasant a humour 




Sir, I am in a humour neither to be trifled with nor sneered at.




Ha, ha, ha! I can assure your, Ha, ha, ha! your Lordship, no man is happier to see you in your present temper than I am.




Look you, Sir Frederic, you and I have been too long of the same school for me to be ignorant of your principles. But I begin to detest them!









They are now, at this very moment, rending my heart. They have planted a nest of adders in my bosom. In short, Sir You must forbear your visits to Lady Morden.









I am serious determined.




Ha, ha, ha! When her Ladyship gives me this advice, it may perhaps be followed.




It must and shall be followed, Sir, when I give it.









Ridiculous as it may appear, to you, and such as you, I feel, and will assert, a husband's rights.




Ha, ha, ha! I congratulate your
  58
Lordship, on the keenness, and delicacy, of your feelings; they give me great pleasure; infinite pleasure, upon my soul. Ha, ha, ha! As to a husband's rights, I have no doubt, you will very shortly be in full possession of them all.




Sir, I will have you know, I am, at present, in full possession of them all.




May be so, egad!




And can no longer forbear telling you, I believe you to be a villain.




Ah, now, your Lordship is perfectly explicit. 




LORD MORDEN, SIR FREDERIC, GABRIEL, who runs fearless between them, and looks first at one, then at the other.




How now, sirrah! How dare you take this liberty?



Nay, ecod, there do seem to be some danger in it; an I had not dared to dare, but that I thought that your Lordship wou'd na stick I.








Nay, but my Lady sent me, and would be glad to speak wi' your honour's worship.








Oh no! Not wi' your Lordship's honour's worship; but wi' his worship's honour, Sir Frederic Fashion.




This is no place, my Lord: we'll settle this business to-morrow To-morrow, my Lord To-morrow 








Damnation! Torture! To-morrow? He has some concealed meaning A thousand little circumstances tell me, some mischief is brooding I could not have believed Lady Morden so confirmed, so far gone, in guilt. The behaviour of them all, their dark allusions, their sarcasms, pointed at me, convince me, they are acting in conjunction, to hold me up How now, sirrah! What do you stand gaping at? How durst you come between us?



Why, ecod, I knew that, wi' us, i'th country, murder would have been against the commandements; and I had forgot that, here, in town, you have no commandements.




This fool can see the excesses of passion in their true light.



I'm sorry 'at I angered your Lordship's worship; becase as why, I wur determined to do like the rest of my neighbours; for, sartinly, wur a body to keep the commandements, while every body else is breaking them a'd be a poor devil, indeed.  Belike, your Lordship be a bit jealousy, like?








Nay, I should no' a' wondered an you wur An I had no' been told that your Londoneers be never jealousy, like.




Should not have wondered! Why not, sirrah?



Nay, ecod, I munna tell!








Nay, that's it As I said, I munna tell!




 Speak all you know, instantly, or 



 Nay, nay, donna be in a passion, your worship I be no goose, you munna spit me.




Speak, I say I'll have your secret, or your soul.



Ecod, I believe, your worship will be puzzled to find either Tho' that Sir Frederic be an old fox A's used to steal chicken.




Be explicit; what has he done?



Done Oh! A's 








Promised me a place!








And, moreover, a' ga' me a purse; which is better still: for, your worship's grace do know that, an egg, in hand, is better nur a hen, in expectation.




Suppose, sirrah, I give you my purse, too.



Nay, ecod, an you gi' it me I b'lieve, I shall I shall take it.








Thank your worship's Lordship.  








 Why, hark you, sirrah! Come back! Why, rascal!



 St! My Lord! My Lord!













 Oh! Madam, I am distracted.



Have patience, but for one quarter of an hour, and I hope to rid you of all your fears, and inflict that punishment, on the author of them, which he dreads most.








By exposing him; making him what he delights to make others, a subject of laughter and contempt.








We may be overheard; step with me into the antichamber, and I'll inform you.







 Sir Frederic! Sir Frederic!




Well, what's the matter? How camest thou off with his Lordship?



Off? Ecod, I I wish you may come off as well.








Ees. Why, mun, there be the bailiffs, below!








Ees Sent by the Irish gentleman, lady I mean, a'ter your worship! Ecod, hur is detarmined to ha' you, safe!




The Devil! What's to be done! Is she with them?



No; hur be come back, and is gone into the antichamber, wi' my Lord.




And has not seen them?








Here, quick, change clothes with me, and tell them you are Sir Frederic Fashion.



Me! Ecod, thank you for that No, no I would na' be in your coat, for fifty pound!




Fool! they durst not detain you.



I'll take care they shan't.




S'death! What's to be done?



Ecod Suppose Suppose I wur to go, and tell the Irish gentleman somebody wanted hur; and so make 'em arrest she?




Ha! Exquisite fellow! I conceive Away, send her instantly!







Is your name Sir Frederic Fashion, Sir?




No, Sir; but Sir Frederic will be here, directly; if you have any business with him.



 Have your handkerchief ready, should he make any noise, for fear of a rescue This is a very serious affair.  Pray, Sir, what kind of person is Sir Frederic?




Um a handsome agreeable little gentleman, and very young.



May I ask, Sir, how he is dressed?




 Gad! well remember'd.   Dressed, oh! he is dressed for for the masquerade Here he comes. 








 Well, Sir Frederic! Ha, ha, ha! How goes your scheme.



Oh, ho! Faidth, and are you so jocular?




I have been thinking this is a dangerous business, and would advise you not to give the girl that contract It may bring you into trouble.







Oh! Faidth, and she has it safe enough.



 Sir Frederic Fashion , you are my prisoner, Sir, I have a special writ against you.



Ha, ha, ha! Against me! Arrah, frind, but you are making a bit of a bull here.



We know what we are about, Sir; my carriage is below; you shall be treated like a gentleman; but we must beg you to go with us, instantly, and without noise.



 I tell you, friend, you mistake the person.







 Here, Sir Frederic; here be a card, from Colonel Castoff, wi' his compliments.







 Ees, to be sure!



Sir, we must be gone.



This is a concerted trick Here  







Did not I do it rarely?




Do! I could wonder and worship thee! In half a year, thou would'st make an ass of Machiavel! Oh that I could but retrieve that cursed contract.



I do think I could get it.




Ay! Nay, I do, almost, begin to believe in miracles! Which way?



No matter for that What will you gi' me?




Whatever thou canst wish A hundred guineas 



And the place in the Excise?




Any thing, every thing! Run, try, fly! Think, succeed, and I'll make an Emperor of thee!



Ees I'll be Emperor of Excise-men.








The shrewdness, and abilities, of this fellow are amazing!




 Yes, my sweet little Emily, the greatest beauty in London would be envied, had she made such a conquest.



Ah! ▪You say so. 




Say! Why, to-morrow morning, the whole town will be in a flame!



Well, that will be pure!




Oh! Sir Frederic 




 My life! My soul! My transport!



 What sweet words!




You are very much obliged to me, I assure you. I have been speaking to my sweet, dear, little Emily, here, in your behalf.




Then, Madam, I am, inexpressibly, obliged to you!



Yes, Mrs. Modely is very much your friend, and very much my friend A'n't you, Mrs. Modely?




Yes, my little dear; I am, indeed, very much your friend: and, if I had not the best opinion in the world of Sir Frederic, would not have spoken as I have.



Well, Sir Frederic, have you ordered the chaise and four?








Nay, you may say any thing before Mrs. Modely. I have told her all; for, you know, she is my friend.




Yes, yes, Sir Frederic; be assured, I will not betray any secret, the keeping of which will make my dear Emily so happy!



Yes, we shall be so happy! You know, Sir Frederic, you swear to marry me.








Well, but, swear it again; now, before Mrs. Modely.




By all the saints!



Saints! Pshaw! You should swear by by my bright eyes, that dim the stars.




Oh! By those bright eyes, that dim the blazing Sun.



And and, my beauties, that eclipse the blushing Moon!




Ay, by those, and all your burning charms, I swear.



To marry me, the moment we come to Scotland?




The moment we come to Scotland.



And, if we are pursued 




To fight for you! Die for you!



Oh! That will be delightful! 




 The Devil it will!



Come, let us set off! My bandbox is ready!




That is impossible, my angel!








I have not ordered the chaise, till ten o'clock.



Oh dear! What, two whole hours longer!




They are two ages, I grant   Forgive my fears, my deares Emily; but, tho' the pleasure of your company is the most precious thing on earth a a yet 



What, you want me gone?




Rather than you should think so unkindly, I will run the hazard of being surprised, and eternally separated from you.



Will you! I am sure you don't love me then However, I'll go. You will be sure to be ready, the moment the clock strikes ten.








Time is precious Here have been such plots, against me!









Oh! I have escaped Scylla and Charybdis! But wind and tide are, now, both with me Lady Morden is to meet me, here, in half an hour. Thro' that door is her chamber.




Oh, you vile creature!




What prude, to-morrow, will dare pretend that woman, and education, are a match for man, and nature?




And so you will persist in your wickedness, in spite of my persuasions!




Lady Morden has, still, all the rhodomontade of love, in her brain Thinks of nothing but cooing-constancy, and eternal raptures!









Except, indeed, tormenting her husband; which seems to give the sin a double sweetness.




Or she would be no wife!




So, as soon as I am gone off with Emily, I will have a consolatory epistle delivered to her.









Here it is, ready written; and, if I don't flatter myself, a master-piece.




Let me see! Let me see!




No, you shall hear. Dear Madam, Tho' you are an angel, if there are other angels, am I to blame?









If man is naturally inconstant, and if I am a man am I to blame?









If nature has made variety the highest enjoyment am I to blame?









If, since happiness is the pursuit of us all, I am happy as often as I can am I to blame?









Farewell, Madam; circumstances, as you will find, force me, thus suddenly, from your arms, in which, I own, I found heaven centered: but, if you should call me cruel, perjured, and ungrateful, because I act naturally, and therefore rationally am I to blame?




Certainly not! Well, as I live, this is a master-stroke! Perfectly as I thought I knew you, you have astonished me!




Yes; 'tis the true Socratic mode But, now, my dear Mrs. Modely, go you to Emily, prevent her disturbing us, and keep her in readiness.




Well! remember, every thing is at stake, and be yourself.




Fear me not; that prescience, which, they say, is the forerunner of all great events, gives me a happy assurance of success: a confidence, that makes success certain.










I Cannot keep from this house! There is a foreboding of mischief, which haunts, and perturbs, my imagination! And, I fear, with reason! The malignant joy, the smothered exult, the obscure, ironical, satire, which ran through the discourse of that Sir Frederic, were not without a meaning. I wish I had not consented to let Emily stay He sneered, I remember, at the moment: nay, it seemed the sneer of triumph! I wish she were safe, at my own house. Poor Lady Morden! And, is it possible? Such rectitude of heart! Such purity of sentiment! I wish Emily were at home Should my child, my darling fall, I were a wretch indeed!








 I am miserable! distracted! racked! The thunderbolt has struck before I heard it! Oh that its exterminating power had been final! But it has maimed, and deformed, and left a full feeling of wretchedness!




How now, my Lord?




General! I am a wretch! An irretrievable, eternal, wretch!




What, and are you come to a sense of this, now it is too late?




There's the misery! The curse is accomplished, and hope is fled!




Why, ay! Such is the infatuation of folly, and vice, they will not believe vengeance has an arm, till its fatal gripe is felt!




I cannot support these tortures! Oh that it were possible! 









To reclaim Lady Morden.




What then? Another month and Sir Frederic Fashion, or any other libertine of fashion, might take her.




Never! Never! Were her affections once again mine, the stroke of death, only, should separate us!




 Well, my Lord, if you are, at last, convinced of the immensity of your loss I pity you!




Oh, would you could relieve!




Would I could! But, you were a witness how ineffectual my endeavours were. However, walk with me, into the antichamber, and let us consult what is best to be done. Her principles, I fear, are shaken; the only rock on which virtue can stand secure.




Sapped, destroyed! She avows her intents! Unblushingly avows them! And, recapitulating my errors, my crimes, dares me to complain of, or notice, hers! Scorns and contemns me, and justly too, that such a thing as I
  71
should pretend to repeat, or respect, the word virtue!




It is what every husband, every father of a family, must expect! His smallest foibles will stand as precedents for a swarm of follies; and, if he has any vices, they will propagate a hideous brood, that shall extirpate his name from the earth, or overwhelm it with obloquy!







 Come, mun! Your worship, come!













Well, what hast thou done? Where is Harriet?



Oh, I ha' her safe.








Ees, mun For, when the Bailiffs found out a wur a woman, they wur parfitly ravenous!




And let her go?












But, I secured her.








Nay, never do you mind how I tell'ee, I ha' her safe.




But where are the Bailiffs?








The devil they are!



Ees, they be waiting for your worship.








But what o'that? I a'got the contract, mun.








Ees, here it is.




Precious fellow! I could worship thee! Give it me.



 Nay, hold there! I wunna do that.













Pshaw! Make no words, but deliver it and, here here is 



Nay, put up your paper, for I wunna part wi' mine.








Nay, be mild tempered stand where you be; for an you stir another step, I'll call the Bailiffs.




 Cunning scoundrel! He has me in his power, and time presses. Well, Gabriel, be faithful, and, depend on't, I'll make thee a clever fellow.



Why, ecod, I think I am like a Monmouth-street coat ready made.




Thou rememberest the instructions I gave thee?








The chaise is to wait, at the corner of the street.








Thou art to convey Emily's bandbox away, privately; and, if any questions are asked, to say it is Lady Morden's.








Hast thou taken care of the letter, I gave thee?



Care! Ees, ees; I a' ta'en good care on't.




Observe, thou art to deliver, it to Lady Morden, half an hour after we are departed.



Half an hour before you are departed.




Zounds! No, half an hour after, man.



Oh! Ees, ees; half an hour after.








But but, how will your worship get by the Bailiffs?




S'death, that's true! Is there no disguise?



Why ees there be a long greatcoat i'th' hall.




Ay, true! Bring it me.



Nay, nay I'll put it on first, and let 'em see me so, then, when they see you, they'll think it be I 




Excellent! Where are Lord Morden, and the General?








Unlucky! I wish they were any where else.



Oh! an that be all, I'll soon make 'em budge.








Nay! Lord, you're so quisitive! I tell you, I'll do't I'll saunter thro' this door, lock it, and send 'em packing thro' t'other.




Thou art the prince of plotters Away, be vigilant.



Oh! never do you fear me!









This fellow would outwit a whole conclave of Cardinals!




Well, Sir Frederic! here I am, you see; punctual to my promise.




 Oh, Madam, how can I repay this bounty! this condescension! Never! My life were a poor sacrifice, to such sweetness and such charms!




Sir Frederic, this is a trying, a decisive moment! I am going to be either the most happy or the most wretched of women! You tell me, it is your wish, your resolution, to be no longer that general lover, that man of the world, you have, hitherto, been thought.




Say not, dear Lady, it is either my wish or resolution! Heaven can testify, I have not the power to be any thing, but what it shall please you to make me!




I have owned to you that, the levity I have lately affected is not natural to me▪ that my heart sighs for an acquaintance, a mate▪ that, like itself, is subject to all the sweet emotions of sensibility! Yes, it was the first wish of my soul to find this correspondent heart! A heart beating with the same ardour, vibrating to the same sensations, panting for the same pleasures, shrinking from the same pangs; pliant, yet firm; gentle, yet aspiring; passionate, yet pure! Such I once thought Lord Morden's Should I, a second time, be deceived!




I am poor in proofs of sincerity! I have none to offer! My former errors are present punishments! To deny or even palliate them would imply intentional deceit; and this is a moment in which I would wish for men and gods to be witnesses of my truth! I have had, I own, most libertine opinions of your gentle sex; but these I, now, solemnly renounce! Had I, before, met with a Lady Morden, I should, before, have made this renunciation! But, perhaps, the women it has been my misfortune to know deserved, in part, the light esteem in which I held them. Never, till now, did I find one who could mutually inspire such passion and respect! Such agitated, burning, hopes! Such excruciating fears, or thoughts so sanctified, as those I, this moment, feel!




Yet, Sir Frederic, I cannot help observing your conversation, in society, seems still tinged with the impurity of your former libertine principles.




I own, Lady Morden, with confusion own, I have not hitherto had the courage, or, perhaps, I have wanted strength to stem the torrent: but, aided by you, I feel, I dare promise any thing!




I confess, Sir Frederic, the mind finds some difficulty in rooting out fears, planted in it by reiterated accusations. The stories the world tells of you are dreadful! And, yet, there is such heartfelt conviction attends your present words that, to me, it is impossible to listen and retain a doubt.




This generous confidence transports me, fills me with gratitude, and inspires
  76
rapturous hope!  Oh, gently suffer me to conduct you, where love lies, in panting, breathless, ecstasy 




To them GABRIEL, abruptly, in a Great-coat, stands fixed, staring.







 Belike You dunna want company?








I thought as much 








Nay! Hands off!  I shan't stir, till I have delivered my message.




What message? What have you to say?



 Why the chaise and four be come.








 The bandbox ready.













 Begone, I say.



Gone! Nay, sartinly, you would no' ha' I run away wi' her.




 Ha, ha, ha!









Ha, ha, ha! Why, surely, you! The never failing victor! The fertile-brained Sir Frederic Fashion! who knows not defeat, and who never, yet, was at a loss for stratagems!
  77
Though you are taken somewhat unawares, you cannot want invention!




You'll pardon me, Madam, if I want understanding to comprehend your meaning.




Indeed! Well, if you are so very dull of apprehension am I to blame?









Oh! Do you recollect this letter?




How! Faithless fiend! 



Keep off, or dread the chastisement I am prompted, instantaneously, to inflict!




Chastisement! What is this? Who are you?



A man! You are 




For heaven's sake, brother! 








Gabriel Wilmot; whose head is so full of the nonsense of friendship, honour, and honesty!




I'll be revenged, however.






To them LORD MORDEN and GENERAL



Turn, wretch, and receive your punishment from this arm! 




 Oh, for shame! Look to the Lady 




Oh, General! Oh, my Lord! 




My life! My ecstasy! My saviour!





To them MRS. MODELY and EMILY.



Bless me, what uproar Hey day!   So, so! Here is a very pretty denouement to our plot, indeed!   I see, good folks, you are all embroiled here; and, as it is a very disagreeable thing to be present at family disputes, I'll  




Pray, Madam, stay, and receive the compliments of the company Mine, and your friend Emily's, in particular.









Mr. Wilmot! My best brother! Though you have, in part, acquainted me with what is past, yet, it is so sudden And you! my dearest Lady! To find you still the same is joy unspeakable!




The task of making you suppose I had effectually become what I seemed, was, indeed, most painful; but the loss of your affection were not pain! 'Twere horror! I told you my passion was too permanent to be shaken Ah! how could you imagine I meant another? Or think it possible I ever could forget that chaste, that ardent, that eternal, love, I have so repeatedly vowed?




Oh for words! I am all love! gratitude! rapture! and amazement!




And so is Sir Frederic, apparently Nay, even you, Madam, seem a little surprised.




Me! Oh dear, no.




 Dear Sir, though you are a deep and excellent plotter, if there have been counterplots am I to blame? 









If man is sometimes vain, presumptuous, and unprincipled, and if you are a man am I to blame?









If I assumed a mean disguise, that I might aid a sister, to detect, and expose, the mean machinations of Seduction am I to blame?








If, following the advice of this dear Lady  simplicity has made cunning outwit itself am I to blame? 









If, since happiness is the pursuit of us all, I wish to be as happy as possible   am I to blame?








 Certainly not So, the catechism being ended, the scholars may depart.














You forget the bailiffs.




Besides, Sir Frederic, before you go, you must give me leave to introduce you to 




To them HARRIET in woman's clothes presented by Lady Morden.
 This Lady.







Yes, Sir that Harriet, whom, hearing she had happiness in view, and proportioning your ideal triumph to the weight of misery you might entail, you raised heaven and earth to bring to wretchedness, and ruin.




Upon my honour, you you are a sad man, Sir Frederic! A very sad man!




But your vanity is humbled you, now, stand detected; and, instead of envied, you will be sneered at by the depraved, pitied by the good, and, henceforth, avoided by the credulous young creatures you, so manfully, have delighted to involve in guilt, and destruction!




A very dangerous man, indeed, Sir Frederic!



 Ay! beware of him, Madam.




Oh! I I will!



Yes, Sir, the finger of scorn points where it ought: you are exposed, and my resentment is appeased.




Then, Madam the the contract 



There it is, Sir.  I never meant to make any other use of it than what has
  81
been better effected, by different means. 













No; they would sit a little awkwardly.




And now, Sir Frederic, if, after this lesson, you should still retain your former principles, and practices, and, hereafter, receive a still severer punishment, I hope you will acknowledge we are not to blame.
Exeunt Omnes.

  80〈1 page duplicate〉  81〈1 page duplicate〉


