





I Cannot expound the Riddle.



It is a Trick, some new Device to
insnare us.



I cannot tell: It wants a President.
Resign his Power and Greatness, at a time,
When every Stratagem has had Success,
And all things Stoop to his Ambition.
It puzles me,



I wish he were in earnest.



If his Inclinations be for a private Life,
He shall have my Vote; and let him make
What hast he will to the other World.



If it were in my power, I would lend him
A Lift to Heaven, and that's more Charity
Than he deserves, when the Accompts▪ are cast between us.





What shall we do, Colonel? they say
We are like to be Disbanded too.



Is there no Hemp? Go Hang your selves.



This is not the usual Dialect.







Noble Colonel, you are melancholy.



A Simptom of our Cure.




Your Wisdoms apprehend the Cause;
If the Generals Humor holds, You three
Will not take my single Security for a thousand Crowns.



You are merry now.



If you were no Senators I could tell you,
You lye now: But bewo'ye Gentlemen,
You are like to have a fine time on't.




I like this well.









I am acquainted with him Colonel.




My grave Senator: Hark! you promis'd
Me a Kindness; We may be undone, if the
General hold his purpose▪ We shall
Be marching off shortly.







To our old Trades agen.



Why, do you believe his Excellency
Has any serious thoughts to lay down his Commands.



You will easily Consent: Are you not all desir•d
To meet him at Timoleons Tombe?







Where he'l resign his Commission to the Senate.







And which is worse in my Opinion.
It will be true, And which is worse than this,
There's little hope the Army will be continued.
The Enemies (Pox on 'em) are all quiet,
And we that fought for this peace, must Starve and Stink,
For ought I know, suddainly.



Nay, prithee be clear with us, and tell us
Thy own thoughts of the General.



By the Word of an Officer.







If you cannot take my Word, to what purpose
Should I answer your question? Why I'le tell you,
And you shall judge your selves, what will
Become of •im▪ These two days he hath
Drunk nothing but Water, Eat nothing but Sallads,
Talk'd nothing but Religion, and now and then falls▪


Into a long Fit of Prayer, that signifies nothing:
If these be not Prognosticks of a falling General,
Then would I had all my Arrears.



Why? for your comforts, the Senate may hold fit to keep
The Army up still, and though the General lay down. 
'Tis not impossible to find another will take up.
VVill it hurt you to Receive your Money?



Nay, nay for my part, I shall be contented, so
I be paid amongst a great many more,
That shall be happy to be retain'd in your Thoughts,
As men that dare empty their best Ve•ns to serve you.



We have experience of your Valour Colonel.




And shall deserve it.



Your most humble Servant.





What think you now?



My Faith settles apace.





'Tis he: my Lord Cleomenes, my Heart
Leaps to congratulate your safe return,
(Gentlemen of the Senate of my Principles)
Your Victories were here before your Person;
Our Enemies in Affrick are all tam'd.



And Dionysius marching Home in Triumph.
I shall take an Opportunity after I have seen the
General, to give you a more particular accompt.



One Word, Sir, We have Wonders here, that
You expect not, strange Revolutions.







I dare not tell you aloud, and it will ask
Your stronge Faith, the General.




He is a most Noble Gentleman, and has
Preserv'd the Honor of his Family,
And still maintain'd his Current clear, uot mix'd
With foul rebellious Streams.



'Twas his Fortune to be abroad when

Damocles began his Faction here; and, but since his Return,
And the Kings loss engag'd with Dyonisius, 




But that I know the Wisdom and Friendship
Of good Demaratus, I should Suspect
He would abuse my Faith; It frights my Reason:
Resign his interest in the Army?
But who are those approach us with grave Ceremony?


Is not this Hugo de Petra?



The same: One that may write himself
Knave General.



My most Noble Lord: I know not whither I should
First deliver my Message from the General, or
Bid you Wellcom home from my self?
But 'tis good manners to Obey his Excellence.



You preserve your ingenious Humor still.



Sir, I was Commanded to wait your Entrance into
The City; and in the Generals name, to
Congratulate your return.



He was ever gracious.



But that's not all, By his Command I am to Salute
Yo• by the Title of Grand Master of the great
Castle of Syracuse, which is a Signal Mark of
His Confidence I will assure you: Leave off your Wonder,
And Read there.




It were no manners to distrust his Act,
Or your Relations, who have always been
A friend to truth.



Let me Kiss thy honorable Hand upon my own
Accompt; If I have a soul? your Honor shall
Command it to your Service.



If he have a Soul? he makes a doubt on't.



But 'tis too great an honor to Cleomenes:

His goodness thus would prompt me to a worth;
Who finding only some desires in me
To serve his just Commands, would quicken them
To some becoming Action; but my Duty
Is not performed, till I wait upon him.



And we shall attend you; my good Lord,







This, beyond all confirmes me.







Excuse me Gentlemen, if some great affair
Call me hence: I'le not fail to meet you at

T•moleons Tombe: where, if things succeed
To expectation, I shall tell you something to startle you,
And you shall thank me for't.





But 'tis not without my Wonder,
That Cleomenes, 



There's the policy: 'Its frequent,
When Princes fear a popular man, they labour
To gain him to their party by preferments:
Nor is it safe yet to Irritate the Souldier,
To whom Cleomenes stands Pretious.



I know not what to think.



Think no more, let the gods play their Game out▪
They are wise, and Mankind is their mockery:
But we loose time; I am for Timoleous Tombe.



The Scean of our whole Fate lies there.



I wait upon you.







The Place I have confirm'd, is but an earnest
Of that great debt is owing to your Services:
You have made my Son a Souldier Cleomenes;

He cannot fail of Victory, that lives
Near the example of so much Honor.



I have perform'd my Duty, All above it,
Sir, is your Bounty.



But is Timandra within his Train of Captives?
Heir to the great Numidian, King Ophella, whose unquiet
Armes kept us so much in Action.



But his fall procur'd you many Victories.



A Princess of much Beauty by my Sons
Description, so much excellency of Person
And bravery, I guess there's something in't,
Beside the naked Story: He does write as
He were prompted by Affection.



His Deportments have been fair to her,
And like himself.



We shall see this Wonder▪
But what's the Moore he talks off?



A person of no mean Extraction,
That came to shew his Valour in her Cause,
VVhom the impatient Courage of your Souldier
Compel'd to wait upon Timandra's Fortune,
And fills a place now in her Train.



'Tis well Cleomenes: The present state
Of things requires you, take possession
Of the Castle, where I shall soon give you a visit:
I have trusted you with Siracuse, and my self.



To both I shall be faithful, Sir. 





What think'st thou of him Hugo?




You have done wisely to Secure him thus;
This will C•jole the Citizens.




I thought you would have waited on Cleomenes

To his new Charge: Your looks are Sullen: Ha!
This shews like an Affront to me; as you
Meant to dispute the Justice of my Fa•vour•.




We know Cleomenes is a Noble Gentleman,
And think your Excellence hath not been sparing
In your Reward: We hope you do remember,
VVe have fought for you too; In all your Fortunes
Shew'd both our Love and Courage.



Now I see, and pity your Envies; y'are not wise:
Can you remember this, and think I can
Forget my Veteranes, to whose constant Valour
I owe my Growth, my Glories, and my Self?
You cannot loose mein a Wilderness:
Though you should make no pursuitafter me,
It would become my Care to finde you out,
To honour and reward you; and in confidence
That you are still the same Men that dare Execute
VVhen I command: This day I have determin'd
The Harvest of your Fortunes.




We dare Execute whatever you Command.




Hugo, the List; acquaint 'em with my purpose;
Tuou art fit to be a Minister of State.
I will peruse their Faces.



Can you read Colonels?




Dost make a question?



I cannot tell, 'tis not in your Commissions.
You must be acquainted with these Names: They'r Men
That must (Where sits the winde?) be knock'd o' th' Head,
And your work's done; all but examining,
VVhat Baggs, Plate, Jewels, and such Tristes, they
Have at Home. I cut out this work for you.



Excellent witty Hugo, thy designs oblige us all.



When you have done, I look for my Reward.
Sir, the Officers are very Reasonable, and will do my thing
You shall command For their own good.




Their Smiles assure my Happiness, and their own;
VVhich shall grow uplike Twin•s.



If any will go off civilly and Compound 




What shall's do with 'em?



Give 'em Wings, to fly to any Region
Of the Air, or Earth, so we be rid of 'em.
This day I lay all down, and like the Sun
Set in my Evening Cloud: But yet may Rise.



Or my Astrology fails. 



More bright and glorious. 



That to the gods and you. 





You must not be drunk till the work be done.
But hark you Gentlemen: You are to Act great things,
VVhere's your Commission to Secure you?







When you have done this dangerous Service; Where's
Your Order to defend you from the Gallows!



My thoughts were so taken up with the Hope
Of Plunder, I minded no Security.



I must provide for you all: 'Tis here then
Under the General's hand▪ This is your Commission
Peremptory, d'ee mark? This you must do,
And more you may do: For many things
Are left to your own discretions.







If in that Company, or as you March, you see
Any man, whose Look, Fashion, or Beard, you
Like not; 'Tis enough to make him a Delinquent,
And qualifie him for a Composition.



Most ingenions Hugo: We are all bound to thee.



I shall see that by my Share in your Plunder.






You tell me wonders, Sir.



Let me Repeat 'em Madam.
This day will Damocles deliver up
His guilty Greatness, and lay by his Sword,
Hath been so fatal to your Family,
I am transported with my Hopes, and Prophecy▪
The hour approaches Madam, when you may,
Like a bright Star (too long Eclips'd) Advance
Your glorious Head, and wear upon your Brow,
Those Beams, that best become your Name and Birth;
Daughter and Sister to a King.



Alas! both those Relations cease; my Father's dead,
And my dear Brother drown'd.



Yet still you are Calanthe,

Next of Blood, for whom the Stars
Have finish'd the•r Consult to make you happy.



By Damocle's Reign? call home your Reason
My Lord, you gave me a preservation,
VVhen my misfortune knew not how to find,
Or parallel in Story, a more sad Image,
Than mine did Represent. Do not undo
That goodness you have wrought by wishing me:
Believe, there can be truth or hope in Damocles

At this time, when Success Courts him abroad,
And not a breath at home so bold, to murmur
At his Ambition, now lay down his Power?
He will sooner part with his right Arm.



When I remember, Madam, who you are,
And what your Royal Brother suffer'd; 'tis
A fair excuse, if you admit not this
To your belief. We all knew him a Villain:
But what's all this, if heaven have now decreed
He shall be a Convert?



Till the Earth witness it,
For whom 'tis partly meant, let us not throw
Nature and Reason off, the greatest Argument
You can assign, is, that he has advanc'd

Cleomenes to so great a Place of Trust.
A person of much Honour, and by fate
Employ'd at Carthage, when the Flames broke out
At home, in whose black Clouds my Brother Vanish'd.
A man of the best Race of the Nobility,
VVhose Valour hath endear'd him to the Souldiers,
And rather of the Generals Fear than Choice,
Call'd to the Power, which he can soon take off.



You are too full of Jealousie.



My Lord, you must not to Timoleons Tombe;
My soul presages, it will prove the Scean
Of some black Tragedy.







I know 'tis your Affection joyn'd with Duty
(That flatters you with Hope to see me prosper)
Invites you from me: But i'le not consent
To loose you so; my Father, Brother, all
My cruel Stars have left me.



I could chide your busie fears: To wave my
Resolves now, were to be false to you and to my Country:


The Gods and Justice call me; and you, Madam,
To expect the Glories that your Blood doth challenge.
Which I shall timely urge, when Damocles

Lays down his Interest in the State and Army,
And when your Name is mention'd. 







Prepare for news Madam, to cure the tremblings
Of your affrighted Heart. They stay for me;
permit me to Kiss your Hand.



Since there's no Remedy. 



You are gracious to dispence.




Farewell my honest Lord; my soul divines
VVe have had our last meeting in this world:
'Tis time to call a Counsel of my thoughts,
I am lost else. 
(Exit. Cal.


and other Armes of the General's Commission upon a rich
Cushion, a  before Damocles, at∣tended
by Hugo and others.



Hugo, How dost like this Ceremony?
Do not I look now like a walking Hearse?



Most rarely; but 'twere fit you made a halt,
You will arrive too soon, before the Knaves
Be all met at the Tombe: A thin Convention
VVill spoil the sport, I always lov'd to see
Full Audience in the Theatre; 'tis the credit
And glory of an Action, and I must
Applaud your Brain for this Design, who might
Have done your business without half this trouble.



There's the Delight, the mischief is my Luxury:
To Raise 'em high, then Crush 'em in their Swelling.
I do not wish my self Born to the Inheritance
Of this great Island: Hang long Pedegrees,
Titles of Blood, and empty Fables of
Our Ancestors: A Ladder by which Fools
And Changlings may ascend to greatest Empires,
I will create a Claim to every Kingdom
VVithin my Reach: It speaks the greater Power;
And frights a Nation, which should be us'd
To terror, lest their saucy pride and ease
Make cheap the Person of their Soveraign.



How every thing becomes you? We arrive
Timely: Do you not hear a Noise and Outcry
I' th' Temple; Sir, the Gates are spread: So, so,
The Souldiers have been at it.

The Scean Timoleons Tombe, where things appear in some
confusion, the Souldiers knocking down Senators, and
some are carried off wounded.


Whether most Reverend Fathers?



Sir, the press of People is so great expecting
Your Excellency, that these venerable Gentlemen
Did faint sor want of Air; and are
Now led forth to Breath. their Last.




Alas! Convey 'em gently to a Refreshing.



Impudence! 'Tis thy Treachery: Expect
A black Reward.



Dost thou not fear a Thunder-bolt?

Officers. March, March on.
Exeunt Senat.



Those that remain are your own Creatures Sir,
And most of 'em my Cuckolds, their Wives,
Shall bear me witness.




They Represent a Counsel of the Gods.



Had they all Provinces in Heaven, they would
Resign 'em to you, and be damn'd to serve you.




True Patriots and Preservers of your Country,
VVhose Bosome was late panting, and her Check
Pale wi•h the loss of Blood, the Punick Sword
Had Ravish'd from her: I come not to shake you
VVith Terrors of new War, nor to ask Pay
For your bold Souldiers, by whose Valour you
Enjoy your Shade▪ Sleep quietly, and Foes
Abroad calm as the Dust that covers 'em:
At home no Relick of the publick Enemy
That fil'd your Streets with blood. Young Cleander

Is out of Capacity to give You
Alarum in this World, unless he can,
After so long a sleep i'th' Waves, break from
His gloomy habitation, and his Sister
(In her self inconsiderable were she alive)
Hath to my knowledg been long since a Tenant
To her cold Grave in this Conjuncture of
Affairs; your weary General


Doth at your feet lay down his Sword, and all
That power to Act you gave him.







It must not be Sir.




So, so; they are perfect I see, and he dissembles
To my own Heart: The Devil cannot match him.




It remains only that I humbly beg
(Grave Fathers) your consent, that I may now
(There being no further use of me, already
Tyr'd with the careful conduct of your Arms,
Retreat into a private life, and spend
My rest of days in Prayer, that you may live
A flourishing State.



Will you desert us then;



Good Heaven avert so foul a Thought: I shall
Be near you still, and after refreshment,
If danger dare approach, at your first call
Take up my Sword again, and in your Cause
Give up my Life, your Safety, or your Sacrifice.



However your great soul will not allow
A sense of danger, Sir we are not safe,
If you will not resume your Sword and Power,
I speak the General Vote.



You doe not Sir
(VVith pardon of your Gravity) Reach
VVhat we most desire▪ In justice Sir
To your great prudence of so eminent Valour
To which we owe our Lives, our Liberties,
And what else we enjoy. We humbly pray
You would exchange the Title of our General,
And take from us the offer of a Kingdom.
The Crown cannot be plac'd upon a Head
So much deserves it.








Ingratitude in us to Court your Virtue
VVith any less Oblation▪ So it will be
The great Unhappiness within our Fate
If you refuse it. Sir, in mine, you hear
The Breach of all.







Now must he Cant a little.





I doe not understand you Gentlemem,
Pray speak-agen.



He cannot hear't too often.



Here we divest our selves of Power and Name
Of useless Senators, and all Bow to you.
As humble Subjects.



All ready with our persons to attend,
And declare it to the People.



You amaze me Gentlemen; Collect your Wisdoms,
I am consum'd already with less Cares,
Too feeble to sustain a Crown (I think,
VVith pardon you did Name the Word.) My sleeps
Under that little Province I enjoy'd
Before were thin; and those poor slumbers full.
Of Trouble and Destraction: 'Twill be justice,
That under such a Weight I never sleep;
So much will the Concernment of my Cares,
For you oblige me to perpetual waking?
I dare not Gentlemen give Entertainment
To such ambicious Thoughts, Among your selves
How many worthier men to sit at Helme,
Not one in all this Circle but is qualified,
To Guide a Nation: I have no Name,
No Birth, no Images: Nothing in Annalls
To speak the Glory of one Predecessor:



This is your modesty, which cannot be
Greater then the Necessity upon us
To live under a Royal shade: You have
An influence upon him: pray Sir speak:



You hear what Necessity there is:
You'l break their hearts if you deny'm.




But some few Hours to Consider.



Hours? They will be dead within this half hour
If you refuse it. Pity the Venerable Gentlemen:
Observe they Weep, and I doe melt to see'em.



I cannot stand the storm of this Affection,
Doe with me what you please: Although you make
Me King, I hope I may take leave to Call
My self your Servant in my Heart, and study
By all the duties of a Prince 



Wee are all satisfied.



Sir we all wait on you,
And think our Happiness Incompleat, till
VVe hear the Voyce of all the Citizens,
O•t noise the Trumpets at your Coronation


VVith long live Damoeles King of Scicily.









Heark the noise is Catching.



He that Aspires, must know no Conscience.
I see 'tis easier to be great then good:
Some Trees thrives best whose: Roots are warm'd in Blood.







COme let me see your Bills of Mortality: How many
Have dyed this week of the Bloody Sweat?

Three Senatours knock'd o'th'Head at Timoleo•s

Tombe, and four in the Street for not holding
Their peace; Six Senatours drown'd, thrown
From a Precipice into the Sea. Two and twenty buried alive.
How buried alive?



Why, these were Totally plundred, or Compounded
At so high a Rate for their Liberty; they must
Starve presently; Which we call burying alive.



That's right: Well Gentlemen, I have been
Studying for you, and have found out more Employment,
Unless your Conscience have enough, and in that want
Of wit have an inclination to live Honest.



You have better thoughts of us.



What is't dear Sir?



Observe me: I will procure you Commissions
VVhen you please to talk witty Treason.



Thank you; and so when the State please we may▪
Be ingeniously hang'd for't.



Y'are dull Officers, and doe not Reach the Knack;
Yet I'le tell you: You shall insinuate into
The Company of discontented Persons.







You will have the Wit to choose men of a sound
Kidney; that have Estates I mean, and can
Endure to bleed in the Mettal Vein.



What then: We understand this.



Comply with the'r discourses, and Humour every
Complaint upon this turn of State: Ag•ravate
The Insolence of the Court, the want of Trade
In the City, and the heavy oppression of the People.


Can't Weep, Drink with'em, Winde up
Their pity into Anger, and with the t'other Cup
Pinch up their Anger into Curses of the present
Government: After you see'em Ripen with some
Impertinent Cautional Parenthesies, which you
Must use (As I hope their's none but Friends)
Whisper a Health to the Confusion of the Usurper.



To his Confusion? Good, and what Follows?



When this is done, or so much as Opportunity
VVill give way too: Embracing some One affectionately,
Dropping into a melancholly posture, Call the Drawer
And pay all the Reckoning.



We pay it all?



By any means you must seem honourable: their's
The Trapan, it will create their Confidence to other
Meetings, to which they may invite more
Of the forlorne Tribe, and perhaps beget a design,
Or some Engagement for the Cause: To be short,
VVhen you have wrought the business to a Height,
Or Schrew'd'em into an Action; send for Souldiers
At the next Guard: Charge'em confidently with
High Treason, and bring'em before me.



But they may Recriminate upon us.



Where are your memories? You shall have a Commission
To be Knaves, talk Treason cum privilegio, like good
Subjects to find our the States Enemies: and if they
Escape climing the Tree for't, their Estates shall Suffer.
Out of which shall be defalk'd large sums for your
Honest Services: And what harm's in all this Now?



None in the world most ingenious Hugo.












Farewell Demaratus; and Farewell Calanthe,

For I am lost too although I walk thus
In this thin shadow that doth shroud my Being,
Compell'd by Tyrany of my Fate like some
Vessel distrest to shift all Sail, and stand
VVhat Winde• are pleas'd to Blow: Nothing is left now,
But in this Cloud to attempt Cleomenes:

VVhose Faith must either guide my Will to live,
Or his neglect lead me a nearer way.
  15Enter a Servant to Cleomenes.

To death; Sir, do you serve my Lord Cleomenes




Or I am paid to no purpose.



I'le not examine that: pray give him knowledge,
A Gentleman desires to speak with him.



To avoid impertinent Errands, I'le consider
VVhether your business may be worth his Trouble or no.



That's out of your Commission (I suppose) to Judge.



Young Gentleman, you are mistaken, in such Cases
As yours, I have heard and determin'd my selfe: Hum!
The Governour is at this Time is engag'd to Serious Business.



I know yours then: Here prethee acquaint him
That I wait.




Cry you mercy, Sir: I find your Business Weighty.




I tremble at my self before I see him.
What if this Lord should now prove false?
Since Friendship but too often follows Fortune,
Perhaps he is involv'd to Act which those
That Rule; and neither Will, nor Dares beyond it.
Where am I then? And which is worse then all
Accounts of Danger, should he when I am known
Give up my Honour, or my Life, to gratifie
The Tyrants Lust!


'Tis He: His looks are troubled, but I see no
Line within his Face to doubt his honour.







Sir, I have a business to you of great Concern.
A Secret too not fit for every Ear.








I am a stranger to you, and perhaps
You may want Faith to Credit my Relation
At first; but when you have heard me out 







It is believ'd in Siracuse that a Sister
To the late King (by name Calanthe)'s dead.




Calanthe! 'Tis so, or at least this Island
Contains her not: But grant her dead.











Sir, She is living: to my knowledge, living:
I know upon what Bosom I Repose
This Trust: You have been held a noble Lord,
And Friend to Innocence.



I Smell a Snare.

The Devil is at work already, But
He shall find me Arm'd: To your knowledge living?
Young man, if thou can'st make this clear, and that
The Person thou hast nam'd by any Art
Of thine may be invited hither, Ask
Thy own reward: The King shall thank the for't,
To whom thou canst not doe a service more
Acceptable: and I shall think it Happiness
By thy Consent to be an instrument.
To settle his unquiet Thoughts. Calanthe,

After so strict an inquisition
Brought to our Hands? No Reward can be enough.







Betraying to our Justice the Person of Calanthe.




Oh my Heart! My Fears are come about.



Where is she? Speak: I will command a Guard
To wait upon her.



Command all the Furies.
I am mistaken, you are not Cleomenes,

Upon whose Heart I durst have laid my Soul,
VVhose Fame was never Staind with a dishonour:
You are some Monster of the Time: Good Heavens,
VVhy doe you allow him such an honest Face?



How's this? You will discover
VVhere this fair Lady is?



Not to Redeem thee
From that dark place thy Soul is meant for, Hell;
Though I am young I have Fortitude
Above thy malice, and give my self
A Sacrifice to Virtue with more ease
Than thou canst name it: I already see
My confidence hath betrayed me to a Man
That hath sold all the Honour of his Family
To buy the Favour of a bloody Tyrant.



Be not so loud.



Be you less impious, good Heaven!
Open thy Azure Curtain and permit
My Brothers Soul to look down to see me now
Bleeding and panting, at the Feet of once


His Friend Cleomenes. Doe not think bad man
One tear of these speaks any grief to die,
But to have found thee false: Here, Take Calanthe,

And carry her a Tryumph to the Rage
Of your new Master.



There's tremblings in my blood: Calanthe! ha!
Though sorrows have endeavoured to destroy
Her Beauty; She retaines enough to make me
Believe she lives: 'Tis the distressed Princess,
Howere that Habit would Obscure her.
Madam, (for I dare call you so) admit

Cleomenes to your Charity and forgive me.
We either seem'd our selves: You for your safety,
And I suspecting a design upon me
From Damocles Agents.



Are you honest then?



And shall be ever: Madam, my Eyes cannot
Be weary of this Happiness to see you.



And dare you Sir protect me? I am too blame
To tempt you with a Care of my Distress
That have been fatall to those Hands preserv'd me:
Honest Damaratus, If I drop a Tear when

I doe mention him, you'l be so kind
To excuse me, and to pardon my Rash Language▪



Dare protect you Madam?
For your sake I will dare the worst of Fortune,
And Act what Honour can expect or dictate:
I think it a high Favour from the Gods,
And could even bless the miseries that brought you,
But prudence will be necessary, till
Things Ripen to your Freedom and just Merit.



You may own me as Page.



It will be safe.



I shall observe my distances.









The King is come to Visit you.



It is a grace to his unworthy Servant.




Let one ascend the Platform of the Castle, and
Give me notice when they approach the City.

Cleomenes, I am come to bid a joy
To your new Government.



You are ever bountifull.





Hugo, What pretty Boy is that?



I know not Sir, a very handsome Face, but if
you have a mind to have a Boy, know a Face
VVill tempt you.




Cleomenes, What Youth is that?



A  of mine.



A very prety Boy, he shall wait on me.








Come hither prety Youth,
What's thy Name.



I am called Polydore.




'Tis well he ask'd not me.






Sir, The Prince Dyonisius and the Army are now
Marching within clear view of the City.




Alexius and the rest Rid forth to meet 'em,
Salute my Son from me, and test him it is my VVill
So soon as he Reach the Out-works of the City, that He
And the Prisoners of greatest Quality attend me here
I'th'Castle, the rest Rendevouz without the VValls
Till further Order: I'th'mean time, I'le take
Some prospect of their March.






VVhat can secure me now?



Madam, I'le send one to convey you hence.



And what will you do then?



So you be safe, Let all the lives of Danger
Meet here, and center in my Heart.


Cleom. officers to go off.


My Lord come back, and hear me; I have thought a way.



Things must not be delay'd; Oh speak it.



It may preserve us both, till some kind Star
Smile on us: Come, you shall present me to him.



I will present this sooner to my Heart.

Did you propose Cleomenes your Defence
From the fierce Tygar, and do I hear you


Bid me now give you up his prey: Did you
So late accuse me in your Jealousie
Of my lost Faith, and after so few minutes
Advise me to betray you?




There is necessity, I must be undone;
And let me chuse my VVay.







I have to keep the safe, who by denial
Of this small gift maist draw his Rage against thee,
And ruin both.



And i'le be rash as Passion to Oppose it.



VVill that help me in such a straight: who must
Upon his least Command be compel'd from you.
Your Courage is not now my Friend: there is
No time for more dispute: By all thy love,
By thy own Duty, as thou lov'st my Life
And Honour I command thee.



I am charm'd to Obedience, Madam.



I have not Suffer'd to that Height of misery
To throw off all Hopes in Providence: This
VVill confirm thee in the Tyrants thoughts, who may
Suspect me else a VVoman, and perhaps
The same thou would'st preserve: He is
Return'd, be Confident.





Now my good Lord Ha•! still methinks that Boy.
Is full of Beauty: VVilt thou change thy Master?



He cannot Sir, but be ambitious of it,
And I am proud if you accept him from me.



He shall be my Page:
Thou hast too good a Face to be a Boy.



You make me over happy T••ls talk frights me.

If any blessed Spirits be design'd
To guard poor Mortalls, let'em Hover here





I'le search him if you please.



No 'tis a Boy.



VVould I were sure of a Female with no worse,
Face for this nights Bed-fellow▪


Enter Dyonisius, Alexius, Strato, Dion. Scrophilus.
Sir, The Prince.


VVelcome to Siracuse my Son, and to
Thy Fathers best embrace, who thinks no Blessing
Can drop from Heaven so welcome, as to Hear
Thou hast a Name in VVar.



Sir, I must Owe▪
To Heaven, and your great Precepts what hath made me
Seem worth your▪ Favour; and next them a Debt
We must acknowledge to Cleomenes,

Whose Counsel, and Example made us Fortunate.



Again my thanks to you Sir: But where is
The Queen Timandra? and the more you character'd▪
So brave an Enemy? I desire to see'em,
Attend'em hither.


The Treasures of the East can't afford
So rich a Present. Madam, you are welcome.
She weeps, and yet looks fair as doth the Face of Day,

VVhen it's wash'd with morning Dews.
Madam, I hope my Son hath made no forfeit
Of his Honour, Since you left your Couutry
Under his Conduct.


Your Son hath us'd me honourably, abating what
The Laws of War oblige him too: You can't
Bar the Resentment of my own condition,
That thus contributes to your Tryumph;
A Queen, your Prisoner.



Nothing can have here:
The face of a Confinement to your Person,
Your are Queen Timandra still; and let me tell you
So far from being a Prisoner, that you have made
Your self a Conquest.







A Victory of me, by those fair Eyes;
So that what Spoil my Souldiers made within
Your Kingdom, you have Reveng'd this very minute
By making me the Conquero•r, your Captive.



I know not what this means.



It shall appear (if you will give a little


Truce to your Passion, Madam) that you were
Sent hither by the Gods to make you happy
And greater.



Still beyond my Understanding,
I cannot be more miserable: Death
Hath not a sting beyond what now afflicts me.



Be wise and tame those Fears: Nothing is meant
Here, but your Honour and a Liberty
Beyond what you enjoy'd: The Crown you wear,
If you but smile shall have a double Lustre,
And call to it another bright Companion;
This Island to Obey you.

Dionisi. Oh my Fate!
He Courts her: Have I for this
Stifl'd my thoughts of Love so long, in Hope

To gain him for my Advocate? and do I hear
His passionate Addresses?




Now I conclude you mock me Sir, this shadow
You have in your pocession, but my Soul
Can never be your Captive









In this Angelique form I see you have
The passion of a Women: You are Angry,
When you have better thought upon't you may
Call in this cold neglect, and think me worthy
Your highest Favours: Son, you may attend the Queen,
Call back that Moor: your Name?














A Lybian born: my Extraction Honourable,
I was bred up in King Ophella's Court,
After whose death (before unripe for Action)
It pleas'd the Queen to think me worthy of
Her chief Command of Horse against your Army:
How I behav'd me in that Trust your own
Souldiers inform you; I am now your Prisoner,
Ready for Death or Ransom.



It may be in your own power to deserve



Your Freedom: Think on't: Withdraw.





Sir, I have an humble Suit.



I must deny thee nothing: But deferr it,


I have something that is near me to Consider.



Near you Sir, I am your Son.



Do you affect the Queen?



'Tis in my Heart confest: and Sir, I hope,
You will consent to make me further happy.



Call in those thoughts, and be your self Remove. 



I bid him be himself, and ca•ot Curb
My own effeminate Passion. Now she's gone,
I am at ease: Why, how now Damocles?

Hast thou beheld the Horror of a Battle?
Stood all the danger of the Sea and Fire?
Heard grones that shook the Dead unmov'd and constant?
And shall the magick of a Voice or Face,
That perhaps owes its Beauty to a Pencil,
Betray thee into paleness, and a fear
Of every frown, and think it Happiness,
If she but Counterfeit a Smile upon thee?
Wake, wake, my Soul, and do thy noble Office
Upon my Heart, that now is Shrunk and Creeping
To be a Females Scorn. Who will Obey me,
When I Un-king my self? Ha! I am arm'd
Against her Charmes: It is too like a Virtue
To be Love: Who waites? Where is the Queen?
Enter D•onysius and Cleomenes leading the Queen by the Hand,
with Cleander.

The Devil has a Claw within me still.

There is some Witchcraft in her Eyes and person
That softens me agen Dionysius.

Now I commend thy prudence that dost offer
With thy own Hand what is so pretious to me.


If you please, this may have other Application:
I can Challenge no Affection from the Queen,
But for your Kingdom I wonot leave my
Hopes, she may at last look kindly
On my Intentions.



What if I love her?
You will not be my Rival?




If you be not Cruel to your Son,
Deny me not what every Souldier looks on,
The purchase of his Sword: She is my Prisoner▪
The Law of Armes gives her to me,



Fools will be Clerks before they Read: I blush at thee;
The Law of Armes gives no propriety
Of persons: when we make 'em Prisoners,
The Ransome they may Challenge: If thou hast
An Avarice so low it shall be paid thee.
Cherish no other Hopes, lest I be angry.







Sir, I intreat, your Son may not, for his
Civilities to me, meet with your Anger.



His best Regards to you became his Honour,
I hope, you will not Frown on mine. I have
This Madam only more to say; You shall
But change your Pallace for •y Court, Which will
Receive new Honour by your presence, Whilst
I change the name of King to be your •ervant.



This I expected not, and blush a little,

To find my self deceiv'd: I only pray,
This noble Moor, whose Fate hath suffer'd much
In mine, may have a part in your high Favour
And Freedome.



Sir, you have it: Now, Madam, I'le wait on you.








Cleomenes, hast thou Art to give a name
to this Affront?



I am sorry Sir to witness it, his passion wonot last,
pray let me follow you.



My Lord, I have found your Love; Loose not the King.
O my enraged Soul beats to get forth:

It is too full of Flame to come abroad yet,
But• I must not grow old with this Dishonour,
His Act hath disoblig'd my Blood, which will
Admit no Calm, until by Force or Art,
I tear the fair Timandra from his Heart.







How shall I give my Grief a name that Live,
And yet am worse than lost? misfortune never
Declar'd me miserable, till this Hour.
For while I Read bright Comforts in thy Eyes,
See my self lov'd and promis'd to be once


The happy Owner of thy self, and Virtue;
I do Behold a Hand wonld Snatch thee from me.



It must be the cold Hand of Death. I promis'd
My Love to you with such devotion,
As with our last Breath gives up our Souls
To Heaven: And those that dare lay Violence
Upon our mutual Vows shall Reap the fruit
Or nothing but their Sins.



Thou art excellently good: Perfection has
No name in Nature large enough for thine,
And what am I, to merit so much Goodness?
Thou canst not chuse but see how much I am
A darkning to thy Lustre: every Smile
Bestow'd on me, is but a Sun-beam cast
Upon a Rock, which cannot pay the Gift
With any thing but Barrenness: The gods
For fome offence are Angry all with me,
So much, that 'twere a Sin almost to ask
A kindness from above, for thee, least they
Punish thy Virtue for my sake.



Or yours rather for me.



My Stars have made a Faction in Heaven,
And poison'd all the Influence of thine,
Which else would be less cruel, and take thee
Into their kinder Conduct. Is't not then
A Justice to Remove me from thy Love?
Then all thy Grief would Vanish soon with me,
Or else command me to Act something for
Thy sake, which in the doing may destroy me.



You do not think I can be so unkind
To impose a danger upon you, whom I
Have Beg'd of Heaven; and whose misfortunes I have
Wept for as my Sins, and wish'd 'em wholly mine,
So I might ease your Breast: You have forgot,
I only Live in you, and when you dye,

Timandra is destroy'd, I shall despise
The Tyrants Policy and Rage. 



Thou hast nam'd the Reason,
Why 'tis fit I should not Live.



To see my Constancy?



And what must follow;
A constant persecution of thy Innocence.



'Tis Conquest that way to be Overcome:
I am sure you won• me so.



I know thy Blood will throw severe Disdains
Upon this bold Usurper, who neglected,
May by his Rage be prompted to more Wickedness,
While I must be an idle Looker on.
And See thy Goodness war against thy Safety,
Like a tame Cipher, keep a place within
Thy Breast, to encrease the number, when thou hast
A mind to sum thy Griefs.
This is not all; thou art to Combat with
Another Serpent of a softer mould,
Perhaps more dangerous, when deceiv'd his Son,
When t' other canot by his fiercer Nature.
This may Attempt to catch thee with an Art,
Betray thee with a Charme of seeming Innocence,
And with Civilities attempt to Cheat,
If possible, thy Virtue.



How I could chide you now: It is not well
At this Time, when our Loves, our Lives, and Honours
Are most concern'd, and ask our wisest Counsel
And strength to guard 'em, to take off our Courage,
By numbring up our dangers; as if Death,
Which sums them all, were more Considerable
Than our own Honour to be arm'd against it.




My Soul and Reason: I have said too much,
Which not Consider'd, Springing from my Love
And Fear of thee, were above all Forgiveness.
Thy pardon will Restore me to my self:
Here I throw off my melancholy dream.



Heaven will have care of both.



Thy words are Prophecies.




Madam, the Prince Dionysius.





It may advance something, if you speak kindly
To the young Highness, who may be Honorably
Preserv'd, and be of use to our Necessities:
The gods allow us prudence.










Your Highness humble Servant; I rejoyce
To see you cheerful Sir; the Queen was thinking,
The late unkindness of your Father, might
Have made too deep Imprission in your thoughts.



'Twas an Affront shook my Obedience. But you see
I wear a quiet Face.



I see you can Retain, You filial Piety.




My thoughts in their own purity to the Queen,
And came to kiss her Hand.










Your near Relation may do me a Favour
When I am absent, by some friendly mention. 
I may deserve it.



You have already Sir.





Madam, it was not
A want within me of that most Religious
Esteem I owe to your person, that I did not
shew more of passion in my late Affront,
And you concern'd.



You shew'd a noble temper
And piety to your Father.




You wonot think my soul so much a Coward
To quit the least thought of my Honoring you,
The Pride and Glory of your Sex: I hold it
A greater Blessing to call you Mistris, than
him Father.



But with your Highness pardon;
Here's nothing of ill Consequence consider'd,
Or to your self or me: And dangers have
But ill Invitements to Affection.
Though you have made me Captive, I am not
So weary of my self to wear new Chains.
What is your Father's Court to me? A Prison,
But with more Paint and Ornament: I take
The Garden Air, sometimes the Fields, or Grove.


But not without your Father, in whose absence
I want not spies upon me: In each Chamber
And Gallery: And this he calls by Liberty,
And glorious Freedom: But you cannot help it. 



Madam, I came to tell you that I can
And will, if you consent. 







To accept it as my Service and my Duty,
I know you look upon me now with wonder,
Forgive me, and forget I brought you hither
To exercise the greatness of your Virtue,
And when I kiss this sacred Hand, let it
Bind like an Oath (that's sworn by all the Gods)
I will not rest 'till you are free again
Out of the reach and force of Siracuse

In your own Kingdom; where your Subjects eyes,
To see you agen Surpriz'd with your blest presence,
Shall weep their sudden joys, and dye contented▪
Nay, in your own Court, Madam, where I found you,
When you were praying unto stubborn Heaven
That heard you not. If all this be not done
By mee, and ere the Sun three times Rejoyce
The world with Day, Conclude that I am dead.
And one thing, Madam, more; I scorn to make
A Price, or name my own Reward: when this
Is perfect, you may please to think I lov'd you.



You have nam'd such things Sir, (give me your pardon)
I have not hope eneough to think'em possible;
But such an Act would merit much. 




Seem calme and easie to my Father 'till
It come to Action: the method is already
Form'd in my Brain: All that is good attend you.






I am glad to see these Smiles aboard.



I have a story will concern our happiness
This Dionisius may be noble.



I mainly doubt it, Madam: if the Devil
Should spawn a Saint it would be wonderful.




Madam, a young Gentleman from the King,
Humbly desires Access.




I guess upon what Embassy he comes: Please you,
Withdraw.





He's young and handsome; What great pity it is
He should be a Knave so soon? But the Usurper
Is cunning to engage such Innocent Faces,
To abuse our fond Belief: How the Urchin throws
His eyes upon me? As he would stare me
Out o'th 'Presence.





Madam, I hope you will vouchsafe your pardon
If no express a Service for your just
Concerns, I beg a Freedom.



You attend the King?



Madam, I do, but am not now his Messenger.



I like it better.



Though I bring with me what is fit for Princes
To hear, the Language of an humble Heart,
That in the general interest to Virtue
Comes to unlade it self, and do you service.



Thou givest thy business a spacious preface,
And by thy looks it should be fair: But yet
Sweet youth take heed the Court (thou com'st from) do not
Instruct thee wrong: Thou serv'st a Master wise
Enough to Teach. 



My attendance on the King, Madam, doth carry
No early date, and if you dare believe me
My time hath been to mourn, not to admire
Transactions of the Court: Some tears I have wept,
(Though a stranger to your Person) for your sake.



Prethee take off my wonder, and be clear:
This Language would invite me to believe
There were some Danger near.



I would give it a Name
That should not fright you: for it is
Within your choise, timely to scatter a'l
Those hovering Clouds that may involve you in
Too late Repentance.



Still thou art obscure.



It is no secret in the Court; The King
(For that he has made his Title now) does love you.





Ha! what makes that Boy here Ile observe.




And cherishes a hope by marriage
To fix his never satisfyed Ambition.



This is not thy Concernment.




Be yours too soon, and justly may be mine
Who have a Heart that inward bleeds to see
So great a Queen, and more than great in Virtue
Made a Tyrants hopes.



Thy duty to the King obliges thee
To wish him well although my Ru•n Follow,
Alas, I have no favours to Reward thee.



To serve your Virtue is above Reward,
Save what Heaven gives.



This boldness wants example.




And in that answers his impiety;
You cannot choose but know it. Fame has not
Yet lost his Tongue abroad, and it might reach
Your ear: Or if you have not been so happy,
'Tis not too late to tell you he is false
To Heaven and all mankind: Within his Breast
Dwells no ingredient of Love or Honour,
And though he carry Bolsome in his Lip,
'Tis to betray you at last a Sacrifice
To his unruly Greatness.



I am a Queen.



But in a Tyrants power, which knows no Law,
When he has secured your Crown to his Ambition.



I have heard too much of him, he dares not Act
A Violence, although I be his Prisoner.



He that durst act a Sacriledge upon
His King, will think it but a petty Trespass,
To bruise, or break a soft Heart, such as yours.



All this I know is Truth: But why from him!

But that he speak so passionately the Vices
Of this great man, I should believe I had
A Rival, that obscur'd within that Habit:


There's something more than my weak Eye can Reach,
His words do speak a greater Soul, than what
He seemes to enclose.



I hope 'twill prosper: She seems to Resent it.

Madam, I dare not trespass more upon you:
I have discharg'd my duty to your merit,
To Justice and to Heaven; And now I cast
My self on Providence for what must follow,
If I have given a light to see the Danger,
You might incurr with this bad King, I am happy.
But if my want of years or Eloquence,
To cloath my Honest meaning better, make it
Less acceptable, You may soon Revenge it,
I have put a poor unworthy Life within
Your Breath, which you may throw into the Air,
Or call the Usurpers Cruelty to punish it.
You shall see Madam, then, I fear not Death;
And in my last devotions will pray,
Heaven may forgive you.



Stay noble Youth, and
Take my thanks: I know not when thou meanst
To visit me agen.

The King comes forth.




Our Guard lay hold upon that Traytor; that Impudent
Young Villain, Yes 
He shall visit you, when he can crawle from tother world.



My Stars have done their worst: be you perfect Madam.



Let his Tongue be cut out immediately.



Sir, I beseech you, let not your Anger fall
With so much Cruelty.



Madam, though you have not merited so much
If the Story be consider'd, to incline me
To any mercy for him; Yet that part
Of his punishment! Remit. Drag him to
The Common prison till further Order 
Stay, I have thought better on't.
Carry him prisoner to the Castle, and tell Cleomenes,


As he will stand clear in our Thoughts, look to him,
And place him in some Dungeon, dark and deep enough,
Where he may Howl unpitied: He may afford him


The musique of his Chains to make him merry.



And when you have done all your Cruel•y,
Death will, at last (spight of your Rage) Release me,





Madam, you may be wise yet, to consider
I honourably Court you: What is past,
Is in your wisdom to Redeem by Smiles
Upon your Servant; pray think timely Madam. 





Weeping? Shall I kill him now, and Oblige
The world by taking off this hated Monster?
Yet he spoke kindly when he parted from her.









Hiarbas: Nearer yet. You may Remember,
I said 'twas in your power to deserve
Your Liberty, and me your Friend: The way
Is this: Use all your Interest or Art
To make the Queen more soft to my desires.







I would have a marriage of our Crowns and Hearts.
You understand?



I must acknowledge You much honour me,
But Sir, you have chosen a weak Orator
In the affairs of Love: I wish I had
An Interest in the Queen so great to serve you
To your own merit; but in what my Power
Or Language can effect, in Reference to
Your wishes, shall appear.



Thou art prudent: she has newly took the Gallery.






I thought our favours would have made you
Be near us still: I wanted thee.



I was here within these Six minutes to attend you, Sir.



I saw thee not.



But I did you Sir, with the beautious Queen,
And knew my duty better, than to interrupt you
When you are private with a Lady.



You can be a Courtier.



I have news for you.







Your Son presents his duty to you.







Yes, your obedient Son, as I have Order'd him,
He begs your pardon, for his bold intrusion
Upon the Queen Timandra's Love, he has
Done with her.



Done with her? How?



He has disengag'd her from his thought, and now
Wisely foresees your Care and deep Contrivements
Are for his good and Greatness, when it shall
Please Heaven to call you hence, which I hope
Will never be whilst I live Sir.



I thought he had been stubborn, and resolv'd
An expedition far enough to tame him.



The People will not thank you, Sir, for that,
They have no mind to part with him.



The People! Hang the shabbed multitude.



Oh! they love him Sir, and he is more endear'd
To their kind thoughts since his Return.



And I grow less, ha?



The more's the pity Sir.



But tell me Hugo. 



The many headed Beast will talk Sir, 







I Sir, of you.



What dare they say?



E'en bad enough: They were ill before, but
The bloody Nose you gave the Senate, Sir,
Has turn'd the•r Tongues wild.



I must know what they say.



I beseech you do not: Do not desire to hear it.
A pox upon 'em, what can you expect from Rogues
And Rebels?



I have a prospect of their Hearts already;
I know they love me not: But I do long
To hear how the Slaves talk, and belch their poison:
Come, Gi't me therefore in their own pure Vomit.



I am very unwilling: I know 'twill make you angry.



With thee? Do't I command thee, as thou lov'st me.
But let me have no mincing of the Treason,
Nor washing a fowl word; the Sports lost then,
I'm in the Humor for't.



You know I am the Creature of your Smiles,
And must obey when you Command; But 



There's no Retreat, Begin, now I am ready.



Why, Sir, the people call you a Bold Knave: Yes
By my troth, which in their opinion is a worse
Name than Traytor, and more suitable to
Their understandings. They that would be
Thought less Soluble in their own Tongues,
Say, you are but an Usurper, and though you
Have the luck to dye in your Bed; nay, and may
Have the liberty to stinke in your Grave,
Yet they hope before they dye to make it a
Holiday, and see you hang'd after all this, to
The great Comfort of the Nation. What Rogues are these?



The Rascals would be witty: On good Hugo.




Another says, the Flames you have kindled
Can never be quench'd, till some of your principal members
Be committed to the Fire, The name
Of your Quarters has been terrible; and therefore
They wish, that every Post, that now carries
A Libel, had also a Limb of you.







For your Soul, they think the Devil will
Scarce have any thing to do with it, though
It be his due; lest your impudence should
Out-face him in his own Dominions, and by
Some Faction and Conspiracy there, Cheat
Him of his Kingdom, as you have done your
Soveraign here.







They say, beside other gifts, you have two Virtues
Most remarkable: Pity, and Devotion.



'Tis well they will allow me any thing.



They say you can Out-weep the Crocodile, when
You have the Humours to dissemble, and can eat
Up any mans Heart with tears in your eyes
For your devotion: the people never tremble more
Than when you look upwards to Pray: Your days
Of Humiliation are a certain preface to some
Notable mischief: for if they scape a Tax, the


Murder of some honest Men must follow: after
Which you commonly Order a Thanks-giving.



They observe me right Hugo: If they have any
Malice left, a little more, 'tis excellent Mirth.



They that speak favourably of you, say you are
A brave Villain: In conduct fortunate and full
Of Courage, but all misapp•r'd to serve your design
Of enslaving a Kingdom, to Master a Crown,
VVhich they say will shew upon your Head, but as
A brighter mark of your Rebellion, till your
Noddle ake with the weight of it, and both fall
From your shoulders in a great storm; In which
They prophesie the Devil means to come, ere it be
Long and fetch your Soul away.



A storm? I shall go off with loud musick then,
Ha, ha: So, so, let' em talk on; and when their Breath
Is spent, their Heirs may take up their quarrel
And kill me in a Chronicle; where they shall read
That all their Fathers were my slaves: Ha, ha,
Farewell honest Hugo.






And didst thou wait that day upon my Father
At Timoleons Tombe.



'Twas my last service Sir:



Didst see him murder'd too?



I saw your Father, the good Lord Demara••s

On the Pile with other Senators,
Bleeding his Life away, and with the first,
Thought it my duty, though it were sad news,
To acquaint you Sir by letter.




The story now confirm'd: I am lost to all the World:
No man dares own me but this poor old Servant.
To my Fathers death this Cruelty is added,
That me they devour'd alive: All that my Father
And his old Predecessors had been gathering
So many years to keep alive our Family;
They have torn and Ravish'd from me▪
Why do I breath this Aire?


Souldier, leading her as a Prisoner.


How now Colonels? Why in this posture?



We are commanded to carry this young Traytor to the Castle.



I ever thought he was a Rascal: You were Cleomenes

 Sirra, were you not? Well, I suspect




That Lord too: But what has he done Colonels?



If I mistake not, those two Feather Caps
Are of the military Tribe, that brought Commission to
Plunder your Fathers House Sir,
And one of 'em quoited me out of the dinning Room.



Ile bear you Company,
I cannot serve the State too much, I love to have
My hand in every Treason.



You were ever active.



Leave me I charge thee.




What's he that comes confidently towards us?



I have an humble suit to you Gentlemen.



It may be so, but I use not to carry single mony,
And these Colonels have nothing but Gold about 'em.



I scorn your Charities, unless it be to kill me.



How kill thee? upon what acquaintance?



And to that I must have not consent, Ile shew
You Reasons, and then I know you'l do't.







I was late Son to an unfortunate Senator.



Son of a Senator, That's somewhat: He deserves
To be run through the shoulder for that: Look to
The Prisoner; I do not like this despirate fellow.



My Father was murther'd at Timol•o•s Tombe
And by some marks given me, you may be two
Of the Barbarous Villains.



The young man's Angry.



Look to the Prisoner I say.



I could not reach the City at an hour
to die with him, but time enough to bear,
That since his death, that Fortune, which his Care
Meant mine, is seiz'd upon▪ All my hopes lost,
I have a Total Ruin.



What dost thou tell us of Ruins, and killing of thy
Father? Come to the point: Tell us something of
Consequence; We have other bnsiness to attend.



In short I must prevail with one of you to kill
Me presently:



Art thou in earnest? Look to the Prisoner, I say.



By all my better hopes of to'ther World,
I hate to live in this, Stript of all Comforts.
Who draws? Ile stand a fair mark for his Sword.



Sir, we have something else to do, then
To kill a man that hath lost both his Friends
And his Fortune: you must 'en live 'till you dye,
If you had had the luck to have been with your Father,
These Gentlemen would have done you Reason.
But now the State is satisfyed, and for ought
I see, you must live a little longer, unless you will
Be impatient, and hang your self.



We do not use to exceed our Commissions Sir.



Why then my Sword shall try what I can force.



Look to the Prisoner. Ah!
They fight: Calanthe runs away,
The Souldiers follows her.





Ha! I have known that Face,
'Tis Demaratus's Son.



Hold! I am a naked man: One of you kill him at my
Peril, Ile save you harmless; Here's a mad fellow
Indeed, O my Lord Cleomenes save me, defend me, there's
An impudent Rogue, he calls himself
The Son of a Senator, set upon us,

My self and another Souldier



Not to have Rob'd you?



No, no, the Rascal had a plot to have his own
Throat cut; and because we would not do him the Courtesie,
Like a Brazen-fac'd Fellow, he set upon four on's.



What's become o'th Colonels?



Nay, nay, he has kill'd 'em for ought I know.



These are the men▪
Of mighty noise and Husk, when there's no danger,
Most nimble at a Throat, when they are numerous.


But leaves tremble not more in a Rough Wind,
Than they to Guard themselves, when they are call'd
Upon the Accompt of Honour.








It is the Lord Cleomenes.




Come hither desperate Gentleman. 




Ask him what he hath done with the two Field
Officers? Thank Heaven Sirra, I had no Sword,
As I do heartily: I think it sav'd my Life, I had
Been paid else: I am in a sweat to think whether I
should have gone if he had kill'd me.



So, no more, the Colonels made their retreat fairly;
He did not know your Person and Employment
And does ask pardon for the Fright he put you to.



I humbly beg your pardon to my passion:
The memory of my undoing was too fresh within me.
Alas I was transported with rage, more for
My Fortune then my Father, and I am. 



Of our own Principles, and for the Cause, which made
His Father send him to Travail. 



Saies your Lordship so? But Sir he has Rescu'd a
Young Villain that was sent hither by the
Kings command to be your Prisoner.



I rescue a Prisoner? VVhom? or VVhen?



That did you Sir, you were weary of your life before:
Now the Law shall hang you to your own Hearts desire.



Upon my life I know not what he means.



The thing that was your  my Lord: O he's
Prov'd an impudent young Traytor.



Ha! VVhat has he done?



Nay, I know not. 
Enter the Souldier leading Calanthe.

'Tis he: by good Fortune he is recovered: honest Souldier
Look for a reward: my Lord, it is
The King command you, put this Rogue into a Dungeon▪



'Tis she, my Heart dares not look forth. 




He shall want no Charge I warrant him. I am
Sorry he had no more Grace for his Relation once
To your Lordship: the Crimes are high. You shall
Hear more, my Lord I know you are honourable:
He has an honest Face, but your Lordships wisdom
Will be concern'd to use him like a Rascal, and so


I take my leave. My most Honourable Lord.




It shall Speak my Innocence
And Duty to the King: Take him away,
I hate to look upon him.


My Soul's upon the Torture.



Farewel, Son of the Senator, thou mayst live now
To be an honest man, and see what will come on't.





Parmenio, thou shalt not Repent to Live,
I see thy Courage, and in thy Name
And Blood have an Assurance of thy Faith.



In all I am your servant.



Bid an Officer of the Guard bring the Boy back,
And wait me at my Chamber to be examin'd,
And be you near to Observe my further Order.



I shall my Lord.



I have a narrow path
To walk on: Guide me Honour and thou great
Soul of the World: Things now for Action call:
This Tempest looks as it would drown us all.







I Do not like the present Face of things.







I did expect a finer Time on't.



The Triumph quickly Vanish'd.





Your Servant Colonels: Where's his Highness?



In's Bed-chamber writing Letters.



What to his Mistriss? the Queen Timandra?

She's a Rare Beauty.



Would Affrick had kept this admiration
To it self: I fear she will be fatal,
And undo us all.



For my part, I think, no woman in the


World is worth a mans melancholy.



I am sure it hath thrown us into a melancholy
Posture: The Prince does not enjoy himself.



And the King is strangely alter'd.



I have heard one man possess'd with many
Devils, but I never heard of two men possess'd
With one and the same evil Spirit before.
Well, I fear a Storm's not far off: the Clowds
Are gathering: This outward Reconcilement
Between Father and Son, is but a dream of
Fair weather.



I wish his Highness well:



So we do All.










Your Highness humble Servants, who should be all
Happy to kiss your Hand, and see you chearful.



Why, so I am: Am I not chearful Gentlemen?
Look well upon me.




Your Servants canot chuse but be concern'd,
When any Cloud's upon you: Sir, we are
Men that truly Honour you, and see through all
The Sun-shine you put on, that something
Has got too near your Heart and darkens you.



I did not Sleep well. 



We Believe it Sir,
And something is the cause▪ Change but your Fancy,
And it will Vanish like a dream.



Your Remedies are pleasant.



You'd say so, if you knew my Frolicks,
And yet I must Confess, I have had my Fits
As high as a Mistris, but never Ventur'd Love
Above a Moon: Took notice of my Tides
Of Love, yet made my Voyage off and on
Without a Storm, or straining the least String
About my Heart. You'l pardon Sir the freedom. 



But you mistake Cause.



I wish I did Sir;
But this disease, call'd Love, has a most certain
Symtome, and wears his Night-cap so visible,


That the distempers still appear, although
The Cure may sometimes fail.



Gentlemen, 'tis no woman hath discompos'd
My thoughts.



Why, is't a Man? Who in the name
Of nature can be so weary of his Life,
As to disturb our Freedom.



If my counsel may be offer'd Sir, no matter what's the Cause:
Drink Wine, and bear up above all the thoughts
Or Friends or Enemies. Would we were
I'th' Camp agen; this Drowsiness and Ease
Will Tarnish all our Souls.



You love me Gentlemen, and
I hope I have deserv'd it.



Is there one here that stands suspected?
A man that will not Sacrifice his Life,
And in your Service fight in any Cause,
'Gainst any Person?




You would contribute all your Courages
T' assist my Honour, if it shall Require
A worthy Vindication. Therefore, Gentlemen,
In the Evening I shall communicate a Secret,
In which I shall desire your Faith and Counsels,
Till when I ask your pardon noble Colonels.



We'l wait you Sir.



And shall be proud to serve you.






What make all these Officers here? I like it not.




Hugo, to my wishes; thou hast kept thy promise.



Pardon the boldness of this interruption;
My duty may want method, but not zeal,
To serve your Highness.



Thou hast given me proof.



I came to give you account Sir of your Father.



How is it with the King, dear Hugo?




Much the better, since
I sweetn'd him with your Resolve to quite
Your Hopes in fair Timandra: I found him
Raving at first, and a Commission drawing up
For your present expedition to Corinth.

But I soon qualified that cold Unkindness


And he expects your Visit.



Thou hast Oblig'd me Hugo; and to justifie
The truth of thy Relation, and Confirm him
That all is my Obedience and clear Duty,
Here is a Letter to the Queen from me,
With full Resign of my Pretensions to her:
And that there may be nothing wanting Hugo,

To uncreate his Jealousie of either,
Thou shalt deliver it thy self, and give him
Thy own accompt of all things.




Your Care to satisfie him, 'tis excellent; and I
Shall take it as a great Honour, to carry this express to her.



Honest man: What can Reward thy Faith,
And care of me?



My duty pays it self.



Farewell dear Hugo, I expect no Answer. 



I think you need not: This will do your work Sir.



I cannot chuse but Smile: that I shall make

This cunning Knave my Engine. I'le not trust him
Too much: Parasites are a Race of dangerous men,
Especially to Princes, who abuse
Their Beams, as Serpents do the Sun-shine; Thrive,
And yet Infect the very Light they live by.






So, I have an Office; his Highness Letter-carrier.
But I consider the Circumstance carried a Gloss
Of Cunning. That nothing may be wanting Hugo,

Thou shalt deliver it thy self. Hum! And why my self?
I am not Concern'd I take it: I'le be sure on't.
With your Highness leave, I must make bold
To peep• into the Belly of your Paper-kite. 
If any body should see me, He would think me
Little better that a Knave now: But 'tis not
The first Time I have been bold with a Trust.

What's here! a loose parcel of paper inscrib'd

Palermo! What should this signifie?



I have not not time to enlarge: Prepare
Your self and your Friends this night for your
Escape: I have sent you the Word enclos'd
By which you may pass the Guards, from whence
I will wait you to my Quarters; where
With a considerable Train
I will be your Conduct: and in all other
Commands Shew the Obedience of,
Your most faithful Servant Dionysius.

I this the Letter of Defiance? Are you good at
This young Prince?
If I had not made a Knave of my self before
Hand, what a Fool would he have made me now, and
His own Father. The Word for their Escape!
Conscience be quiet; I am Resolv'd to carry this
Letter to her, but his Highness shall excuse me, if I keep
To the Father's side; He's my elder Acquaintance.
We were bred up Children in Villany; and when we
Came to Age, the Devil swore us into a Brother-hood;
Saving that mischief advanc'd him to be a
King, and let me rise no higher than a Parafire.

A little Art will make this Letter sound agen.
As for the enclosed, a word to the Wife; I can
But laugh to think what a Rogue I am.






My Lord, I have told you all the Story, and
Canot acquit my self of some Impudence,
Although I felt a Tempest in my Soul,
To see this black Usurper-hold so fair
A Hope in the Queens Love, which by one Act,
Might make him Master of her Crown and Beauty.



It did concern your Interest to break
The Rise of such a Fortune, and there is
No despair Madam, but it may work
A noble Sence within her Breast.




And in my apprehension (though Silent)


Yet seem'd to pity both her self and me,
But kept her passious even, and in order;
At last she gave me thanks, and turn'd aside,
As being, perhaps, not willing I should see
A Tear was breaking from her Eye: And at
This instant Damocles Surpriz'd us.



'Tis high time, Madam, to consult your Safety,
Which hath a sad Complexion; the perils
That I have been acquainted with near shook
My Frame so much; I labour with the Weight
of your Concerns.



My Life's indeed a Burthen,
And 'twere a mercy, if the Heavens took back!
Their unregarded gift, since I have liv'd
To be destructive to my self, and all
That undertook my Safety.



There's something offer'd to my Thoughts: Ha! 'tis gone agen.



Cast not thy self into a Storm for me.



'Tis come agen. Madam, I have a Servant,
Honest and Valiant; you may trust your Person
To his Attendance, who may this Evening
Convey you to place Secure; for here
You are expos'd to death inevitable.
There, nor his Anger, nor his Eyes shall Reach you:
Leave me to answer your Escape.




Without enquiring, whether you design,
To make my safety my Ingratitude▪
Do's not my Reason tell me, he will make
Your Life the forfeit of my absence.




Deserve so well of Heaven as to be made
A Sacrifice for you; How would my Blood
Conspire and Crowd into a Flood, to shew
A Chearful Ebb: 'Twere but duty Madam.



My Lord, I allow a duty, but like not the
The way; Since I'le accept defence, but on
Such Terms as Honour: would embrace a Victory.
The Dangers are my own, and I'le be near 'em.



Then be it so; and be as safe as I,
This Fort, my Life, and all my strength can make you:
If I and they fail, You shall see and witness.
O'th' sudden, I could prophecy, but dare not
With prophane Lips, but yours are sacred, Madam,


And you may say, there is a hand, that guide•

Your Safety: that great Fate that brought you hither.
And it doth raise my thoughts that you must prosper:
I find the People willing to shake off
The Usurpers Chains, and then your bright appearance
Will compleat their Joys, and make
A Mourning Throne Rejoyce, to see it self
Restor'd in you, to all just Glory.





He has observ'd my Order.
Be pleas'd, I may commend to your attendance
This Gentleman: A person, on whose faith
You may build a Confidence: It is the Son
Of good Demaratus; Parmenio.



I have heard his Father mention him; He was
Sent to Palermo for his Studies.



'Tis the same, by his good Fate sent hither now
To do you Service; I must take my Leave,
Affairs throng in my Brain.




You need not wonder
That these few tears break thus unruly forth,
They are a just debt to your Fathers memory,
Who lov'd me well.



Mine have been paid already,
And it remains to shew my self his Son:
I know not who you are, more than a Gentleman,
Whom the Usurper persecutes, and a person
My Lord Cleomenes would preserve: And I
Presume you have Virtue to deserve all this,
And shall think Death an Honour, when I meet it,
With his Commands upon me.










Madam, This Story of the Boy amazes me:
Why, he so unconcernc'd should take the Boldness
To venture so much Counsel to his Ruin?



It is no less my wonder: But I never
Observ'd a greater sense of Honour, nor
Read so much Virtue in so small a Volume.



I had other Thoughts


When I consider'd his Relations
To the Usurper, and had no Charity
To think him more than one of his black Agents,
And the worse too for his good face, It put me
In the mind of the fallen Angels.



I grieve for his sad Fate, but can't help him:
Indeed I never felt within my heart
So great Commpassion to a stranger, and
It is but justice, since his care of me
Made him so miserable.




Quit this sad Argument, and give me leave
To tell you another story that concerns you.
I have a message to you.



To me! from whom?
He must be a bold man, made you his messenger.








Forgit it I beseech you;
He's full of Love no doubt.



Full of the Devil;
And would engage me his, dark instrument,
To bring you to his wishes. O the Favours
And Treasures shall be mine: Have not I
An excellent Office!



What answer did you make? I fear his words
Awak'd your angry blood, in which you made
A Return, did not please him.




He hopes Ile do't.



What witchcraft could encourage him?



Being thus put to't,
As the Oracles are wont to Answer, when
They are consulted what shall come to pass,
I wanted not ambiguous words that pleas'd him,
As wishing I had so much interest,
And strength to do him service to his merit,
That would do all our work, and his too; Madam,
He should be hang'd but once, and high enough:
But let me humbly beg your pardon, Madam,
That I have mentioned him, his very Name
Carries a secret poison in the Breath,
That must create a Melancholly, and Dull
Those Christal images within your Soul; Let us
Look back upon our hopes in Dionysius;



VVhose promise kept, will pour a welcome Balm
Into our wounded Loves, and Banish all
Our sullen Contemplations.




Those great things are beyond his power to Accomplish.



O punish not your self with one such Thought,
I confess, Madam, it is a mountainous promise,
But hee's a Prince now, belov'd i'th' Army,
And at home popular: The Rising Sun:
Ador'd, and flatter'd: And who knows what Miracles
His Love, and Power may Act.




Madam, a Gentleman desires access,
He hath some business of Concern (he says)
From the Prince Dionysius.




He must be admitted.










Madam, I approach your Royal hand
VVith as much Reverence as to an Altar.



Have you affairs with me Sir?



VVith you most Royal Madam, I think I have;
But pardon me if I be slow to tell you what
Commands I have from the sweet Prince; Ah
My eyes are not yet satisfyed: There are so
Many beauties in that Face, I could stand
A whole day to gaze upon't.



Pray come to the business.



Come to the business? Ha, most gracious Madam,
The Prince. 



Be not so tedious: VVhat from him?




VVhat from him? That from him:
And in that I have said all, and done my
Duty, and now most gracious Madam, can
Tell him what you say.



I have said nothing: It does require no
Answer.



In that Smile I carry a thousand.

Cleander observes, Hugo going off, and comes towards
Timandra, but Hugo looking back obsucres himself.


Hum! Is't e'en so black Gentleman, you are very familiar,
I shall do your errand, How she Titters at the Letter, and he laughs
And looks through the Paper: If I say I shall betray my self.




The thing has kept his word, and we must take
This Opportunity; I like his Project.
But, Mandam, though we make use of the Word,
It will concern our wisdoms not to Trust
His Conduct after: That were but to shift,
A person, not the Danger, since his power
Abroad may equal what is threatn'd here:







We must Remember this Mock Prince is still
The Son of Damocles; but our time is narrow,
Leave me to th' care of Outward things: If we
Without a Check but reach the Sea, we have
A Friend from every Prospect; not a Wind
Can blow from Heaven, and hence, but for our safety.
The world's before us: Who can fear to drown,
VVhen every Coast, and every Wind's our own.



1. The King's troubled.
2. And he will be so,
VVhile this unmanly Ague shakes his Temper.



Have I by my great Arts from a despis'd
Prodigious Lowness of my Birth and Fortune
Advanc'd my self to Honour, and to Empire?
And now fix'd like a Piramy'd, upon
Whose Top my Name stands the admired Obj•ct,
And envied mark of Princes round about me,
VVho fear what Crown of their's I'le next attach,
As I have done this Kingdom, where I have
VVith bloody cost rais'd to my self a power
Upon my Princes, and the Nations fall;
Both which I Ruin'd, with a factious Flame,
And made this Clime too hot for temperate Laws:
The Dull Defenders of a drowzey State,
That slept too long, while my Ambition wak'd,
And undiscovered brought this fatall Change;
And as those subtile Favours that design
The Bodies Ruin, by the Vitals first,


So I began against the Life of Power,
My lawful Soveraign, whom I fought and forc'd
In Battle to Retreat and save himself,
'Till in his flight he met an Angry stream
That swallow'd him, and his great Horsmanship.


1. I dare not speak to him,
He carries Ponyards both in his Eyes and Pocket.
2 VVe must stay till he call.


The Senate then a lazy lump of Power,
VVith forcked Heads threatn'd to sit heavy
Upon my Heart: But I found ways by purge
And bleeding to Remove 'em, and constrain'd
The dull Remains to humble their proud necks
For we to walk on: All things that Oppos'd,
Until this period, I made tame and stoop,
And shall at last a Woman baffle me:
Defie my Love, my Anger and my Conquest?
I will disolve that Magick that she trusts to,
And make her know 'tis in my power to take
(If she be obstinate) more than I have ask'd:
And that bold talking treacherous Boy shall live
To see her pride and stubbornness tormented.
And should my Son Rebel agen, and offer at
An interest with me: I have an engin

That wakes at my first call, shall strick him to
Eternal Silence.




I beseech your pardon.







Sir, says, he must speak with you.





O, is it Hugo?

Why was he not admitted presently!
You can be officious when you please.
Leave us agen, and let none interrupt us,
Honest Hugo.




The business, Sir, is done.







I have explor'd each Fibre of your Son.



And How? and How?



All things are well and in an excellent posture.



Thou art i'th' dark.



But I have brought to light a Plot, you'l
Thank me for.



A Plot? What is't?



Your Son most violently proceeds to Cross
Your interest in the Queen, and has most
Impiously contriv'd away for her escape.



He dares not? Her Escape?



I skrew'd my self into his Soul, and he,
In his Confidence of my honesty, would have
Me carry a Letter to her.







Yes, but had the Grace to break it open.







Which gave her to understand that this night
By Virtue of the Word, a scrowl enclos'd, without
And difficulty she might pass the Guards.



O Rebel, Traytor, It will be then necessary to
Change the VVord immediately.



Do not trouble your self Sir, I have sav'd that l•bour,
For most artificially I trim'd up the
Letter, and changing the Scrowl, baited their
Ambition to be gone with a word of my
Own divising; Did I not very well Sir?



Admirably: I could kiss thee for't, Thou hast done
A Service never to be sufficiently Rewarded.
It tickles my spleen; T•ou hast done rarely Hugo.




In this one Act I have out-witted your
Son, and it was high time to give his disobedience
A Check, Clip'd the wings of his precious
Pigeon, who is wild with the immagination of
Taking the fresh Air; but when she finds her self
In our snare, I hope she will be tame
Enough, and stoop to any Conditions your
Heat of blood will propound to her.



The pleasure comes to fast: Ha, ha, ha.
Now are they (having already swallow'd their
Liberty) laughing at us. 



To think how we are gull'd? I should have told
You Sir, I have discover'd the Moor to be a Raschal,
A near friend of hers; A saucy Sun-burnt Devil,
And your Rival.



The Sooty slave shall dye for't: Not all his black
Relations in Hell shall rescue him: The evening


Creeps upon us: I dare not trust the Aire with ou•

Discourse, my Stars, I do forgive you all, y'are
Kind; and next to them, I owe my thanks to
The VVise, Honest Hugo: VVe'l be in at the Sport.



By any means Sir, I must wait upon you,
My presence will add much to their Vexation.



The strength shall be recruited at each Guard.



I canot but laugh to think how they will look upon
me Sir, when they see themselves in the snare,
And how the Moor will Blush Sir.



Let's away: no change of Countenance:
Carry all Smooth until the storm surprize 'em.









He's ordering the Centries.








Well: If I miscarry this bout Corporal, Ile say
My death at your door, that made me leave my
Drink behind me.



There's your spot: Two hours hence expect Releif,
You may lye down and listen, but take heed, when
The Round comes that you be not taken Napping,




I warrant you, in my first duty, I thank my Stars,
(When I left my own Trade to follow Man-killing)
I had a Benefit from my Fears, and could wake
At the Motion of a Field-mouse, now I am an old
Souldier, and us'd to't, I can do my duty in my
Sleep: Rise, Bid stand: Ask who goes there? Have
All my Questions and postures as ready as the
Most waking Centry of 'em all.



I had a Scurvy dream last night Serjeant.



'Tis well for you Captain.



A Scurvy dream well for me? Why prethee?



'Tis well for you that you can dream: Time
Was within our memory we have not slept
In ten nights: hard duty, little drink, and no
Pay, do not much Corroborate nature: But
What was your dream Captain?



Why, I dream't we had an Alarum given us,


And that the Enemy (having taken our Redont
Upon the River) were entring the Town,
Against them I march'd; and at last, when I was
Beset by a Party of theirs, and in
The Condition of engaging with 'em: Two Rats
That had a quarrel behind the Hangings in
My Chamber, waken'd me.



And so you came off?





Where's the Captain of the Watch?







I had Orders to Recruit the Guards to night.







I know not, but there is something expected.



A pox on't, my dream's out: Come Serjeant,
I attend you Colonel.






Look how the night's already drest, and for
Thy fair attendance hath put on her best
And brightest Lustre, while every Star
(Though not with so much Sparkling as thy Eyes)
Pays his willing shine to light thee
To some more happy Coast.



I cannot fear Success, while you are Conduct.




Arisba, this last Act
Will perfect thy fidelity, and make it
Fit for Reward.



Be confident of my duty▪
But Sir, contemn your self, I heard something
Move▪ the Centry is near.



Be careful of the Queen, I will approach
And give the Word.



I hear a Voice: Stand: Ha! What's this?







Corporal: by this moon-shine 'tis the Devil.
Coporal: Come quickly and be damn'd, here's one
Stays for you: I charge thee, come no nearer.
Corporal, ha! So.



I'le e'en leave you together, and Alarum the Guard.










You are mistaken, and must along with me.





The Guard's Alarum'd: I doubt we are betray'd










It had been safer to have touch'd a falling
Thunder-bolt.




The Corporal kill'd? Then 'tis time
To try my Sword.






We must face about.


other Dionysius, Sicanus, Dorion.



The Court's Alarum'd: where are these Traytors?







Let's help to take 'em.



Agreed; Souldiers, we assist your duties.



Whence this Alarum? Hiarbas and Timandra.

There is no time for cold enquiries; Accept our
Swords Hiarbas to your Service.




Dionysius, can this be Real? There is some Hopes yet.




I think this Coast is safe.



Ha! the Souldiers grow out of the Earth
Like Cadmus Teeth, Defend the Queen on that hand,
I on this.



I cannot fall in a more glorious quarrel.
Souldiers d'ee not know me?



Dispatch: the King commands you Seize 'em.

They fight▪ Strato and Proclus fall in the Skirmist. Sica∣nus
and Dorion beaten off. D•onysius taken, and Cleander
surpriz'd behind by Parmenio.


Th'art a brave M•or













Ingrateful woman; was your Heat so mighty,
None but this Son of night was fit to mix
And walk Companion of your Love and Fortune?
A Dog? a Moor?



Thus Mungrils snarl at Lions: Damocles,

'Tis not our Crimes, nor any good the Gods
Foresaw in thee, nor Valour of thy Guards,
Nor our own Sleeping Stars, but thy great Sins,
Not yet mature for Vengeance, hath made
Our design fruitless.



Ha! Dionysius! my Son turn'd Rebel?
'Tis time to check his Speed: And whose fine plot
Was this?



Sir, it was mine: I could not hope a Life here
Without Stain to my Honour.



And Madam you may dearly count for this.



It was I contriv'd it.
She does abuse her Innocence, let me
That have a Soul prepar'd sustain the punishment.



They have both accus'd themselves unjustly,
The plot was mine, I must agen Repeat,
But not Repent it, mine; I sent a Letter,
And the Word enclos'd for their escape.



You did? Cleomenes. 





Sir, I desire no body may be Believ'd, but my self:
The Plot was mine, the Cream, the Knack of
It my own.







Yes, and shall please thy Sooty Phis•omy.







As sure as your Highness gave me your Letter to
That Lady, which I deliver'd with my own Hand;
But it was after I had broke it open, and made
Bold to put the Change upon your own Trick. Altering


Only a word or so. 



Remember he's your Son.



Thus I blow off that name: I expect your duty:
You need not Strive for your Rewards.



I am commanded to attend you Sir to the Castle.



I am sorry my unhappiness should thus
Involve your danger; But I hope your Father
Has a Reserve of kinder thoughts.




Timandra, your fair Hand. This Kiss
Is bought too cheap though I dye for you.
Farewel noble Hiarbas.





Come nearer Moor: Dost thou not Read Death
Within this Frown?



I am above it Damocles: Keep those Bugs
Upon thy Brow to fright tame Fools, and such
As born from Worms do Crawl about thy Court,
And lick thy dusty Pavements: Snakes that live
And lap the blood of Innocents: I despise
Thy mercy to my self; But if thou hast
A sense of Honour, or of any thing
That's man within thee, Look with softer Eyes
On this distressed Queen.







Ambition cannot aim at greater Honour.




(Hadst thou no other Crime) shall make thee Curse
Thou hast a Being.



Saucy Competition with thee? Thy Pride
Provokes my Smile: I tell thee Damocles,

Thou mayst by number, and thy Crouds of men,
Steal an Inglorious Victory: But were
Our Persons singly arm'd, and we two plac'd
Upon a Cliff, or some Star-kissing mountain:
All thy abused Legions round about us
Staring to see us fight for Love and Honour:
The Gods should not be weary to look down.
And thy own Armies undeceiv'd should Judge
Who best deserv'd Timandra.




This Moor has a brave Soul.



But I loose breath in talking to a man
Whose very Soul's a Coward, and his Heart
False as his Title to the Crown.




We'l try how he can talk without a Head:


The morning Sees him dye: For her. 
One Convoy serve 'em both, and look you trifle not
With my Commands as you will keep your Head on.
Thns all my Troubles vanish; I was never
A King till now.



I hope you'l take my word another Time.





Madam, I grieve for your misfortune.



For thy self Cleomenes: And yet thou hadst
An honest Fame.



You do not know me Sir.



But I forgive thee: Come, mourn not Timandra.




I should not weep were we to dye together.



'Tis not Resolv'd above so; do not envy me
As man to lead the way: 'Tis my Honour
To bleed a chearful Martyr to thy Love.
Forgive me if I hope thou mayst not stay
Too long behind: For when I shall arrive
Among those blest Shades; and have my Seat
Where only good inhabits: Yet I fear
I shall not think it Heaven till thou art there.
Conduct now where you please.







THou hast told me a sad Story: the Queen's made
A Prisoner? and Hiarbas doom'd to loose
His Head this mourning? They are then both
As miserable as I: But she is firm
I see to her Honour. How does he bear himself?



With a most manly Temper, not i'th' least
Dejected for his thought of suffering Death,
But as it separates Timandra from him;
For 'tis presum'd they Lov'd.




His worth may make the Cloud upon his Face
More lovely to her Eyes. But how doth She
Take this affliction?



At first most sadly;
And yet his Courage and his wisdom has


Almost perswaded her to part with him.



M•ght I not see him before he dye?



He made it his request to my Lord Cleome••s,

That he might Visit you, petending something
T•at might concern you and himself.



On that account I wish he were permitted.





His stay will be but short.



I limit not the Favour, and shall thank you,
I wonder I have been so long forgotten
In the Usurpers anger, but his Fury
VVhen it does fall perhaps will recompence
The slow approach it makes.


Sir, I am told you would speak with me.







Your business pray with me?



I must be thrifty of my Time, my Life wonot
Allow us many minutes, and I would not
Put off this earth without a peace about me.
I come to Ask thy Pardon.




You never Injur'd me▪





I did abuse thy Innocence.







And gave thee •p
To my own thoughts an impious Boy, when I
Conceiv'd thee late a wicked Agent from
The Us•rper to the Queen: But she has told me
Since, a large volume of thy Virtue,
That I am oblig'd to carry thy Forgiveness,
Or doubt my Passage to a better World.



Sir, I have Charity to pardon all
The ill you thought of me.



I thank thee, and trust me, if I were to live
I would study thee a better Recompence
Then naked Pravers: But as it is, I wish
T•ou maist o•t-live the Tyrants malice, Farewel.







I should say something, from the Queen, of sorrow,
T•at for her sake thou suffer'•t, But when I'm dead
She'l tell the all at large.



Pray tell me Sir,
Do you expect to die so soon?




The precise minute, but cannot think I have
Many more to tell that number time, but
By a Tyrants glass.



And can you part with Life so evenly?
How did you work this noble mastery
Upon your Soul? I wish I may do so,
When the approaching minute Comes.



It is an ease to die: a Blessing Boy.



My bless: The choise part of my Life is gone
Before, yet I am confin'd to a tedious Life
And make no hast to follow it, But 'tis
The Tyrants fault not mine.



Thou wert then in Love too.



Heaven will forgive me, if I say, I lov'd
A Brother, in whose life was all my Comfort
But Death snatch'd him away maliciously,
I know not where, nor how.



His Name I prethee.



You shall excuse that, you are a stranger
And will not be at all concern'd to know him,
But here is all that's left him, his shadow,

Which when his cruel Fortune call'd him from me,
He gave me a Companion in his absence,
But that my tears are pious to his memory;
The frequent Drops, and kisses, I have paid it,
Might have long since defac'd and drown'd the Image.



My labouring Soul: The very same I gave




'tis my Sister, but I must not
Discover.









There is some secret magick in thy Sorrow
Makes me forget my own: If I could think
The Tyrant would not punish thee with Life
Too long, I'de wish to stay and tarry for
Thy company that we might die together.
Enter Timandra, and seeing them, stands at some distance.
Thou art young, and by the example of my dying
I would instruct thee to a Flight abve


The wo•lds Ambition, and though I be
A stranger here, there we should be acquainted,
Where we might live and love to all Eternity.



What do I hear?









Ha! Timandra, I am but
The shadow of my self: those two divide
All that I was between 'em. Art thou come!
I'le tell the Secret, Polydore's a woman;
A Princess my Timandra, One that lov'd me
Before my Happiness of knowing thee,
And yet I dare not tell her who I am
Though a dear part of my self; nor dare I kiss her
For fear my Soul dissolve upon her Lip.



He has some strange Contention in his Breast.



What killing Language do I hear?
Have I for this made forfeit of a Kingdom,
And what is dearer, Liberty? Puld on me
A Tyrants Rage, and given my heart to one
That in my presence owns another Mistriss?



I see the Clouds are gathering to make
A storm within thee: Let one word disperse 'em:
It is Calanthe, my dear long lost Sister.



And will you not uncloud your self to her?







I canot blame their passions high at parting.




It were a wickedness the Gods
Would never pardon, Ile give the a Reason:
She knows I am to die; O let me vanish
I'th' dark: for but to tell her I am Cleander

That must within few minutes bow my Neck
T'th' Hang-mans Ax, to please a bloody Tyrant,
'Twould strik her dead immediately before us,
And I should be her Murtherer: No Timandra,

Let the Usurpers Soul own all that guilt,
When I am past the miseries of Life,
Ile tell the Angels, who are coming after,
And that's enough.



I would say something,
Speaking to Calanthe.

But so many Seas of sorrow meet within mee,
They drown my Tongue and Heart.








I am commanded to attend you, Madam,
To your Chamber.








Sir, I have Orders to wait upon you.



Thou call'st me to my death, 'tis welcome.




Madam, your Retirement is concern'd.



How soon, we are all divided?




She must not know this Warrant for her death:
He has remembred her at last; Let 〈◊〉 dye to morrow

Timandra will be next, and then his Son,

And then my Head brings up the Rear, I see
The method of his Tiranny.





Sir, I am very much Importun'd by the Moor,

Hiarbas Servant, now your Prisoner.







To let him speak with you: He says he will discover
Something to your private Ear you'l thank him for:
A secret will be wellcome to the King,
And worth his pardon, if you will promote it.






Have you any thing to say
To me?



My Lord, I have something to reveal to your Lordship,
And in Hope you will mediate for my pardon. 







There is a person in the World.



One person in the World? take him away▪
The Fellow trifles, and is tedious.



Not so quick; I'le come to the Business.
My Lord, I'le tell you: The Gentleman you
Call Hiarbas.








Is no such man: No Moor.







No more then your Lordship; these hands temper'd
The Ingredients, that gave him the Complexion


He wears; I dare not speak too loud:
It is the King▪ Sir.












Make it good, and be for ever Happy.



I knew it would be wellcome news; upon my
Most certain knowledge he has walk'd in that
Obscurity, since the Defeat he had 〈◊〉 Battle▪
The Queen only knows of it, beside my self▪
There are few could have kept a Secret so long,
And so sweet, as I have done; but the fear
Of Hanging has had the better of my Conscience.





For such a Service; The King shall 〈…〉




Nay, let him give me what he will beside, I hope.
You do not conceive that I have done this out▪
Of any ill Principle, only the Gallows
Was too strong for my Imagination▪



Art sure this is not Reveal'd to any else?



Upon my 〈◊〉 your Lordship 〈…〉




Then I'le take course to be the last▪
It shall go no further.








Take thy Reward base Villain: Betray thy▪
King and Master? Parmenio, throw him
Into that Lobby; and dost 〈…〉 off his Head,
I shall have use on't: So, good Heavens I thank you,




we have much to 〈…〉







I thank you Sir, only I shall Request▪
This favour, when Hiarbas with his Blood
Hath satisfied the Thrist of Damocles▪

That you would bring me word.








That news may give a period to my Life,
And break my Heart: What benefit have Princes:
To be born great? To have a name and power
Above the common Tribe for a few minutes?
When they'r expos'd to the same Strokes of Fortune,
Which renders them but still the more unhappy;
And their fall so much the greater, as they are
Thrown from the taller Precipice.




Madam, the Prince Dionysius, by some favour
Of my Lord Cleomenes, is come to visit you.



Alas! this is no season for a Visit;
And yet he has deserv'd all my Civilities.
I pray admit him.





Pardon, dear Madam, that I have presum'd
To make intrusion upon your Sorrow:
I have only to present you my sad Heart,
That sees and mourns your •ate.




Madam, the King is come into the Castle;
Sir, as you weigh my Safety or your own▪
You must not be seen here: That way you'l meet him;
You may Obscure (I know not where) within
That Bed-chamber, his Jealousie at your Sight,
Will turn him into a Flame to all our Ruins.



You shall perswade: Though it be worse than death
To shew this Fear.



For the Queens Honour there Sir; I hear him


Coming up the Staires; One word more Madam,
I dare not trust your tender Heart


Without a Caution, let no Object fright you,

Hiarbas shall be safe upon my Honour,
By your fair self he shall, until you speak with him.






He is dispatch'd Sir;
You ne'r shall see his Face agen.



Not see it, I must Cleomenes, therefore when I send for't
Let it be ready. Hugo attend.



'Tis at your Service Sir.





What says the fair Desire now?
Have you consider'd?


  62And throw off all your unbecoming Wildness,
The very thought and memory of Hiarbas,

Or any other that durst take the Boldness
To offer at Affection as my Rival?
Are all your sullen humors tam'd and vanish'd?
And in that stubborn Heart have I a name?
Lord of that Empire by thy Choise and Gift
To my desert? This I expect to hear,
Or nothing, and that too without much preface.
This is a new and shorter cut of woing
Than I have us'd: But since t'hast Slighted all
My kinder ways, Anger is only left
To instruct thee how to Love? Say, and be brief.



Then briefly thus; Know I do hate thy Love,
As much as I despise thy Anger, Tyrant.
And had I guilt but of one loving Thought
Within my Heart to thee, I'de say,
That Honour there had bid farewel, and left
Me fit to be a Prey to Falshood.
I have not been much tedious in my Answer.



You have been nimble I confess, but I will
Use the same Brevity: Bid Cleomenes

send in Hiarbas Head?








A Present for you Madam.









His lips are cold,
And want much of that noble Heat, wherewith
They were wont to entertain you Madam.







I will not leave any thing alive that loves thee,
My Son is next: But now I thing on't Madam,
I have not done yet: I wo'not leave,
Till I have made thee leprous and unfit
For any mans Embrace: Come, you know the way
To your Bed-chamber: Move, or I'le drag thee to it.

Hugo, to the Doors.



Yes, I know my duty: Or shall I help you Sir?
I am good at both.



Help, Help! Dionysius, A Rape, Treason.





Ambuscado! 'Tis time for me to Shift.




Her Champion hid in her Bed-chamber! They have
Had meetings. Villain, Bastard.





Lost both to Gods and Men; no more my Father.
Murther: Help; O drop a Sword from Heaven
To punish this predigious man. Murther:




There, I ha'e met with you.





You have don't: farewel Timandra and all the world.




What have you done Sir?



I have kill'd a Traytor.



You have slain your Son.



He was my Son, my Anger had forgot him.



Take off the Body: the Spectacle will Raise.


A Tempest in the Souldiery: You have undone
Your self, the Army lov'd him.



Let 'em take him then: where's the Queen?



She gave the first Alarum with crying a Rape,
And now the murther of your Son: You must
Consult your Safety.

The Souldiers within crying the Prince's Revenge.
Hark! the Souldiers,
Their Clamors mount as if they would Allarum Heaven.

Parmenio, set a Guard upon the Staires.
Agen they cry Revenge.


Curse on these loud-mouth Hounds.



You must be Rul'd; the Torrent will Orewhelm
Us all, if you neglect your Safety: Here, obscure,
Trust to me Sir, I will secure your person;
Upon my Life.










Leave me to use my Art: you shall hear from me.
But first I'le thus prevent your Sally.


And place a Guard to watch you here.
So far my work is done.
The Beast I have got within a Den. 
Captain, proclaim a free Session of the
Senate in my name; and give 'em all my Honour,
None shall invade their priviledge or persons.
I will Joyn with 'em to Assert their Liberty,
And impart something after these Rough Seas
To make their Calm secure:
And withal, you may give out the Usurper's
Dead, It will allay their Fears the better.



You need not doubt this will be wellcome news:
I go my Lord.






What will become of me now? There's nothing but
Confusion i'the Castle, and now I am out on't, do not
I know where to hid my self: Some say my Mother
Was a Witch, if she had taught me her Trade, now
Could I have transform'd me self into a Cat: they
Say she has nine Lives; I would give eight on 'em
With all my Heart to save the odd one.



I do not like his marching up to me: How now Souldier?


Save you noble Sir.



But I fear I shall not be sav'd. Dost know me?



Know you? Yes Sir, very well: I ha'e Reason for't;
You sav'd my Life, when I was condemn'd by a
Counsel of War to be hang'd.



O, I remember thee; 'twas for Robbing a Church,
A very honest Fellow; I see thou art grateful, and
I Believe thou hast a kindness for me, for
Old Acquaintance.



Would I could Serve you Sir.



Pox, I know 't; and that thou mayst be in Action
Now, I have a Suit to thee.







Here's money, as we say at Court, to help the good
Inclinations: Here's gold too.



Bless your Honour: But what is the Suit an't please you?



No worse than I wear my self, I would only
Change an upper garment, I have a great fancy
To see how that Red-coat would become me, mine's
Velvet: Shall's Chaffer?



'Tis at your Service Sir.



Here, quickly then help to Strip me: What news Souldier?



News? Why, do you not hear a free Senate proclaim'd?



A free Senate? make hast honest Souldier.



There's nothing but Joy in the City, and the
Secluded Members of the Senate do every minute
Creep out of their obscurities to admiration: They talk of
Bonefires too: What turn there may be in the State
I know not.



A Pox of all ill luck: It will come to my turn
I fear.





They have my Lord Cleomenes Honour to Secure 'em;
And the Senate-house being in the Castle, they have
Pretty good assurance of their Safety.



Peace; not to loud: Stand behind me Souldier, thou
Shalt not be seen, not for a World.



Why Sir! I dare shew my Face.



Dear honest Mirmidon: for a Reason that I know.



Not shew my Face!



There's more money: as thou lov'st me. 



Most Noble Lords, and Reverend Senators,
The Business that requires your presence
Will need no Preface, more than to assure you,
'Tis of dear Concernment to your Countries peace,
Such as will wipe away the black Remembrance
Of Timoleous Tombe.



Ha! Timoleons Tombe, discours'd on already.
Stand close good Souldier! I'le be thy Skreen
For this time.



And prove a wellcome Balm, to heal those
Wounds, the people but too long have with you wept,


While both your Votes and theirs meets Heavens
At once: But I delay this Happiness too long,
And now Conduct you to the place design'd
For this great Work.









They are out of Sight. So, now I thank thee;
Farewell honest Souldier. and be hang'd.



Stay Sir, a word,



I am in hast.



So am I: I have a Suit to you now.



To me? what prithee! Thou hast had my Coat
already, but be short.



That you would please to walk along with me
To the Castle.



Friend thou shalt excuse me now; another time. 



I must not be deny'd: I was civil to you.







You must walk presently, as I direct, or I have
A Goad will make you mend your pace.







I must do my duty, I have an Order for't; I
Expect a Reward too; Therefore dear Hugo. 




For thy Honour; thou knowst I sav'd thy Life.



Do not you remember the Proverb: Save a man
From the Gallows, and he'l be the first
Shall cut your Throat. March, honest Hugo, march.


The Senators appear in the Senate, to them Cleomenes, Alexius,
Dorion, Sicanus, Calanthe veil'd.


That you are safe, and met here, is the Joy
Of your Cleomenes, who hath no Ambition, but
To Repair his sad and bleeding Country,
And that the Laws, after so many Stromes,
May run in their own free and ancient Channel.
Lay down your Fears of an Usurping Tyrant,
Whose Lust of Empire hath committed such
Horrid and high Impieties, I tremble
But to Remember: And at the last hath added
Unto his many Paricides, the murther
Of his own Son: A Person that was only
Unhappy, that he had so vile a Father.
Who though not at present dead;
Yet. 







Not dead Fathers, but by the Providence of
Heaven, that heard our prayers, he is now
Within your power, and timely shall appear
To be the Object of your Justice first.



Thou art thy Conntries, and our great Preservor



But there is something, Honour'd Fathers, of
Greater Concern to take up your chief thoughts.
I meant it in my promise; and shall not
Detain your Hopes too long: Here, I present
The lovely person of a long lost Princess:
A Branch surviving of the Royal Family,
Whose Story will draw up your Love and Wonder;
The fair Calanthe.


Fathers keep your places,
And think what your own duties are oblig'd too.



It will Require no Study: We declare
Her Right to the Succession: the Crown
Is justly hers, and we Salute her Queen.
Long live. 



Stay Honour'd Fathers; though her name and Virtues
Deserve as much as all her Sex together,
Whose preservation has been long my Study,
Though I have nothing to accuse your duties,
Yet she must not be Queen.








My Lord, your Reason.



I'le shew you a Reason presently.




After a great and constant zeal to place me
In my own Right; Is he become my Enemy?
The faith of man is but a Mockery.






Here is my Reason Fathers: Do none here
Know this too long obscur'd Face?



The King: 'Tis Cleander.











Ha! my Brother? let me throw
My Soul into his Bosome: Blest Cleomenes:

My Royal Brother: dearer to my Heart
Than many thousand Kingdoms.




O my dear Sister.






Long live Cleander King of Scicily.




I shall employ the best Care of my Life

•world• serve you, and my Country.




You are dropt a present Sir from Heaven: aand after

•s blessing, there is nothing left to pray for,

•t that the same great Arm that brought you

•ther with so much Miracle and Peace;

•y still be a Guard about your Crown.





•ead firm Loyalty in every Face,

•ould else think the Crown a Burthen to me.

•t I must tell you that my Fortune meets it,

•hen I have more Capacity of bearing

•o great a weight: For here is one that must

•vide all Cares with me: The fair Timandra.




•ur Voices and consent will weave our Crowns

•d persons into One: Heaven hath done his Office.



Then long Live Cleander and Timandra.


•ng and Queen of Scicily and Namidia.




I am rewarded now for all my Sufferings.













Cleomenes pardon my unjust suspition





He is perfect in all goodness: I must own him

•ly best preserver: You can never Sir,

•nough reward his Piety.





•world• you consent Calanthe: Dar'st give thy self to me?







So, what think you of my Sister?



What I should think, if she were not your Sister,



•e is the wonder of her Sex: A Princess

•o be with Reverence look'd on a far off.



My Lord, if I should bring her nearer to you.



She is in my Soul already.






•world• see thou only canst Reward Cleomenes▪


•nd nothing else left worthy of his Faith▪


And Honour: I must give thy self to him.
Take her Cleomenes from me: your Hearts will meet
And make no difference.



I Confirm my Brothers gift Cleomenes:

Thy Blood is from the Race of noblest Ancestors.
Thy Virtue makes the greater: and let Envy
Talk it self dumb, thou dost deserve a Princess,
And shall't be Read in story to thy Honour,
When some that boast great Empires shall have dark
And common Mention.



'Tis too much Grace.




Of all our Forces both by Sea and Land
Are thine, with what can be hereafter found
Worthy of thy Desert, and fit to add unto





Your bounties overwhelm me, I must fear
My Bark's too small for this great Happiness,
But will remember still you are Calanthe.






Are you my Guard?



We do attend your Person.



But I had men that would Obey.



You had a Son too, but you murther'd him.



Fine fellows: Ha! What are these? Senators?
Their Faces are much paler then their Robes:
And some of these dropt at Timoleons Tomb: Ha!
I know 'em agen: See how my dream continues;
When shall I wake? Me thinks I feel the weight
Of mountains on me Cleomenes:

What gay thing is that?



'Tis Cleander the King.



Ha, ha: A very dream still: If I were not▪
A sleep, who durst confine me thus, and give me
Such saucy Language? What's that Lady?



'Tis the Kings Sister, the fair Calanthe.




So, so, I am confirm'd, and that's Timand•a

Whom the fine King plays withall: Chimeraes,
What strang things do we fancy in our dreams,
Some Thunder wake me.





Hugo, Sir, the Usurpers Parasite,
A most Perfideous Villain.



Ha! The King? I am blasted Sir, I most
Humbly beg that you would hang me.



The Laws may fit you Sir.



I have deserv'd it.



I make no question:
Remove this horrid Traytor from my sight,
This day be sacred to our Kingdoms Peace,
And let him dream on, till the Laws and Death
Awake him.



Ask the King mercy: Speak for your self Hugo.




To what purpose? Let me say what I will, I

Knew they will hang me.




Then I will wake my self:
The next wound's his, that dares approach me.

Cleander, I will do the Justice,








'Tis too late, I scorn your Canting Forms of Law:
'Tis in my Power to deceive all your policy: Ha!
I do begin to be awake: This wound has don't:
But I shall sleep agen I fear, and quickly Vanish,
I know not whither.
My eyes grow dim o'th' sudden: 'Tis a trouble
Now to look upwards: Heaven's a great way off,

I shall not find the way i'th' dark: Farewell.








But left his name behind; A Glorious Villain.
His Head shall be advanc'd upon the Castle,
But let his Body crow'd for Burial,
I'th' Common Execution place.
You Gentlemen (no more a Senate) shall
Be honour'd with the name of our great Counsel,
And leave it to my care to Recompence
Your Loss, and Sufferings.




Sen. You are Gracious.



There shall be an Indemnity for those
Whose frailty, and not malice, made 'em Act
Under the Tyrant.



Mercy becomes a King, which as it flows
Upon your Enemies, should have a free
Stream to your Friends, whose Faith, Sir, hath been try'd▪
You •lse would break their Honest hearts.



I thank your good advice my Lord.



And in their number let me, Sir, present
(To kiss your Hand) this noble Gentleman,
Son of the Lord Demaratus; who Bleed
A Martyr for you.



He was my second Father.



And my Friend: you shall be


Restor'd both to his Honour and his Fortunes,
Beside the Addition of some employment
(That may be worthy) near our Person.



What shall be done with Dionysius Body?



It shall have honourable interment.
Come Timandra, 

Set on to th' Temple first, Where we may Pay
Our thanks and Vows to Heaven; whose Justice, though
It march but slow, and silent;
Yet at the last bold Traytors all shall Feel,
It stricks their proud Heads, with an Arm of Steel.


