



WEll Mortals, if any live happy,
 'Tis we Scythians at this day.







Are not we Men?







And what's more, have our Amours unquestion'd
 By those meager sort of Females, Wives, whose entails
 We can cut off at pleasure, sometimes held necessary
 In case of Age, or accidental Ugliness;
 Is this no Felicity?



A sign we had our Predecessors men.



I, and such Souls of Matrimony, that
 Would be all in all in every Act and 
Concern of Woman; changing Wives at pleasure,
 Sometimes, as oft as Menial Servants▪ how would
 The Wary Spaniard, the more Jealous Italian

 Glory, had they like priviledge?






Methinks, this custom of our Nation
 In so absolute a dominion over
 That weaker sex, is not a little rigid.



Prethee marry then, and if thou dost not
 Find it necessary; thou'lt be more easie
 Yok'd then most in Scythia.




But our Queens marriage
 Is my wonder, with this Persian Prince
Tysamnes.



She is wise in all her Actions.



Yet not by any priviledge exempted
 From this our Nations Law, though a Queen;
 'Twere well, she had made it first, some Act of State.



At least to exempt her self: Princes are
 But men, sometimes most various.




 Confidence in her new made Husband.



Or rather the strength of her own vertue,
 That dares trust her merit to embarque
 In any storm, should it arise from what
 ('Twere sin to think) Ingratitude.



May they live great and prosp'rous.




Tysamnes is a Prince endu'd with many Graces,
 Fam'd equal with the best Captains of our Times,
 In noble deeds of War; and though but younger
 Brother of the Persian Crown, against
 Natures act, deserves the first place in that Throne.
Enter Foscaris.




Here comes Foscaris, a Gentleman, that has
 Newly parted with his Wife, a fair one too.



But that's a change in this part of Scythia,

 Few repent, where Women like to flowers,
 Are often plac'd in bosoms, but till Love
 Fades their sweetness what Foscaris! 



The merry'st man 'twixt this and Babylon, Gentlemen.



You have parted with your Wife.



And a fair riddance too; though as Women
 Go now, I think she was vertuous.



Dost thou not therefore feel some regret
 For rejecting from thy embrace, so deserving a
 Lady?



No more then a child for throwing away
 A toy, when weary of the pastime.
 Alas, I have lain by her a whole Moon,
 Enjoy'd all her nights, and days varieties:
 Pass'd the beginning, the middle, and even
 The bottom of all can be call'd fruition;
 Which I confess was most delicious;
 But the heavy thought that this must prove
 In the end, but dull repetition,
 Did so cloy my appetite.



Perhaps before it had taken a just fill.



I confess, had I espous'd such a Lady
 I should have been content to have serv'd Love
 Two Apprentiships at least But oh the wonders
 Of Matrimony! how soon has mankind 
Enough of the honey of Wedlock.



Nay, I dare commend her Graces, besides
 I think she lov'd me; and for her person

Pigmalions Image might have been copy'd
 From her lineaments. A Face in ev'ry feature
 Pleasing: such an Eye! such a Lip! with a Cheek

Jove ne're was fam'd a smoother to impress;
 With something yet, then all, more taking.



And hadst thou not better have kept this delicate
 Food of Love, though thou hadst chang'd sometimes
 A meal; rather then thus utterly to forsake her?



Alas! I had my Surfeit, Gentlemen, and was
 So Wife-sick; she seem'd to me Loves potion.



For my part, were I in thy case, and had
 A Face of Brass, I should go near to blush through't.
 Here comes the Lady 
  4Enter Clarina.




To be thus thrown from him without a cause,
 Or act of ill laid to my charge: on priviledge
 Of this our Countries Ignominious usage;
 And by a man I lov'd so well?
 Vile, and inhumane custom!



I hope her vertues, and thy crime will move thee
 To repentance: thou art else such a
 Tyrant-husband, as has no like, even
 In this hard-hearted Clime of ours.



Rather indulgent, that gave her means of
 Freedom: I open'd but the Cage, and
 Now Love may flye, as it lists.



By my example 
Let none be henceforth made a Bride in Scythia;

 Where sacred Tyes, and chastest Love
 Is no security.



Though I am a true Scythian and partly
 Of thy humour, I could wish thee, (for this act,)
 Some fatal penitence.



Ha, ha, ha, Is that
 Possible in a man of my complexion?



He scarce vouchsafes a look on me; when but
 So late, each beam of mine was more
 Considerable then warmth of Sun-shine.



We must now leave you to your better thoughts:
 The General Bassanes is arriv'd the Court.
 Our attendance is expected pity

Clarina has no kinder Husband.




I'le wait on you Gentlemen: I serv'd
 But lately under his command 



You have no pity left for me? 






A little somewhat; but thou seest I am now
 In haste.



I'le be as brief; take me to thy embrace,
 My dear Foscaris: thou know'st I lov'd thee


Vertuously and truly well: if I have done
 Amiss in any act unknown; I'le bend
 My knees for pardon.



Alas! I charge thee
 With no crime; but Marriage is such a mischief,
 It makes Friends sometimes differ, they know not why;
 For which I thank my Countries dispensation:
 Otherwise as a Mistress, I think no Lady
 In our Court deserves before thee.



When e're you wed (as soon perhaps you may)
 May you espouse one far more beautiful
 And equal to my affection so farewel 



Adieu adieu: I'le not kiss her at parting,
 Lest I lick my self into Love again;
 And yet methinks I could almost be content:
 'Tis a pretty black-ey'd rogue, and was so
 Amorous and Airy. Heaven forbid
 I be not once more smitten, and so proceed
 To a second Wooing; but I hope I am arm'd 






This unkindness grieves me.








I had ne're more cause, Madam my Husband. 



What of him? I dream't that he courted thee
 With more firé then ever; and my dreams I
 Can tell thee, hit unhappily sometimes.



He is most unkind; a Husband of our cruel mode
 Perfectly, who having gather'd but so late
 My Virgin flower, has thrown me from his breast,
 As if already faded and yet I needs must say,
 I love him still.



Thence came thy mischief;
 The very spring of all thy Tears: we Wives
 Must use more dexterity in managing
 Of Husbands here; and that way, if possible,
 Get some hand on their Affections: nor should
  6
They bed with us; but when we please,
 Or when our healths require it: the soft and gentle
 Not seldom most slighted: The truth is, Marriage
 Amongst us is a most dang'rous food of Love:
 And therefore we must use more wit for sawce,
 Our men will be else so cloy'd, and cast us off
 With no more concern, then we give a dish
 Of meat after having well fed on't, to our Waiters.



But I was so tender,
 In giving cause of separation 



'Thad fixt him surer to thee; nor is it hopeless,
 But the sense of thy Vertues and Beauty
 May work in him some thoughts of reconcilement:
 There have been (though rarely) such examples.



Might I but live to be so happy! 



Besides I have a means, if all fail
 To do thee service thou dar'st confide in me? 







You must be secret.



As a thought within your breast.



And mark me; if thou find'st this work him up
 To love again 



I doubt the end will prove impossible.



That's as the means are order'd: Love will find out
 Ways sometimes as extraordinary; which made
 A famous Poet write a Book of Lovers Arts,
 Not much inferiour to Medea's Charms: 
And be sure when you see him next, let it
 Seem against thy will, as if thoud'st stand
 If possible, at like distance from him; 
As the sphere of fixed Stars: adding convenient
 Pride and scorn, no small artifice in our sex.



Your Copies somewhat hard
 To be practis'd by a Lover.



'Tis but a just revenge in thy Case.



I shall observe your fair instructions.
  7Enter Andrages.




See, here's my man of Venus; an example
 Of my skill and conduct observe him well,
 And thou shalt see, I have an humble servant
 Instead of Lord and Master is't not so, Andrages?




Your will's a Law, Madam.



In spight of our Nations custom, is it not?







This is a language, I have
 Not heard before from a Scythian Husband.



And yet, I'le say thus much, for this thing
 Of my embrace: he dares vye with the best
 Of our Gallants; and cope with Mars himself
 If met in field; nor less would be concern'd
 For every frown of mine, with any he
 That durst despise e'm: Am I not right, Andrages?




My life's at your command.



You have a power I see indeed, and doubt not but you'l use it nobly.



We must rule thus, or we are lost here:
 What's a Venus that cannot lead her Mars

 In triumph? Andrages, perhaps I'le sleep
 With thee to night for this 



You'l be most welcom Madam.



This day some considerable of our Sex 
Join in a Petition to our Queen and
 New made King.



'Tis to abrogate their abuse,
 In the arbitrary rule of men.



I hope 'twill prove a seasonable request,
 Since now the Queen has made her self a party;
 In taking of a Princely Husband.



Thou hast eloquence, and shalt be one of
 Our fair Speakers in this Cause.



You complement me Madam,
 Though I am oblig'd to serve the interest.



We must appear with the fair number 
Who expect us to confer Andrages 
Wait my coming home about the hour of nine.




With all observance, Madam 
Was ever Gentleman and Souldier thus hen-peck'd
 As I am? nay, against the priviledge of mankind
 Here, endure it? that can discharge a Wife
 With a breath: sure there's some extraordinary
 Magick in't; and I find by my inclinations,
 I am so unfortunate to love her at that rate,
 As I cannot rid my self of her, though I 
Suffer to death, or what's worse, the miseries
 Of a vexatious wedlock.
Enter Foscaris.




What Andrages? heavy and drooping!



Somewhat out of Tune.



Nay, then 'tis odds, but thou
 Art smitten, or at least ruminating
 On some new beauty.



Would that were the worst.



The very best of our Banes, that have prov'd
 Wedlock Come I'le sing thee a catch I have
 Made on this subject.
He Sings.

What though her Eyes are black,
And kisses with a knack,
Natures best skill e're created?
In time she may prove
A surfeit to Love;
And so deserve to be hated.

2.Love freed from this diet
Is best kept at quiet,


The wanton still longs for to range;
Let's thank then our Laws
In Wedlocks frail cause,
Gave Husbands a License to change.




This is all discord to my malady.



I took thee to have been longing after
 New flesh and blood, or rather sick of thy wife,
 Is not that it?



Thou dost not mock me?



No, o' my life!



Why then I'le tell thee,
 I love her a thousand times better, then
 When I long'd for her first enjoyment.



Is that possible in a man of thy Genius?



Let me be punished else.



Alas! poor Souldier of Cupid:

 I have parted with a Wise fair enough
 To have figur'd Venus by, and for that only cause,
 Because a Wife: I'd fain see the power of Man,
 Or Angel, bring me again to the like dotage.



Nay more, should she scratch me once a day,
 Or use me with that Amazonian confidence
 Practis'd in our neighbouring Scythia, where
 Her Sex has the supremacy, and are
 So many she Tyrants: I think I should
 Endure it, and love her: If this be not Magick,
 There's none betwixt us and the North Pole.



Visit her bed often; and if that does not do it,
 There's no surfeit in Wedlock.



Alas! I have not leave to come there, but rarely,
 And on such terms of good behaviour,
 That I am almost in an Ague the while.



The very name of Humourist, methinks
 Should bid thee quit her, there's scarce a worse evil.
 Or if she be modish, and a wit, 'tis odds,
 But she makes it her luxury to abuse thee,
 And bite thee at every turn of thy tongue.
  10
If not, make any thing thy quarrel, to bid
 Adieu to her, thou'lt else shame thy Countries priviledge.



But I am such a Dotard 



And yet i'th' Camp
 And Court, well knowing, as most of our
 Time; I pity thee 
Enter Bassanes, Alvanes, Toxaris, Eumenes, and Draxanes.




See the General Bassanes.




A Prince of high renown and vertue;
 Now return'd from ending our Tartarian War:
 We'll pay him our respects at time of fitter
 Opportunity 






The Queen by us, my Lord,
 That have the honour to fore-speak her joys,
 Congratulates your Excellencies return.



She is a gracious Lady; and though but late
 Made my Intelligence, has taken
 The Persian Prince, Tysamnes, for her Husband.



A Prince that Court does loudly fame, surpassing
 All the race of the Arsacides, whence he derives
 His blood.



Her vertue is a mate for his;
 Let it be great as e're did live upon the name
 Of mortal; but I that have a Souldiers plainness
 A little wonder, although her King I hold
 Of highest merit: since there is no act precedes
 To exempt her Royal Person, from that fate 
Of Marriage, the force of custom here
 May even inflict upon the greatest.



It seem'd below her Soul and Love, to make
 That caution, some wise amongst us wish.




Tysamnes! marry'd to the Queen! if I

Forget not I had Advertisement upon his first
 Arrival at her Court, and from a Persian hand
 Of trust, that he there lov'd a Lady; nay more,
 Was thought to have assur'd himself to her.



The General's a little discompos'd.



Perhaps some discontent relating to the
  11
Queens marriage.



If this prove true, Heaven too soon may frown
 On all these joys what are these Ladies?
Enter Melvissa, Clarina, and four other Ladies, each with a Paper in her hands.




They are come to wait upon the King and Queen.
 This day of State, on some concern of their Sex.









The King and Queen are ready to come forth.



We must attend your Lordships pardon.



I have some orders to dispatch unto
 The Camp, and then I'le wait their Majesties 





It behoves us now Ladies, to weigh the force,
 And effect of those Arguments we have prepar'd
 To assail so formidable an enemy, as Men and Husbands, fortify'd
 With that so invincible Champion, Custom;
 I hope you are all well provided?




Doubt it not Madam, women seldom want wit
 To serve their desires and occasions.



Well said pretty one, young and forward,
 And for Illustrations and Metaphors, of
 This hainous usage and tyranny of our Matrimonial
 Lords and Masters, such were to be wish'd,
 Are most pathetical and perswasive. 




I have taken mine, Madam, from
 The example of Socrates, that most grave
 Philosopher, who not only endur'd the ill 
Humour, but the supremacy of his Wife,
 As worthy of imitation.








And I mine, Ladies, from that most dreadful
 Story of Andromeda, chain'd to a Rock;


Is it not so, my dear Tysamnes?




Thou art above my wishes excellent.



The Queen exprest her self most nobly.



If not too confiding in her choice.








Since there's no remedy.



I'le serve thee yet Clarina! it shall go hard else.
Enter Bassanes, Eumenes, and Draxanes.




Welcom, as I can express Bassanes 
Thy Victories were early here on Rumors wing,
 Which made the grim-look'd Tartars beg a peace
 From us: and next my joys of love, completed here,

I must rejoyce thy safe return, thou pillar
 Of thy Country, and glory of my Crown, 
To call thee both my Subject, and Alliance.



My duty is best paid in the performance
 Of your services, which I shall ever study.



Let me embrace thee worthy man; 
The title which I have to thy brave merit,
 In my enjoyment of this beauteous Queen,
 Obliges me to hold thy vertues dear
 That bring'st me Triumph home, before I scarce
 Have warm'd this Throne.



Our new King does caress him highly.



His interest is great.




 You saw Mandana's Court, our neighbour
 Queen, on your return?







There Women govern all.



To wonder, Madam 
Make War, lead Armies, with all transactions
 Of the highest Magnitude in State, 
To whom the men are held subordinate.



Their Queen's a Lady, Fame reports Wise,
 Magnanimous, and no less Beautiful.



I think all these may well be said to meet
 In her.



But the manner of her rule seems strange
 To me.



If compar'd with ours here; but they
 Lay claim to that prerogative, from the
 Antient Amazons whence they derive descent.



'Twas said Mandana did intend an Embassy
 Unto our Court in some short time.



She gave me so to understand.



A beauteous one no doubt.



They are Women, Sir.



We'll treat'm then as fairly.



But credit me, I should not like my reign
 So well, were my Sex here alike in power;
 Since nature and the worlds best Laws
 Have dignify'd the man superiour.



Spoke like my Parisatis methinks we
 Are not chearful; I have joys enough to raise
 A man above the world, had he made forfeit
 Of his bliss You told me of a masque,
 My Soul does want a little clearing up 




I did appoint one.



By any means we'll have it.
 Musick plays a while, after which the Masque begins; the Scene a Grove, in which Diana is beheld sleeping, having at one of the sides next the Stage a Rock, from which 








Eccho! if thou dost visit this fair Grove,
 Where thou hast often mourn'd Narcissus love;
 At Arethusa's call appear.







Once more 'tis Arethusa calls thee here. 







That's but thy voice, thy person I would see,
 Once known a Nymph of highest dignity.
  16
Enter Eccho as out of t'other side of the Grove.




Behold bright Arethusa I resume
 My long lost Figure, since Heavens fatal doom
 Depriv'd me of my dear Narcissus flames.



I bear as great a grief confin'd to streams,
 Could never yet with lov'd Alpheus join;
 Think if thy loss can greater be then mine?



Fair Nymph, with yours I'le not compare my woe,
 Since with thy tears thy chrystal fountains flow;
 And by a wondrous constancy do glide
 Through veins of earth unmixt with other tide, 
Which Thetis for thy glory did decree, 
And great Diana Honours Constancy.



I wait to see her bathe in my cool floods,
 Having a long chase follow'd in these Woods.



She in this Grove with her fair Nymphs does sleep,
 While with my wakeful voice her watch I keep;
 Lest Mortals here (Actaeon like) should pry,
 And ravish blushes from her Deity. 
Behold she wakes.


The Song in the Masque.
1 Nym.
See, see, our Goddess wakes,
Whilst we harmonious notes prepare,

Such as bright Phoebus makes,


When to salute Aurora's car,

The Musick of his sphere he takes.
Diana rises and enters with her Nymphs.


Or as before her Curtains drawn
We welcom in the grey-ey'd dawn,
When for the Chase
Diana bends her matchless bow,

And gives her self the first hollow.


Then through Plains, Lawns, and Woods
Over Mountains and Floods
Nymphs tripit, Nymphs trip it apa•e.



Whilst the Hart, Deer, or Roe
They swiftly pursue,
Their Goddess best pleaseth to chase.




More bright then Hesperus does rise,

Whose beams Stars borrow for their eyes.



Belov'd of Nymphs whose chaste and constant stream,
 Shall give thy Love an everlasting name;
 More dear to me then Zanthus floods so bright,
 Or my own Cynthia's beams that guild the night;
 Art thou to tread a Chorus come with me,
 As once a Nymph of my society?



Bless'd Goddess know from Thetis I am sent
 To wait thee first with her great Complement;
 Who, if not too much Neptunes Billows rave,
 Will soon pass hither in a Chrystal wave.



She shall be welcom. But first Nymph on thee

Diana, (to renown thy constancy)
 Does from her hand this pretious gift bestow,
 Sprung from the tree, whence grew her sacred bow;
 On which with finest silk my Nymphs have wove,
 The wondrous story of thy streams and love.




This grace lov'd Goddess, I must ever own,
 While Arethusa by that name is known;
 But if I may thy Deity intreat,
 I'd gladly yet with my Alpheus meet.



Thrice beauteous Nymph, thou su'st I fear in vain,
 But for thy merit if I can obtain,
 Or Cynthia's aid can help, she shall convey
 His gentle current where thy stream has way.





For which let's all Diana's praises sing.



Stay Nymphs, here comes the Queen to Seas great King.



Chast Goddess, I am come to let thee know, 
What to thy Graces, Neptunes Queen does owe
; And for this Nymph the honour of all floods,
 As these with thee make sacred groves and woods.
 For which to speak my thanks I'd gladly tread 
The stately Chorus, thy bright self does lead.



Great Thetis know, no footsteps ever joyn'd
 With me a Chorus, but bear souls refin'd;
 For which I have deny'd some gods of late,
 Said to have fell from their celestial state.



I once gave ear unto such tales like thee,
 But prov'd it soon my vain credulity;
 Nor on my waves did then rough Boreas blow,
 But I my Nymphs hid in deep Cells below.
 Since fame had told his strong arms did embrace 
The fair Orithia snatch't o're Seas to Thrace.




Nor was it Thetis truth, Achilles came
 From great Peleus, and thy own soft flame.



Such stories may relate as much of thee, 
Which tell the Moons sublime Divinity;
 Though thy chast brows her Heavenly figure wear,
 Did for Endymions love forsake her sphear: 
While such like Tales the guilty Poets sing, 
To feign their Hero's from the Gods did spring.



Queen of the Seas my censure was too free,
 'Twere sin to doubt truth in a Deity:
 Nor will I think that Goddess e're did burn,
 In such frail humane flames my chast thoughts mourn:
 But now behold with me this mortal Throne,
 Merits from our immortal powers renown.



I do embrace the motion, since here's seen
 A Throne as bright as each of us sate Queen;
 May Love there find, serenest calms their days,
 Such as my Halcyons chuse that breed on Seas.



Or as my streams no mingl'd currents own,
 So let their Loves be undivided known.



May Cupid else for ever loose his Bow.



And for Loves Goddess none his Mother know.



To honour whom, thy best known Chorus lead,
 And with the Oceans race like steps I'le tread.



Then Nymphs express with mine your measures powers,
 As when we dance on tender grass and flowers:
 Leaving no signs our nimble footsteps show,
 Or as on Mountains tops, we tread on snow.







Cupid, art thou come hither? 



I flew this way
 To meet my Mother, is she amongst ye pray?



Away, thou amorous toy, dar'st thou be here,
 Where I to honour constant Love appear?



I have a shaft here left within a Heart
 I'd fain withdraw. 



 No more vile Boy, depart,
 Thy Mothers Arts and thine, I too well know.



Then see I flye with an unbended Bow. 





Thetis farewel! I'le to my Woods resort.



But e're I hence return to Neptunes Court, 
Let's yet more honour Arethusa's name.



This night I bathe my self in her clear stream.



Where I'le attend thee with my watry race,
 And Nymphs, whose Songs shall there thy Chorus grace.



For which my fountains clearest springs shall flow.



And my best Eccho's voice pay duty too.



Till when farewel Seas Queen. 








It seems a Moral.



And meant of constancy, I gave the Argument my self.



Most fit To entertain thy Vertue. What sight is that?
Enter. Statyra.




The King seems troubl'd.



My heart misgives me this is she.



How does my Love?



Your leave a while Can'st thou forgive me fair Statyra? 




And wish you happy in your royal choice,
 She is a Princess far above my merit:
 Enough that I have seen your face and dye.



Thou had'st my promise first, Heaven is my witness,
 And give me but thy leave to expiate
 My crime, in due expression of my penitence,
 By some act unthought of; if possible,
 To win thy Loves forgiveness.




Your leave that I return, I'le not ask
 So much as a farewel kiss 



I must oblige a while thy stay: Bassanes,

 Wait this Lady to my Garden lodgings
 With all observance 



I shall Sir 




The ambition to possess a Crown has had too much
 The better of my Conscience 
Come Parisatis.





Your looks seem troubl'd.



A trivial thought I'm moving from my heart.



From mine, I'm sure, your love shall never part.







IT seems the Ladies had but small success
 In their Petition.



And yet they urg'd things
 Home and unhappily.



Women ne're want zeal, feldom wit
 To perfect their desires; but men have here
 So long had the Lee-ward point of love, as
 They must be content with the Weather Gage;
 Which casts not a few on the rocks of Wedlock.



For my part I could wish, that Nature had
 Taken some other way for the procreation 
Of mankind; since both Sexes have so much ado
 To agree of the means But we are Souldiers.



And therefore have the less reason to blame
 Our Countries freedom, since 'tis odds, but we
 Take as much, if we make a true Muster
 Of our Mistresses.



But the Queens opposing
 This desire seem'd to many unexpected.



'Twas to oblige the King no doubt; and by
 The prerogative of her vertues, live 
Above the Law, or whatsoe're could give a fate
 To her enjoyment.



He's now more absolute
 Then e're was Soveraign that reign'd
 But in the right of Queen. His Creatures
 Dignify'd in Court and Camp; that almost
 'Tis within his Will to rule alone, should
 He be guilty of that vile ambition.



She has exprest in every act a kindness






I wish their Loves a peaceful happiness.



'T was hop'd she might have respected our
 General Bassanes in her choice, a Prince
 Of Scythia's Royal blood, and favour'd
 In this Nation with an interest equal
 To his birth.



But he it seems, as much in love
 With Mars, or paying duties to her service
 In the field, ne're rais'd his thoughts and merit
 To that fair ambition.



We are his Creatures,
 And have serv'd his dangers.
Enter Toxaris, Alvanes, and Araxis.





 Your general thanks to his vertues, has given
 Our Crown at once both peace, and victory.



His conduct did deserve no less.



Had his return been sooner, perhaps 'thad
 Given some stay to the Queens Marriage 
But that's between our selves.



The news surpriz'd him, 
We must witness; as one was scarce consulted
 In that action.



She was a little hasty in her choice.



Though in her King, she seems to summe such joys
 As if she'd vye with Angels, as she shines,
 Espous'd on earth to his affection.



Nor does the face o'th Court, sometimes the glass
 Of Princes, discover ought save joys, and smiles,
 A sign to us Courtiers, the Throne's no less serene.



But in the midst of these methought the King 
Appear'd disturb'd at the presence of a
 Stranger Lady.



But that soon vanish'd.



Time will discover more.




 Embassy is expected; 'tis said, they are Women.



Perhaps to complement our Queens Marriage;
 Or make some league betwixt their Amazonian

 State and us.



But say they should provoke us
 To a War; we must bring strange arms into
 The Field to have the better of this Generation,
 That dare fight with men.



I could methinks ee'n wish a War,
 To see how these she Militants would
 Behave themselves; a home-charge with such Troops,
 Were winning of a field indeed Gentlemen.
Enter Bassanes and Statyra.




Here comes the General and that Lady I spake of.







May her beams give no dazle
 To our Kings affection; methought she mov'd
 Him strangely.



Our way lies this way to the Court 




And our's here 






Madam, you highly honour me
 In this discovery, from which I find 
Your name and birth illustrious, as Persia knows.



The acquaintance, Sir, I was oblig'd to make you,
 Since here my stay upon the Kings command,
 Might else have stain'd the honour of my blood
 With such a character as curious eyes in Courts
 Are but too apt to give the least of favours
 That a Prince Vouchsafes a Lady.




 And noble: and give me your fair leave
 To ask a question, my intelligence
 Assur'd me most undoubted.



If it be truth
 My Soul dares not deny it.



Then thus most noble Lady;
 Did not the King once love you?



I did not think
 Heaven had reveal'd what I had thought a secret 

To his heart and mine suppose he did, and yet
 I blush to charge him with a guilty truth.



It was my apprehension 



And since 'tis made your knowledge, I must further say
 My wrongs are fit to be convey'd as far
 As the world has bounds, or fame can stretch
 Her wings to bear e'm.



I fear too sadly 

But should you own this claim to his affection now.



My love's a truth too dear to smother, nor
 Did I come, but arm'd with resolutions
 Worthy of my Soul. And 'tis my highest service
 To his Queen (whose vertues I much honour)
 If I reveal to her my claim, and thence
 Mark out her dangers in this man of falshood
 She enjoys.



I know you would not charge
 Him with this crime, on purpose to create
 Repentance; or if you did, who knows
 What were your dangers (I speak it not to
 Fright you Madam) that here must look like some
 Prodigious Star on a great King, made now
 So fully happy in the bed and glories of a Queen 
Which how he will resent 



Let it be death, 'tis welcom from him.



Heaven avert it, Madam; yet 'tis not safe
 To tempt a passion past recall, though I
 Want not a pity to your vertue.



I thank your goodness.



Or say you could attract his past affection
; And in each beam of yours, more deeply wound
 His heart then ever (as you have all things
 Summ'd at Natures dearest cost, that can 
Inrich a Beauty) were it not glory


To recede from such a Conquest.



Your Counsel's noble I confess.



Besides we have a custom here that does
 Impower each common man to loose the very
 Gordian knot of love in marriage, 
That other Countries hold inviolate:
 What may then a King do to enjoy 
So bright a Mistress as your self?



I find the World in this degenerate
 Faithless age of man has yet one
 Worthy left:

Know then, most noble Prince, your Counsel does
 Conspire with the honour of Statyra's heart;
 And though I had a more superiour title
 To the Kings affection then the Queen can claim
 Though made his Consort; yet I for her sake now
 Forgive his breach of Faith; nay more, if 'twere
 Requir'd, would freely give my life, to see
 Their Loves most happy.



Give me the honour
 Of your hand, to pay my humble adoration
 Of this vertue.



My stay shall not be longer here
 Then taking leave, becomes me of the King.



'Twill speak your worth.
Enter Tysamnes.

The King your pardon Madam 





Statyra! how dost thou like thy welcom
 In our Court?



As more then I intended to receive.



Thou can'st not soon be weary
 Of these shades, and pleasant walks, where
 Nightingales will meet, and sing
 New ravishments to entertain thy beauties:
 More glad to welcom thy appearance, then
 The morning joys, or evenings splendor that
 Invites their rest. I think thou might'st be well


Content to live here still.



My honour is no child
 To be deluded with such toys, though gay
 As Paradise when first it's sweetness bloom'd,
 While but a thought of crime does ripen near me.



Thou shal't be here as innocent as flowers
 That yield their smiles unto the distant Sun.
 You'l grant me sure, so much, Statyra?




I'le rather welcom death then yield to stay
 A minute longer near your person.



I know thou art not so unkind.



Alas I came without design of love,
 Though once your lover.




Statyra! hold, go not
 Too far in goodness, lest Heaven (to surprise
 My wonder) take thee hence, and place thee there
 A Star, or make me fall I know not whither.



I have done Sir nor shall my presence give you
 More concern; or further accent repetition
 Of your sin to Heaven and me; that in despight
 Of all the darts of Love (so late my wound)
 Can with this smiling ease and calm of soul
 Bid you farewel for ever. 





 Shall not leave me thus 



You will not, Sir, detain me
 Here by force? what will your Court then whisper,
 Or the bolder world convey to both our infamies?
Enter Parisatis.

I hope I have made enough expression
 Of my affection 



What do I hear?



'Tis but to give thee more assurance 
Of my love, for which I dare adventure 
Life and Crown.



That word! oh my heart! 




Then know who 'tis you stay 
And thus dare frown upon your will.







And what I thought this breast should have conceal'd,
 I'le utter with a boldness does become my honour 
And when you know it, you'l perhaps, as soon
 Cherish a Tygress near your bosom 
Know Sir I came with full intent to kill you 
Mark me well: to kill you for your faithless promise;
 But that the vertues of your Queen with-held me,
 In whom I wish you ever bless'd: the whiteness
 Of whose Soul, I thought it sin to cloud
 (From act of mine) with sorrow.



Forgive me Heaven; 
This Woman is some Angel sure; I can
 No longer hold but pay my reverence.




We are interrupted my Guard there! 
Enter Captain of the Guard.
Convey that Lady from my sight, and see
 Her safe consin'd within her lodgings.



Let me beg for her freedom, though I do it
 On my knees 



I must not grant it; she came
 To ruine my content, perhaps in thee;
 A Treason too she has confest against my life.



Let me deserve your fair opinion, Madam,
 Though I dye.



Away with her how does my Parisatis? 






Never better this dissipates my fear.







 The Queen Mandana are arriv'd.



See their reception want no state our Court
  28〈1 page duplicate〉  29〈1 page duplicate〉  26〈1 page duplicate〉  27〈1 page duplicate〉
  28
Can give; they shall have Audience speedily.
 Some thoughts require me to my Closet first.





Bassanes, never so happy, as this minute
 In which I prov'd the fix'd assurance of
 My Kings affection. The Persian beauty
 Who but so late gave apprehensions to
 My love, is now no more my fear.



She is a noble Lady,
 And gave me confirmation of her honour.







She does intend suddenly
 To return back to Persia.





 (To my great grief) in much displeasure
 Has restrain'd her.



I hope she'l soon have liberty.



It shall not want my intercession.



Pray Heav'n this be no Artifice.



True love is soon confirm'd; but in that Brest

Suspicion storms, it ne're can anchor'd rest.






Our Petition had but small success.



No matter, as to thy case; did not I
 Promise to serve thee?



But where's the faith
 Believes it possible?



If it be next a Miracle,
 And do the feat, thou'lt welcom the effect?



However, my obligement's great to your endeavours.



What if a smile or look of thine, or a toy
 As inconsiderate as the least lock of thy hair,
 Produce his Loves return, as I apply it;
 Hast thou not reason to thank the means?







Therefore believe well; rememb'ring that
 We are told, a dram of faith can do






You shall confirm me,
 But I hope it is no Charm or Magick?
 I am strangely fearful of the Devil.



Rather a means from Heaven! my Mother
 Left it as a Legacy to me.



A Recipe most Wives may wish for here.



I thought to have given it to the Queen, 
But that perhaps 'twere death to own,
 And this our custom unrevok'd.



I hope her vertues ne're will want affection.



As it effects, I'le tell thee more.


Here comes thy Husband, and I am prepar'd
 For him to purpose thou must withdraw
 Till I give thee notice to appear.




Madam! your most humble servant.



And I perhaps ten times more yours.







Not that I intend to instance,
 You have parted with a deserving Lady,
 And so press a reconciliation from
 The doctrine and uses of Love, as some Matrons
 Amongst us might perhaps ring in your ears
 In the like case.



Far be it from me to
 Think it, Madam; I know you are well bred,
 And must therefore understand what better
 Belongs to our Mode, and a Gentleman, then so.



Well said Gallant but I hope you'l not teach
 My Husband to follow your example;
 And like such a Buck as your self, break
 Through the toyl and bonds of Marriage;
 Though some of you allow it no more, then
 A State device to catch fools.



This is a Witty Rogue; a Wife that understand;


The intrigues of a Mistress.



Then say, my husbands wife
 Should think you a fine Gentleman 



I understand you Madam.



And were willing to bestow some affection
 On your worth. 



Go on Lady, go on; you are
 Coming to a point indeed.



There it is, you have it to a hair 

I hope you will keep Counsel 



O Madam! 'twere sin to doubt it.



And wear it carefully, for the owners sake
 I mean, and so farewel kind Foscaris;

 If this fail, thou'rt proof above Mortal.

Now to be near and act further as occasion serves.




What have I here? I'le open it carefully, 
And first taste it by the smell; it scents
 Most Lady-like, and amorous; methinks
 It moves too, I know not how: Oh these Women
 Are rare contrivers in these Scenes of Love 
Now for the enclos'd 

Ha, ha, ha, a Bracelet of a lock of Hair,
 In colour much resembling my Wives: but
 Such a trick on me, were to little purpose,
 I'le tangle no more there but now I think on't,
 I have found the knack; as sure as I am made
 Of flesh and blood, 'tis Melvissa courts me
 For her self, for which purpose she handles

Andrages, her husband, at that rate.
 'Tis a witty-gay female, as most within
 Our Kingdom; and it seems the Rascal's
 Willing to graft his fore-head, and be beholding
 To his Friend for the Horn. In the mean time
 I'le pleasure her desire, and wear her favour.

The Devil on't, it warms the vein that leads
 To the Heart strangely; and 'tis love I feel
 In abundance I must vent it somewhere,


Or I shall burn to ashes; 'tis most certain I am
 Charm'd to purpose, and 'tis odds but some evil spirit
 Waits at my elbow.




 None but thy better Genius 




Ha! a voice too, then there is a Devil in the
 Case 'tis manifest what art thou, and from whence?



I am a Spirit belonging to the element of fire.



Thou hast some possession of me already then,
 Who am flame all over what is thy business?







The same is mine, and
 Since thou art a kind Familiar, I dare ask 
Thee a question Art thou a Genius of Love at large
 According to our Gallantizing Mode? or art thou for
 A more peculiar Courtship?



I incite Honourable, and Matrimonial Love.



A most Heroick Devil indeed;
 But take a care how thou dost otherwise appear to me,
 Lest my sword make bold with one of thy limbs,
 And it prove afterwards to belong to some
 Sorcerer, or Witch.



You need not fear that.



Prethee avoid me then, I would not willingly be haunted
 By a Matrimonial Genius of all other.



Your desire is granted 
While only I'le thy heart incite 
To love thy fair deserted Wife,
 For whose sake, I am oblig'd thy sense to ply,
 Since on thy wrist thou didst a philter tye.
 And so farewel.




Adieu, adieu! had ever man such a Dialogue
 As this?






Be confident I have perform'd to purpose.







Nay more to his greater


Terror, I withdrew here, and counterfeited my self
 A Spirit.








 Such pleasant discourse with him.



You have done above my expectation.



He comes on fiercely I warrant thee.



And yet I do not find my hair stares, or
 A cold sweat on me, enough to dissolve me to a gelly,
 Like some stories I have heard of this kind.



See, he's here, observe a little in the mean time
 I'le withdraw.




Whilst I feel such a heat dispers'd through every vein 
Of my body, no man, or longing virgin ever felt
 The like in any burning wish, or actual enjoyment 
Well Foscaris, thou hast got a tickling spirit in thee.



I perceive it takes.




 It should not be in the power of Magick to make
 Me affect my cast-off Wife; if it prove otherwise,
 What a confounded Lover am I then she's here.




Now I'le approach him.




As I am a man, 'tis she I long for,
 The very element of fire is met
 Within me, and my heart rises to my very lips
 At her appearance.




The Physick works; now to handle this patient.




Oh thou art bright indeed Clarina;


 Ariadnes Crown of Stars is Copper
 To thy Eyes, and in each look methinks thou
 Stain'st the evenings glory.



Good kind Sir, keep off, 'tis towards bed-time.



'Tis thither I would go with thee Love, and twine
 More happily then ever! Alas, I did but this
 To love thee ten times better then before;
 As men restrain themselves from food they like
 To make the next meal better.



Keep your ground good Sir Amorous;


You and I must not come to the close embrace
 So easily; and lest you should be boyst'rous,
 I'le be gone.



Stay but a twilights time longer 



'Tis more then I can well afford you.
Enter Andrages.




Nay prethee let me beg it though I kneel.



You deserve some penance; I'le not intreat you
 To be sparing.





Foscaris kneeling! and to his own Wife?
 The world sure turns round, or Plato's year
 Is come about; if this Diamond he late
 Discarded should again be Trump? 
What Foscaris! pensive?



Oh I am undone!







Nay, thou'lt laugh me into shame enough
 When thou know'st it.







Why, I am wounded by Cupid the wrong way?







I scarce know how to tell thee.



Nay prethee let me know.



Understand then I am in love
 With my own cast petticoat; if that be not
 A curse to a Scythian Husband, I'le
 Challenge fate to do worse if possible.



Though I found thee on thy knees, I hope
 Thou dost not pray over love again to thy Wife.



But I do, and at such an intolerable rate, 
That were every sense of mine a several soul,
 She might command 'em all to express it.







And more, look well to thy self,
 I fear thy Wife's an Inchantress.



Ha, ha, ha 



If thou dost not see her flying steeple high,
 And thy self atop on her shortly, I'le hang
 As high for't.



But you thought there was no such thing
 As Charm or Magick in Love, and that our

Scythian Wives would have still continued such
 Tame things, as like bob'd Eyesses, they might
 Have been turn'd off; and took to hand at pleasure.



I have prov'd the Experiment dearly:
 Take care and mock not, lest thou art beheld
 Converted to a Cat, and cry Mew
 To keep her company.



Is this the man
 That could defie Cupid and all his Arts?
 Nay shoot your Darts contrary to his, at
 A minutes warning was it not so?



I thought I could, till more then mortal powers
 Conspir'd against me.



And for a Wife, 'twas
 Such a potion, must have no more to do
 With your palate.



The very name of her
 Inflames me like fire.



A little more to cool you
 And I have done; come I'le put you in mind,
 Of a Julip of your own composition;

What though her Eyes are black, 

And kisses with a knack, &c.



No more, no more, though I deserve to be 
Bitten with a Satyr could sting worse then
 Scorpions.



Well; I have done.



Let's shake hands then,
 And go thus postur'd to the Frantick Society here,
 Amongst which I'le dye,
 If e're there were two such Fanatick presidents
 Of Husbands as our selves: Oh 'twould make such a 
Novelty of distempers!



And there endure a little of the twig,
 Shall we?




 Thou for observing thy Wife with such a 
Fond affection, as I beyond dotage
 Long for mine again.





 Enough of this extravagancy: In the mean time
 I have so far the better of the malady,
 That I have no fear of thy relapse,
 And for a cure, let me advise one more gentle;
 Let's drink some Wine, and give it spirit
 In Clarina's health.



Oh that I could taste her lips once more 
And mark me friend, 'tis odds as I am a Gentleman,
 But in spight of all prevention I shall
 Hang or drown my self for love, e're the next Moon.



Come I'le take care of thee.





We understand Bassanes, that the Embassadresses
 From the Queen Mandana are arriv'd.







Attend them to our presence.

An Embassy few Courts have seen before, 
Where Women bear their Princes Errands,
 And rule supreamly even our Sex. 
What think you Ladies, were your case alike
 With us?



For mine I should not wish it, Sir,
 'Twere too injurious to the right of men.



You are a little of the kindest Lady 
For my part, Sir, were I born under the like
 Favourable Aspect of Venus, 'tis odds but I
 Should wear a Bow and Quiver, to maintain


The priviledge you'l pardon, Sir, my freedom.



A witty sprightly Lady and yet I dare believe
 There's none of all you Gentlemen, that has
 A Wife predominant, who does not own
 Submission to the custom here. 







I am confirm'd, that were the case my consorts here, 
(So dear unto my soul) she would not claim
 Her self exempted.



That parenthesis was odly plac'd.




You know I am all obedience, Sir, 
And hope you'l now receive such offers, from
 This our neighbour-Queen, as will not give your thoughts
 The least disturbance; nor would I have a War
 Wherein my Sex should fight, were I made a party
 In the cause, or injury.



Thou art all Excellence.



Now Ladies, your Queens pleasure.



Who does by us, most Royal Sir, congratulate
 Your great accession to this Throne, and more, your joys
 In this your fair and vertuous Queen, who scarce
 Has equal in her Sex: to which (if possible)
 Her wishes do yet adde more happiness.



This is but usual form of State: proceed.



'Tis what our Queen expects you'l welcom,
 Who waves dispute of Territories,
 The usual great concerns of Thrones;
 And has but one demand instead of all,
 To make your Greatness: whence may spring
 A lasting league betwixt her mighty Crown
 And yours.







I hope 'twill find reception.



Then know, our Mighty Mistress does demand
 By us an Abrogation of that most


Rigid usage here, from which the Husbands will
 Is too much Lord of love.



Sure, you mistake your Embassy?



Nor can she reign without a blush must stain
 Her glories, should she not (if deny'd)
 Compel by arms her Sexes fair relief.







Methinks I could fight in this Cause my self.



The King is mov'd.








Your Queen's too bold with us in this demand; 
But she's a Woman.



And soon you'l find, she'l slight
 All dangers in this Cause: nor is the world
 Unknowing, that her arms (though guided
 By the conduct of our Sex) has oft gave
 Wars rough Laws to men.



Let me then intercede, my Royal Husband,
 I would not have a quarrel in this Cause,
 (Although I doubt not from your love security)
 The world I know would say you but defend
 A most unkind prerogative; and since 'tis thus,
 Bestow it as a bounty on the Sex for my sake.



Can this proceed from Parisatis?




As truly as I wish your peace and love.



Thou dost mistake in both 



Besides, what honour wer't in such a Cause 
To be a Conquerour? or on your Warlike Trophee to
 Inscribe, you did subdue the force of Women,
 Led by a neighbour Queen, whose bravery 
Of soul, deserves esteem and wonder 
I know you'l condescend.



Away, thou dost abuse thy Love and me.







Or else endeavour'st by compliance with
 This Embassy, to betray the honour of
 This Crown, and People; take which you like 
And know thou hast forfeited thy Being










And tell your Queen I'le reign

A King of men in spight of all her power
Of Spinsters: whose honour by this grant would be
The mock of Women. Nor do I doubt their hearts
And swords will join with mine to assert this
Nations right.



The King is much incens'd.




I hope 'twill not reflect upon the Queen.



And by my Act, to assure the world how much
I'le own my Subjects priviledge, behold my Queen.



A Lady full of Grace and Vertue 







Who with no more concern I'le cast away,
Then Indians do a Pearl, that ne're did know
It's value; and from this hour no more my Wife.



Must it be so?



Consider Sir, this Act
May prove a rash one 



My resolution's fixt nor do I fear
What Law can act, though hence I reign not jointly
With this Queen, while by the power I possess,
I can create a right above it.



Nor shall I plead a word
Against your Will, though it severely fall
Upon my Love; or mention what should be
Your gratitude to me, that gave you both
My self and Crown, and yet will give my life,
If your concern require it 
You'l give me time convenient to withdraw.



Thou shalt to any place retire within
My Crowns Dominion, where thou shalt live
In state and greatness of a Queen 
And so farewel.







This action of the King was unexpected.




Such as must breed some strange distemper here.



I wish our Almanacks were all burnt else.



To morrow you shall have our Letters to your Queen.



And as becomes her she'l resent this Act.









Madam, you have our pity.




The Queen deserves a sorrow
From all Hearts.



She has deeply mine.



Though life has many ways to lose it's comforts,
Few hinder the distressed means of death:
And let my sad example teach my Sex,
That when they love embarque with men, 'tis like
A vessel, that with guilded streamers sails
On dangerous Seas, and in each calm must think
This smooth-fac'd Ocean may their Barques soon sink.
Exeunt.






I Want no sense of your afflictions, Madam.



'Tis like your worth.



And dare express it more
Then entertaining of your griefs by naked Accents,
That were too low and common for Bassanes heart;
Each vulgar ear that hears from rumours breath,
Will do as much, and glory in the hope
Of making stubborn Heaven bend to hear
Your sufferings.



You are a Prince ally'd unto my Crown,
Nor can I doubt, but every vein of yours
Ha's many streams of honour 






Since you are pleas'd to call me worthy of
 Your great Alliance; I want no heart to tell
 The King, your Husband (though sitting on the Throne)
 His ingratitude.



I wish I had been truly charg'd with any crime
 That might have given his Act in my desertion, 
Some vizard to out-face the world: I dare believe
 The Law that first here gave this liberty to man, 
Did tacitely imply the Husband should
 Not be a lawless Tyrant to the Wife.



The injustice is too palpable; and
 Fitter 'twere this Law had no more being,
 Or the Sex of women against Natures
 Made supreme, then thus to be imbitter'd 
'Gainst your vertue, 
Though smooth'd and guilded over with pretexts, 
He calls State Policy, and Marriage Interest,
 But simply Artifice to bring another
 To his Throne and Bed.



I fear 'tis too much a truth.




Statyra is no doubt design'd to shine
 In this Meridian, by your fair remove:
 But think not, Madam, that your Eclipse of
 Glory can pass without your Subjects due
 Remorse, and vindication: he is a King here
 But as you made him so, in giving him
 Your self a Queen; and from your love has only
 Title to your Subjects hearts.



And had the world
 Been mine in Kingdoms, with as many Hearts,
 My affection had dispos'd 'em all to him.



You have given proof above parallel.



But this ingratitude does combate with my soul!



Permit, I serve your Royal Vertue.



I know thou dar'st revenge my wrong, and hast
 An interest in thy blood and merits, that
 Can guide this Nations Arms, and raise a stream 
Of vulgar force, enough to sink Tysamnes



Even to the depth of ruine, though fortify'd with
 All the power he now enjoys.



I will imploy my utmost in your service.



I have I see a Subject great, brave, and faithful; 
In spight of all adversity Bassanes

 Thou wilt obey me strictly?



Be danger what it will;
 Nor need you question, but the arm I shall apply
 Is strong enough to right, or else revenge
 Your injuries: nor want I means prepar'd
 Even at this minute, that shall soon perform
 The least breath of your commands.



Then know, I do enjoin you all obedience
 To the King 









 Who has thrown me from his heart, and that far
 More strict, if possible, then had he met
 My Love with equal constancy I would
 Not live and underact the part of virtue.



You oblige me now to be your enemy 
Who knows how soon you may be taken from
 The world by him, that thus has cast you from
 His bosom?



'Tis not inglorious if I die,
 Or split on any rock,
 This storm shall throw me on,
 If Innocence be my harbour.



The Worm that's trod on, bows in some displeasure
 When it's griev'd; what should then do your Greatness?



But vertue's yet more gentle, whose value's
 Most refin'd by suffering I know
 You will obey me.



Since 'tis your pleasure.



And be sure give out 'twas Act of State,
 Or Crime in me, or any thing thou can'st devise
 Most plausible, to assure the people
 To Tysamnes. And more, that 'tis my strict
  44
Enter Eumenes and Draxanes.



The Queen, Sir, is withdrawn.







Remov'd Sir, none knows whither.



I fear she has taken some precipitate resolve.



The joys this news will bring,
 Must soon cause her appearance,
 Where e're she is retir'd.



Make strict and speedy search,
 He wants no wealth brings happy tidings first.



 We'll use all diligence.









I'le wait her to you, Sir.




'Tis fit she know
 How much I have offended for her sake.



Statyra, I must beg a pardon of thy vertue.



Sir, you have prov'd I can forgive.



Thy goodness I have injur'd next my Queens,
 And I am making of my peace with Heaven
 And her.



'Tis worthy of your Soul But you'l consider, Sir 



I do, that 'twas my sin of love to thee
 Which did induce this Act, to whom I first
 Dispos'd my heart: and would to Heaven I had
 Two souls, that I might give one to thy vertue,
 And make thee twin in my affection with my Queen; 
Excepting whom, the world and womankind 
Are but trifles to my heart.



Mine is as truly yours;
 And let this blush excuse my boldness,
 If I claim you now my own.








You are made free by Law,
 (If such a one this Country owns) and can
 That less then plead for my enjoyment now,
 So much your Lover?



I did not look for this.




Tempt me not fair Statyra, lest I fall
 Below the sin of the Apostate Angels;
 And call thy love my second crime.



I did but mention mine to prove your constancy.
 May you for ever live most happy in 
Your Queen; and for your sake I'le beg of Heaven
 That she may late be taken thither.



Thou art a pattern of perfection 



And since you now have made me free, I'le crave
 Your leave to respite my return, till I 
Congratulate your happy meeting with
 Your Queen, and so to Persia, where I'le
 Spread your joys.



This centers with my wish.




Each syllable of thine does give my soul new wonder. 
Since not alone, thou can'st my Crime forgive, 
But yield I may anothers Lover live.
Ex. Tysamnes leading Statyra, Bassanes.






You are pleas'd to like my entertainment
 Gentlemen; and I am apt enough to be
 Proud of your good opinion.




You are all diversion, Madam, our Court
 Has not such another Lady.





 Give me leave to spend some hours with your converse.



You may be welcom as I please
 Jointly, and severally.



We understand you, Madam.



But methinks you are a little dull (though
 Courtly bred) since you speak praises of my Wit,


But have little to say for my Beauty.




Oh Madam! that's granted, the Court has no such
 Star, bating the Queen.





 Cannot so far mistake our inclinations,
 As to suppose we pay adorations
 To the ugly, though ne're so witty;
 They are only fit to eat with, provided
 They keep good Tables.



Now I perceive you.




But for you, Madam, (so perfectly taking)
 The day is too short to admire you, and
 The night to enjoy you.



You aim well, and 'tis odds 
But I guess the mark you'd hit pray sit a while;
 I can afford you some minutes 






 Long enough, we are not in haste. 




'Tis fit we wait your leisure.
Enter Andrages.




I keep my lodgings free enough for entertainment,
 And live without the fear of Prying Watchers, or the
 Jealous Husbands eye.



Oh my torment! she dares me to be jealous too.





I suppose, Madam, you allow the Gentleman
 His times of hawking and hunting, in order
 To your more private Recreations.




Let me be so happy I beseech you, 
As to have notice when he is absent.




Or I, Madam, I should endeavour to serve you.



I'le try whether I have so much courage
 Left, as to mark these things (made up of perfumes
 And Perriwigs) in the fore-head with a

Jealous token of mine, e're I am convicted
 I wear a horn there my self now Gentlemen 




Your Husband, Madam we are in haste 



You need not make so much.




Your Humble Servant, Sir. 




The King expects me, Madam.



You shall not part with any apprehension
 Hence how now Sir Hot Spur? I must curb you
 I faith, if you offer to take such
 Careers as these.



You may command me, Madam a Lark is not
 So dar'd as I am by this Hobby of mine.




Put up your Tool, and remove; your appearance
 Was more unseasonable then I look'd for.



Each word she speaks is a Charm; I have not
 So much valour in me as to oppose her tongue,
 What e're I have done, or dare do otherwise.




You may now withdraw,
 Gentlemen, the King expects you.







There is no need of the expression;
 I did but act a little of the most to show my prerogative;
 I hope you'l say there's one Woman amongst us
 Has wit enough to rule her Husband
 In spight of Law.



We'll witness it to wonder, Madam.







Oh Madam! your experiment has done
 Wonders; my Husband 



Loves thee now to purpose. 








 Such a like Artifice on my father,
 For securities sake, yet lov'd him dearly.



You have given good proof in your own,
 And for mine, I believe he feels love
 In every fiber of his heart; kneels to
 Adore me, compares me to Stars, and
 Vows that I am more fair then ever.
 Oh what a kissing time shall I have on't,
  48
If he and I meet in embrace again?



Tantalize him well first.



But to say truth,
 I long my self, and would willingly be you guess 





He comes, withdraw a while 





 Have given me a present has had such
 Powerful operation on me.




 You well understand the meaning on't
 I assure my self.



'Tis love Madam, in extremity.



Did I not tell you so?



I thought I had hit your sense
 To a hair indeed, while I conceiv'd you
 As Gentlemen should a Lady in the like case.



It means as good a thing I can assure you.



But I am doting on my Wife again,
 And must (in spight of flesh and blood) woo her
 'Twice over.



There 'tis Alas good Sir, who could
 Have thought it in a man of your temper?



That same bewitching Bracelet you gave me,
 Which I am fain to kiss thus reverently
 Most minutes of the day, nay, sometimes pray to't;
 I can't blame your Husband
 For being such a strict Amorist; he
 Has had his philter I suppose.



I never found it needful; if I had,
 Perhaps I should have endeavour'd much
 To preserve his love.



There's not a hair
 On thy head, but I dare say can do more
 Then all the Charms of Medea.








I should be loth to prove you guilty of
 Magick, though 'tis certain.




 And accuse me, because Heaven has brought
 Your affection back again to your Lady;
 'Tis odds but I shall answer it.



Well, since 'tis thus,
 I forgive thee; and as you are a Woman,
 Speak a good word for me.





That I assure you,
 And perhaps have taken more care for you
 Then you can imagine here she comes,
 Apply your self first.




And are we met thus?



If not happily, you may remove me
 With the least breath of yours.




 I love strangely to look on thee 
O that Eye of thine! 



And this Cheek, this Lip, (some think not ill)
 So often tasted by you, with other amorous
 Passages of ours: does this remembrance please you?







And do you truly repent
 My desertion, as you protested to me you did?



From the very bottom of my belly, sweetest.



Had you said your heart, perhaps I had 
Took your word, and consented to have met
 Your desires on honourable terms.



This may be a device to bring my passion
 To some further mockery: (these she Serpents
 Want no wiles) I'le try whether or no
 I can dissemble mine, though against the
 Power of Magick.



You dare trust my Love?



I could find in my heart 



You seem'd of late
To adore me so strangely, that I am oblig'd
To take pity of you now for fear of your wits.



'Tis certain she mocks me 

I confess I felt a kind flame, or so;
But I did not intend to keep a perpetual

Etna in my bosom, or such a Fevour
Of Love, that will only admit of one Julip.




Melvissa's Arts do fail I fear.



Besides, you Women are such nice things
To handle, and as the world runs now,
Have such superlative devices. 



I can forgive you truly; by this


Image which ne're can hang too near my heart.


My Picture still there? better and better;

As sure as I live she's charm'd too. Melvissa

I remember told me, that she had done
Something extraordinary for me; I may
Dissemble safely, and if need were, make her
Long as much for me now; what a rare turn
Of Love would that be?



You then continue cruel still?



Alas my pretty fondling, I know thou
Wer't ever kind and tender; but to say truth
I did but counterfeit my passion, a little
To comply with thine, and gave out I had
Receiv'd I know not what charms of Venus,

Supposing thou had'st more wit then to believe
Such wonders.








Could'st thou expect from a man of my complexion?



I'le try my own Art a little then 

Oh my Foscaris! behold I dye to shew
Thee thy ingratitude






Help, help, help, my dearest thing of life,
I love thee most outragiously.



Are you in earnest?



Alas! I could even eat thee to express it.







Besides, I'le tell thee more;
I am charm'd to that purpose 
Behold this Bracelet, there's ten thousand
Spirits of Cupid in it.



May I be certain? ha, ha, ha 



I'le swear it by a thousand Stars.



Ha, ha, ha 



By this good light she jeers me.



And acts her part unto my wish.



Some other time you and I will dispute terms.








If you want an Advocate,
Yet command me; in the mean time, I hope
You'l make much of your favour, and so adieu.






If I am not put in a Ballad, or Lampoon'd
By some Scurrilous Poet before to morrow
This time, there is no mischief in being a
Subject of ridiculous wonder.







Ask me no questions. 



But I could tell thee
Such a story of my Rancounters.



But pronounce not the name of Wife.



I'le tell thee news then; 'tis said we shall have
Wars with our Amazon neighbours.




I have quarrel enough to the whole Sex
For the sake of one.

  48〈1 page duplicate〉  49〈1 page duplicate〉  50〈1 page duplicate〉  51〈1 page duplicate〉
  52Andr.
But if they have many
 Such Pentheselea's amongst 'em as my Wife, 
We are beaten into corners.



I am for any thing that's desperate,
 And if I do not cut as many of 'em 
Off at the waste, to be reveng'd of this
 Evil Genius of mine, let me dye
 By their Bodkins.







Call in the Embassadresses.



Here are our Letters to your
 Queen. We hear her Army
 Is advanc'd near upon our Confines.



But first by us denounces War;
 Who scorns to gain a foot of earth, but what
 Her Sword shall fairly win.



We'll soon prepare to meet her.



And thus we take our leaves.





to the Embassadresses aside.]
 I hope your Queen, whose most Illustrious
 Person I admire, will grant me pardon,

If in my Countries Cause I serve a Souldier.



She honours worth in all, amongst whom Your vertues have no small effects, Acknowledg'd by the world A worthy Captain.










You shall have all Commands become your valours;
 I know as men, you stand oblig'd to serve this Cause.



To a man, Sir.



And I (excepting one Woman)
 Dare act as much against the Sex: but she


I must confess, Sir, has the better on me
 In all Incounters.



Your Wife I guess;
 I am glad to hear I have a Subject who
 Is so kind a Husband 
No news yet of our Queen?



Not any, as the best of my Intelligence can learn.



My soul is on the torture.
Enter Toxaris.



I hope Sir, I have brought you happy tidings in this Letter.








 From an unknown person, who would not stay
 To satisfie my further Queries.





Let this assure you from Parisatis,
That she is remov'd from this Life, before
 It meets your hand: The means I have 
Resolv'd on for my end, I will not give you the
 Grief to hear, or charge you guilty of my death,
 And to confirm you, this preoedes my last being;
 I have sent you this Jewel, you must witness

 I vow'd should be kept to the death of Parisatis.
Oh Heavens! my Parisatis dead! read
 Here Bassanes.





My tears are slow, but credit me,
 The death of Armies, and the groans of War
 When made from gasping Friends, just drowning
 Of their souls in streams of blood, ne're shook
 My heart like this.



Thy griefs are truly mine.



But hope that providence, whose paths are
 Labyrinths, may yet 
Enter Statyra.



She's dead, she's dead, too certain 







Beyond expression; Parisatis my Queen 



I hop'd was now return'd to your embrace.



The other world contains her vertues, she's dead.



My eyes can ne're want streams to pour
 With yours for such a loss.



Mine are too guilty to partake
 With thine; and had I more then Niobe

 E're shed to drown my soul in; or turn'd 
To Marble at this news like her, 'twere but 
Too gentle to express my crime or grief.







What death can I devise, or torments
 Give my soul enough, that have at once
 To answer breach of faith to thee and death of her?



Your stain is deep in both, though far more vile
 As you are a Prince who did unworthily
 Possess the love and glories
 Of so excellent a Queen; that no pretence
 Of Power, or Law, can expiate 
But since by Heavens decree she's thus remov'd
 To Stars, for which did I but know her Urn,
 I'de visit it, and pay my tears as an
 Oblation to her memory 
Yet now 'tis fit you live for my sake



Thou hast some justice to my life,
 But wilt not now oblige it?



I do, and 
Claim it as the greatest blessing of my own.



There's nothing left me, but in thee, that can
 Invite a minutes breath.



You had my first love Sir, 
So far you have an interest still.



And for thy sake I will admit to live;
 Nay more, I'le talk to thee of Love, and with
 What penitence thou shalt require, acknowledge
 My past vows to thee, besides the guilt of my
 Ingratitude unto my Parisatis.




Heaven must absolve your crime to both,


For this your noble sorrow.



Thy words are comforts to my soul;
 But this is such an hour the Stars must mourn,
 Or find new trepidations in their orbs
 To fright the earth with some calamity 
Besides an Enemy does threaten now to invade
 Our Kingdom Bassanes, you shall command
 As General.



With my best duty Sir, and 'twas
 Your Queens command I should continue still your
 Faithful Subject.



I have no other title here to reign but from her love, 
Admit I leave thee, fair Statyra, in some place
 Of best security.



I am oblig'd to be companion in your dangers.



That were an endless peril, though thy vertue
 Be above what fate can injure.



My heart were else not worth the owning yours.



A brave and gracious Lady.



The King 'tis sure affects her.




I feel a cloud upon my soul, I know not when
 Or how 'twill vanish 
Come Statyra, my Love and thine must wait
 The calmer hours of time and kinder fate.
Ex. Omnes.







THE King may soon repent he gave our Treaty
 Such neglect.



We doubt it not, most royal Madam 



And for his Queen, whose fair desertion
 Has the first place in our quarrel, would she
 Were now alive, that we might with our arms
 Impose her on his Love.



'Twere to be wish'd.



The proof we have now given by taking
 This strong City of Daxata on the River

Volga, must make 'em know, their force
 Must yield unto our Sexes power,
 We lead what thinks our chief
 Commandress?



I judge that victory will soon
 Make offerings at your feet.



This Pass we have
 Secur'd must prove considerable, since it 
Impedes all their recruits that way.




 Hinders provision might else arrive
 Unto their Camp: nor can they forrage here
 Much longer, environ'd on each side with
 Mountains, where by your mighty conduct
 All the passages stand seiz'd by us.




 They dare not hope to force their passage.



Our Womens hearts must fail 'em strangely then,
 And make your greatness wear a blush,
 To see them this day prove degenerate,
 Who from your conduct glory many Victories.



Spoke like the blood of Amazons.




Nor do we doubt the issue of this day 
Will make your Prowess far more fam'd
 Then brave Thalestris (stories tell) was from
 Great Alexander, (the Prince of Captains)
 Held in highest admiration.



I see You are all resolv'd, as does become
 This Cause I fight, by which we'll force even Nature
 To confess she was a partial Mother
 To our Sex, when she made man
 First heir of Glory.










Our drudgeries, our pleasures, or embraces,
 To create us Souldiers, that scorn their uses
 But for our heroick ends.



Did but the Women 
Of this world besides hear this, they'd be asham'd,
 To think they had not broke the yoke of men,
 And such a fair and great Protectress in your self.



An entertainment for our Greatness there,
 That this haughty Prince, Tysamnes, (who dares
 Make War against our Sex) may know that we
 In this strong City, forc'd from his bold powers,
 Keep our triumphant joys.



Some Prisoners of War desire to present 
Your Majesty with a Dance, after the
 Manner of their Country.




Musick and a Dance.
Enter Messenger.



A Moorish Lady desires admittance
 To your presence.



She has our leave.










'Tis such, most Royal Madam, must beg
 A pardon for my craving this access,
 Who have journy'd far, to see the glory
 Of your Arms and Person, fam'd above all
 The antient Amazons so much renown'd.



The ambition of this visit we can pardon;
 And glad we are our Actions have
 Oblig'd the world and fame.



But more your Sex in this
 Fair Cause your arms embrace.




 Our greatness 



And though our swarthy clime


Cannot boast Natures Beauties in Rose
 And Lilly cheeks; that gives us there as Daughters
 Of the night; or that the kisses of the Sun
 Were so unkindly spent, as it alone
 Did darken us, and guild the world besides;
 Yet we have there bright souls of honour.



I find thou hast, above what I in this
 Short view can read thy Name?









 I need not ask, I know it must be great
 That represents thy self so full of noble grace
 Unto our presence.



Your great esteem is
 My ambition to improve, though with the 
Greatest hazard of my life.



And dost thou then love Arms? 



So far, most Royal Madam, as I would
 Be glad to dye, though not so much as mention'd
 In the lowest place, among the Annals
 Of your fair Atchievments.




 Already boast I have a Souldier in thee,
 Worthy to lead with us, and these, whose veins
 Are warm'd with blood of Amazons, inciting
 Deeds, which but reported to the softer
 Of our Sex, give tremblings to their hearts.



I should be loth to lose my share in honour,
 Or miss the end I have design'd my life;
 Yet must avow I never yet have fought.



Though thy Complexion above all thy Sex,
 Nature has fitted most to deeds of War,
 In which the scars, and wounds of arms, cannot 
Dig furrows in the fair brow of Beauty, 
So dear unto the vainer of thy kind.
 Yet I must now require, whether no other
 Motive has produc'd this inclination?



I'le soon confess I have not liv'd so much


Oblig'd by man, as that I may not justly
 Be concern'd in your great cause and quarrel
 To make an offering of my life.



Thou hast won my confidence.



The command I ask from your great Majesty,
 Shall be but mean, such as your prudence best
 Will judge becomes a strangers trust.



And thou shalt have it, worthy Moor.




But crave it may be hazardous and daring:
 Heaven knows how willing
 I am to be rid of life.




Thou shalt have fit employment for thy valour 
And take care my valiant Women, that this 

Moor, who promises such wonders of her Faith
 And Vertue, does not in noble emulation
 Match your Prowess.



The Queen's soon taken with this stranger.



She seems to promise much.



A suit of our best Arms and Quiver
 For this Moor 

Daranthe, and you Ladies,
 See her according to our warlike mode
 Invested; nor do I doubt thou'lt use 'em
 Nobly.
Enter one with Arms and Quiver.




I should be else not worthy of that Soul
 I would be thought to bear.
Enter Messenger.



The Enemy prepares for
 Battel, Mighty Queen.



We will prevent 'em giving the onset first 
Mean while, let's hear a Martial Ode,
 The Harmony our Womens ears delight;
 While others of their Sex warble amorous
 Notes to entertain their Lovers.


The Queen Mandana leads her Amazon Women in state round the Stage, making several pauses while the Ode is Singing; at the end of which they go off.

  60The Amazons are suppos'd to sing the Martial Ode.

To Arms, to Arms, the Warlike fare,
As our Heroick Charms,
With Martial Eccho's fill the Air,
Inviting unto Arms.
Our Women with their Bows and Darts,
Dare Mans rough powers assail,
And Conquer such unshaken Hearts
To give Love laws as we Prevail.


Advance, advance, lest fortunes hacte
Our Onsets should delay,
Obliging time that flies so fast,
To curb his Steeds this day;
And hand in hand with mighty fame,
That wraps in Clouds her head,
Her glorious daughters us proclaim,
And first our stately Triumphs lead.



We challenge Dian and her Host


Of Nymph-like Archers all,

Who from their Quivers glory boast,

Or proud Acteons fall;

If ever their bright eyes beheld,
A Chorus like to ours;
Or saw themselves so far excell'd
By Womens more Heroick powers.






Be couragious Gentlemen, the straight we are in,
 I doubt not but my conduct with the Kings
 Will find some brave expedient to relieve.



We'l all dye at your command.



And for the Souldiers wants, our valours soon
 Shall feed, e're their pin'd bellies mutiny


For bread; my presence is requir'd to see
 What order keeps our other wing.




Well Lads, we must fight it out to purpose,
 I find there's no getting else a crum of sustenance.



Or be made such drudges to these Amazonia

 Furies, their Camp has not the like.



In our late skirmish methoughts they fought
 Like Dragons, and handl'd their Bows with more
 Dexterity then Parthians.





 A Legion of Women, or more Evil Spirits
 In any one of them.



And should we fall
 Into their hands, what might they expect
 After that rate?



As I am a Souldier,
 I think a Brigade of men would scarce do
 The bus'ness of one Woman of this Generation,
 If they have the same vivacity for Venus,

 As for Mars.




This morning I could have been contented
 To have broke my fast with one of the fair
 Centinels next me; 'twas such a pretty
 Hard-hearted Rogue.



And if I starve for want
 Of Bread and Women, let me perish unpity'd.



Nay, we must venture on their bodies some way
 Or other; there's not a passage left us else
 So wide as man enters the world.



'Tis said they hold
 Intelligence with our Scythian

Women: and have made such furious resolves
 If we fall into their hands.



And for us Husbands 
If they Conquer 



Eunuch'd to a Man, Gentlemen 
I look to carry my quill in my hat,
 To show I am wholly castrated;
  62
For the rest of our Troops, perhaps they'l give 'em
 Leave to spin in Boots, or serve their other occasions.
Enter Tysamnes with Statyra, Bassanes, Alvanes, Toxaris and Araxis.




Here comes the King; we now shall be for
 Action speedily.



His looks seem troubl'd.



Our City taken on the Volga, and
 Our Provisions, the Sinews of our Armies strength
 Cut off before our eyes; nay more, inclos'd
 By female powers Can you be men and live
 To this contempt?



Spare your passion Sir.



I cannot, while I see I govern Souldiers
 Scarce deserve the name of men, more fit,
 By Heaven, to be converted to some other shape,
 Or serve as Chamber Eunuchs to this female kind
 Our Arms oppose.



This stratagem of theirs
 Was unexpected; in all my time of war,
 I ne're was so surpriz'd.





 How we may redeem some part of this dishonour.



I judge the way must be to attacque
 Their left wing with a brisk assault.



Be it thy command. Foscaris, Andrages,


 Draxanes and Eumenes, be you assisting
 In this enterprise with such Troops you lead.



To our utmost, Royal Sir.



And hope I shall soon give your Majesty
 A good account of this attempt Madam,
 I have your happy wish.



And more, my Prayers for your safety.



The other wing (my worthy Chiefs) I'le lead
 To assist your valours.



We all are ready with our Duties.



And if our Swords cannot yet subdue these
 Women Warriours; let them triumph,
 And tell Dame Nature
 'T was her fond erroneous act,
 Entituled Man Superiour.




 For my sake, as you love Statyra's being,
 That have no small concern in every danger,
 Threatens you.



'T is for thy sake I'de only live
 To crown this day with victory.



'T were too much hazard for my Love.



Thou would'st not have me tamely gaze upon
 These Foes, and see thee pine for food?
 Or yield our selves to this imperious womans will,
 That may, perhaps, give Laws unwelcom to
 Our Loves, or take thy Beauty Captive for
 Her slavish Handmaid, whom but to circle thus,
 Is joy to me above the world and conquest.



Admit I intercede for some fair peace,
 She is a Woman fam'd of Royal worth, 
And cannot be so cruel you express.



I know thou would'st not save my life by
 Womans mercy; besides, 'twould fright thy gentle
 Person, to behold thy Sex in Armour,
 And their breasts (while thine's Loves tender sphere)
 Inclos'd in Ribs of Steel, with one cut off,
 More furiously to wield their Martial Bows,
 With other Warlike horrors to afflict thy eyes.



I fear no danger, so I serve but yours.



Admit I leave thee in my Tent,
 Attended with my best reserves of Force 
Enter an Officer.
What news?



Your Army, Sir, is in outragious Mutiny
 For Bread.



I look'd for this.



I fear as much the Consequence.



A sign they are sons of Cowardise
 That cannot take it from their Women-foes,
 Or make them knead us more.



Your presence, Sir, may possibly allay
 Their fierce disorder.



We'le see who dares not fight,
 Or starve if we command it or else
 We'le look e'm dead your hand my dearest 
This Mutiny we'le soon compose 









Nay, good Lady Errants some mercy 



As we are Souldiers 




'Tis below our Amazon honour to afford it
 To such Knights of Chivalry as you are.



As we are Gentlemen of good Nature to your Sex.



Or as you have had kindness to man.



Or for Loves sake, of which I have store at your
 Service.




You are Spirits indeed of Cupid.




I am more than an ordinary man that way, 
And have Venus about me in abundance.






Here comes our General.




We must not further act without her.



You have done bravely, valiant Ladies;
 But where's their General Bassanes, who
 Forc'd your Squadrons? the Queen would have been glad
 To have led in triumph such a famous Chief.




He fought his way with many wounds unto the

Volga; in whose rough streams we judge him drown'd.



The Queen will give his loss some pity 
For you Gentlemen, who have not been
 Injurious to our Sex in practising
 Your Scythian custom; the Queen proclaims
 She'l think of mercy; and for such pris'ners
 Who have Wives 



What will be our Fate?




It is her Royal Pleasure
 They be surrender'd to their wills 
I must attend and give her notice
 Of your brave success.




'Twere best to be afore-hand with this Act
 Of Grace I humbly lay hold on your Queens mercy.


















Have none of you Wives in being, Gentlemen?
 What say you, Sir?



Who I, Madam? I would not be so unfortunate
 For a world; and would you
 But espouse us to some of your Masculine 
Generation, we'd get your Queen such Heroines.



Dost hear how abominably these Creatures
 Of our Loves dissemble?




They are oblig'd, it seems, to
 Change the complexion of their hearts.



Let it be for life's sake, or love's, I'le have
 My due acknowledgments 



Do not own us, dear Wives,
 We beseech you.




How, not own our just proprieties?



As you are Women, and have mercy,
 We are coming off, and on the fairest terms
 Heart can wish withdraw awhile,
 And we'll be with you in a trice, and
 Handle things kindly, as men and wives should do.



You shall excuse us, we'll reprieve you Our own way now.



And for you, Sir, whose Conversion,
I hop'd, my better stars had wrought 



Alas! my sweetest, I love thee with a flame
As warm as thou can'st wish; but was forc'd to
Dissemble for some motives of danger,
Which I know thoul't pardon.




'Tis fit we understand
Your business, Ladies.




You are not Spies. 



By your fair leaves,
We come to claim a pair of Husbands
By vertue of your Queens Proclamation.



Of which, one of them had the good manners
To part with his Wife, witness my self. 







What will become of us?



Or me, that have provok'd
Fate and Woman together?



I am like to suffer under both, that must again
Endure the insupportable, and endless
Civil war of wedlock.



O, the star of Venus has had a strange influence
In our Horoscopes; there's no resisting destiny,
And she the Ascendant.



Might I chuse, I had rather once more charge the
Amazonian Battel, and all the Viragoes
Of woman-kind together.




Shall we kill e'm to revenge your injuries?



By no means, we beg their lives.



And having thus cull'd out our Cocks,
I doubt not, but we shall manage the game
Advantagiously enough.




You have e'm at your mercy.



Thanks to your Queens.



She has mine likewise in abundance Ladies 
  67
But for you Husbands. 



Nay, prethee we'll compose differences as you



Now for our Capitulations.






If we do not make fair ones for our selves
With such Victors as these,
We may curse our Nativities.



What terms of composition, good sweet Wife?
Thou know'st I love thee above imagination.



Perhaps I may give you fair quarter.



Let it be but in thine, and I will dye
Upon the spot, e're part with thee again;
I am thine now without a charm.



I promise nothing, though you see I have took
Some pains for your safety.



What says my Spouse?



'Tis odds she'll proceed as occasion serves.



Be not proud of thy victory, thou know'st
I have been a most submissive Husband.



You'l soon know my conditions 



And if they prove but gentle,
I am conquer'd happily 




You will not leave our Camp presently?



Not till the issue of this day be past.




If you doubt obedience from your Husbands,
Command a Guard from us.



By no means Ladies,
We acknowledge an absolute Conquest.



Otherwise, you know our Commission.



Your servant, fair noble Warriours.






Enter Mandana with Cydane and Renone.




You have taken those fierce Militants
That did attempt to force their safeties
In despight of our bold powers.




We have, most Royal Madam,
And in obedience to your great commands,


Have gratify'd two Ladies of the Enemies part,
 By surrendring of their Husbands to their wills.



I am glad my victory
 Does give my name a Trophy in the
 Obligation of my Sex; these men we war, 
Have too injurious treated But where's 
The Prince Bassanes, their General?




He forc'd his bold escape, if not drown'd
 In passing of the Volga.





 Been content to have seen him made our Captive.



And must have added
 Glory to your Victory.



He much exprest himself your great Admirer.
Enter Messenger.



Glad tidings, mighty Queen, the King and all
 His power is now surrender'd to your General.



I knew the streight we had reduc'd 'em to,
 Would soon compel 'em 
And where's his fair Persian Mistress, Statyra?




She is, besides some Pris'ners of note
 Guarded by the valiant Moor.




This Crowns our Conquest.
Enter Daranthe and Parisatis, with Tysamnes and Statyra, Araxis, Toxaris and Alvanes.


Daranthe, I must praise thy valour 
And all you my Women Souldiers
 For this glorious day.



We are honour'd that our duties
 Serv'd your Greatness.



But thine, my valiant Moor, that gives
 Such noble emulation in thy worthy Deeds
 To all, I know not how enough to magnifie,
 But soon will raise thy merit to some higher


Trust, shall speak our great esteem, both of thy
 Valour and fidelity.



You oblige the humblest of your Servants.



The King's a gracious person.




I fear too taking.











Is it not just, that I, who am the Mighty
 Warriour, in my Sexes Cause,
 Should frown thee dead?



You cannot look me out of life, nor would
 I turn my head aside, though every beam
 Of yours, were Darts of Basilisks, that dare
 Behold you thus 



You are resolute I find;
 And would to Heaven your Queen were yet in being,
 That she might witness my concern in her
 Fair Cause; or from my power 
Ask thee her Sacrifice, 
Since thou hast been so much her Tyrant Lover.



My ingratitude to her great vertue
 I acknowledge; though I meet all your rage
 In pouring of revenge for her sake on my head;
 And since she is no more, for which, Heaven knows,
 How true I grieve, I would not live, but for
 This Ladies sake.




Your new made Mistress 



And just possessor of my heart.



She has strange fascination in her eyes,
 For which 




If you pronounce me guilty, speak my death;
 Nay, I'le intreat it at your hand as royal mercy,
 So you'l spare the King, 
For whose great safety,
 Had I many thousand lives, I'd humbly
 Lay them, as my offering, at your feet.



This Lady has a noble soul.



Too much the Kings I fear.




I have cause enough to bid thee dye,
 But will not cloud the glory of this day
 With Womans death; and wer't not for a sacred
 Resolution of my soul, perhaps would grant
 Thy Loves enjoyment; but I have now decreed 



If death, I am ready to embrace it.



Oh speak some milder Accent! what can
 Become a Womans soul, like yours, so much
 As gracious mercy?



My resolution's fixt irrevocable,
 As when by Heaven's o're-ruling will, we guide
 Our Justice: for know Tysamnes, I have vow'd
 Thy life a glorious victim of my Conquest;
 Nor has it been unusual in the Wars we make,
 For such a day as this, to grace our Altars 
With the best of Captives, of which I judge
 None worthy, like thy self.



You will not be divinely cruel?



I'le hear no more 

Zeriffa take these pris'ners to thy custody; 
Thy Complexion is most fit to serve this Trust;
 And be sure you have a watchful eye
 Upon this Lady; the rest, perhaps,
 Shall find our mercy.



I joy this trust.



Grieve not, Statyra, since I dye thy Lover.



And might I bleed upon the Altar with you,
 'Twere then my Loves true Sacrifice.



Thus far this day propitious does appear,
 But from the end great Acts their Crowns must wear.







HOw bears Tysamnes his restraint, and our
 Declar'd resolves? I know they needs
 Must bow his lofty heart.



As unconcern'd as Infants sleep,
 Or as the Man you'd chuse the object of
 Your mercy ought to be nay more. 



What means that more?



You are a Woman.







Had I like power.







I'd bid him live at least.



Thou would'st not have me love him?



No by my life 
Though 'twere a gracious Act to Heaven, if you
 Vouchsafe him mercy; since he's oblig'd to fair

Statyra's Love; you else will kill two hearts at once.



Away with this fond pity;
 I have fix't my Justice







Bring forth the King,
 I'le make him know it.



I am all confusion.




This Moor is brave and loyal; my Mother once
 Had such a Lady near her person, she
 Would commend above what Faith can reach.
Enter Parisatis with Tysamnes.


Zeriffa! admit none to our presence.



I shall not but by your leave Queen


Will here observe 






 You contemn the vow I've made,
 Nor does my eye
 Discern other then pleasing calms upon
 The brow you seem to wear.



Such as become a King,
 And every vulgar man, when made a Sacrifice
 To womans passion 



Take heed, Sir, how
 You entertain a Summer in your hopes, 
Or slight the Justice I decree.



What mean you, Madam?
 Alas! I look'd to meet the Miter'd Priest,
 The Altar fixt, where I should bleed your Victim,
 And if you superscribe it 
With my crimes of Love, 
Which caus'd at once my Parisatis death,
 And fair Statyra's tears, I'le call it justice,
 And due expiation of my sins to Heaven.



I'le soon my self convey you to the
 Altar I intend 



What means the Queen?




Or say I bid thee live?



'Twere then a mercy greater then I crave,
 Or merit.



I'd have thee judge it more.



'Tis love most certain.




What think you of this look?




'Tis somewhat gentler then I did expect.



And what of this?




It seems more kind then common smile.



Is it not welcom to thy heart?



'Twere too much to bestow such beams on me,
 And gives me greater wonder, then should Lights Orb
 Contract its glory to the Artick Pole, 
To quicken there some frozen spot of earth.



He does perceive thy pardon now is written


In my heart Zeriffa 
Enter Parisatis.

See thou respect Tysamnes

Above observance of a Pris'ner; I have
 Some motives of a near concern require it.




Is this your vow, oh Parisatis?

 Didst thou walk as undiscern'd as Ghosts
 That cloath themselves in bodies of the Air;
 This must affright thee more, then timorous hearts
 Scar'd with such pale horrors 
Admit, Sir, I congratulate this Grace.




And I with glader eyes could have beheld
 Thee made my deaths black Hand-maid.



You do not slight the Queen, that with her
 Gracious beams of mercy quickens you to live?
 Nay more, if I discern that have some trust
 From her fair thoughts, is giving of her self
 A conquest to your Love methinks
 This should awake your apprehension,



It does! but find my self 
Unshaken to Statyra, and could have wish'd
 Your Queens more rigid vow were unrepeal'd,
 That I might bleed her Sacrifice.



She is your Crime, 
And therefore does deserve to be your Fate, 
Or else embrace the same with her.



Though thy dark visage is most fit to be
 The messenger of death and all it's horrors, 
I may enquire what cause incites thee
 To appear thus cruel.



It breaks like clearest justice 
From my Soul, that am oblig'd to be 
Your Queens Revenger 



Thou art not sent from t'other world
 To be my Executioner, where she's adorn'd
 With Crowns and smiles of Angels, still interceding
 My forgiveness.



I have griev'd his Soul too much,
 Pardon me, Sir, I was too bold to urge
 Your penitence.




It proves thee worthy.



One word and I have done; were your Queen living?
 Nay more, Sir, wer't soon as manifest, she
 Hazarded her life, repriev'd on purpose
 For your safety, would you receive her
 To your embrace and love?



She is too dear to Heaven
 To be given thence; and Stars which frown'd upon
 That fatal Act, already have enroll'd her
 In their first of bright Societies 
But this is all thy dream.



Believe it such 
Yet so far I dare represent her self, 
As to assure you, for her sake, I'le dye
 To purchase your just freedom 
Let this tear confirm you, as 'twere shed from her.
Enter Statyra.







The carriage of this Moor

 Is honours riddle to my thoughts 
Oh my Statyra! I have yet a hope of thy
 Enjoyment.



Does the Queen Incline to mercy?



She has receded from her vow.




And more cruel in decree, seeks 
To divide my soul from thine 
Thou understand'st me?



I do too sadly 



But this Moor, employ'd by Heaven
 To be a Guardian of our Loves, or as
 The night, or Hymen gave her this complexion 
To be a sober guide unto his rights, 
Devotes her self to serve our safeties.



This means of happiness was above my hope,


While through each vein of mine, my blood had ebbings
 From my heart, in apprehension of your dangers;
 Nor did I view her with less horror,
 Conceiving her the Queens most cruel instrument.



I thought her so, but she has given me such
 Assurance of her Faith and Love, that had
 Thy beauteous figure took a veil like her,
 Or were my Parisatis

 Represented such, I would not have expected
 A more strict concern for me.



It seems too much
 To credit from a stranger, or else 'tis but
 Loves kinder Labyrinth.
Enter Parisatis.




She's here salute her
 With thy kindest beams, she does deserve
 Our near regards.



Madam, the King has given me such a character
 Of your worth, as I must beg to joyn
 Acknowledgments with his.



I'le venture all that's dear to serve him,
 And your vertue; but this is not a time
 For Words: Things call to action 
Please you withdraw.








I hope most happily.



And hast thou found him?



Yes, Madam, and have brought him.



This place is safe from ears wait him to me.


 I have laid shall Crown my Acts.
Enter Bassanes disguis'd.
I am wondrous glad to see thee live.



And I like to some man that's
 Struck with Extasies of joy,
 Could even resign my soul, as thus
 I kiss the ground I tread, in adoration
  76
Of your being here, when fear'd beyond a doubt
 You had snatch'd your self away, to make its
 Bosom in your grave more sacred.




Draxanes told thee all?




 As I was levying of Recruits to free the King
 From this restraint he suffers here.



Then we'll spare further circumstance,
 And only know I have prepar'd to do him
 Signal service; for which end, I took this Cloud,
 Either to dye unknown, or live a means
 Of his lov'd preservation.



This deed must ravish Men and Angels
 To express; who must admire at once
 Your most heroick constancy and vertue.



Enough Bassanes, and pardon me, that I
 Sent my summons to joyn thee as companion
 In the dangers I embrace.




 My utmost peril, though every man I meet
 Could look me into Atoms.



And know to my
 More cruel Fate, the King not only has
 A Mistress in Statyra, but the Queen

Mandana, his fair Conquerour, has vow'd
 Him for her own enjoyment.



What can be thought on
 To resist this high injustice?



I have resolv'd upon the means, in which
 I'le use thy Conduct, not more approv'd to act,
 Then sage in resolution; nor do I doubt
 The instruments we'll use, are less then cordial,
 To embrace the end we shall propose, which must
 Be swift in execution.



I would not waste a minute e're I act to serve it.



The Guards are here at my devotion, besides
 A considerable number of our bravest Officers,
 By the Queen Mandana, set at liberty.



They may be serviceable to your design.



The honour of their King obliges it 
Within we'll debate more at large particulars.






Well Gallants, we are all Freemen now.



'Tis a seasonable mercy to us Courtiers,
 Not us'd to this kind of belly duty;
 We otherwise must have been living Anatomies
 By this time.



And so perhaps Metamorphiz'd
 Into starv'd Ghosts, to walk with hideous
 Lamentations these Fields of Victory.



I do not think
 All th' Infernal Region can fright these
 Victrices, should they appear in Arms,
 There's not an Image of Mars, but does raise
 Their fury above Miracle.




 For all their being thus couragious and hardy
 (Which must be acknowledg'd more then wonder
 In their soft kind) they are refin'd as our Ladies
 Of the best converse; and as modishly witty
 As any she Platonick living 



If Venus make no Captives in this shape
 Of Mars, may her Son ne're more wear Quiver.
Enter Eumenes.




Never men enfranchis'd on such terms
 As we are, for which this great and fair
 Warriour deserves a Jubilee.







And like the Sun diffusive in her beams;
 I have been so Caress'd by our fair Conquerours,
 Under several Titles and Commands, as if they'd
 Invite us shortly to match by Regiments,
 And so at last joyn Armies! what a day
 Of Hymen would that be?



Could but our King be freed
 On royal terms, 'twould adde yet
 Glory to this Queens great Acts.




 Favourably, when she late vow'd him
 To a sad destiny.







As men should construe in like case, a Womans vow.



I am yet to learn, there's nothing but
 Riddle in the whole Sex.



'Tis said that Love's the Oedipus,

 And has resolv'd it, to whose soft Altars
 She has given the King some beams of invitation.



But that may adde unto his greater peril,
 Being so much devoted to Statyra,

 That his heart is Ice to other flame.



Heaven guide things for the best!



Where did you leave Draxanes?

He shares of this Grace I hope?



Yes, and is advanc'd to no small favour. 



Not with the Queen?



No, but what's a step to't,
 He is deep in the Moors;

I left him in close Conference with her.



That Moor carries the stream indeed of Grace: 
Our King committed to her trust with his beauteous Mistriss.



But what to judge her.



She bears a Soul of brightest temperament;
 As if that providence had found a place
 Elsewhere for her Nativity; or as she wore
 An Ethiops Cloudy Veil, from Art, not Nature.






Foscaris and Andrages come off thus
 With their Wives! this must conclude
 A strange day of Womans Victory.



I have paid my Arrears
 Of Love, I hope to purpose; we are
 Reconcil'd, and have embrac'd, and so forth Gentlemen.







And can bill like Doves now.



Not too much, I beseech you, lest you fall
 Into a surfeit of Love again; too much
 Of the honey of Wedlock is not good
 For your palate.



We joy your Loves.



If any be unkind henceforth to his Spouse,
 May he suffer my penance; there's some
 Mystery behind, which you shall all know
 At leisure: in the Interim, I acknowledge
 My happiness, from you Lady.



I am glad it was in my power to serve
 Your felicity in Clarina's.



And I rejoyce a kind Wife too, Gentlemen.



But take heed you don't presume;
 You know my power when I please.



These Women Conquerours are strangely noble



We own our Husbands from their mercy.



And we our freedoms.



Souldiers in every vein Gentlemen,
 And can drink a smart health or two as they
 Discourse of Arms and would they yield
 Reasonable obedience to mankind, I'd wish
 You all to match amongst them, they'd spirit
 Flesh and blood indeed.



I long to be doing.



And I as much.



Could but the King come off nobly.



He must, if the Queen do not once more
 Change her vow.



No news yet of the General Bassanes?




He vanish'd in a storm of darts! but what
 His fate is Heaven knows.
  80Enter Draxanes.




A word in private.










Rely your faiths on mine.







You may admit us to Council, 
Wives should partake their Husbands secrets.



You shall, you shall.



And know we have wondrous things in hand.



If honourable, I'le venture all that's dear
 To serve it.



And I as far engage.



Such as must fill your bosoms full of joy 
Within more of particulars.





We have given our mercy to the King.



'Twas gracious like your self. 



Nor will I blush to own
 His Graces merit an esteem from us.



The Queen is surely smitten with her great Captive?







Bring forth the King Cydane.


We'll treat him nobler yet, and make him joy
 This day of Womens conquest.
Enter Cydane.




Madam! the King's withdrawn.











Blister'd be thy tongue
 That brings such tidings to my heart 
Where is the Moor?




Not to be found.
Enter Statyra.




Her black Soul shall take a gloomy flight
 To the other world for this.



I answer for her trust.



Thy life shall bear hers company.




 To yield it up a Victim to your wrath,
 Since that must raise a Trophy to my Love;
 Where every Virgin of a faith like mine,
 Will drop a tear to give my memory
 A name, shall blast the glory of your Conquest.



Away with this fond woman; it is an Ague
 To my blood to hear her reason thus.





Hold and hear me first.



How! men in Arms before our presence?
 Have we no Guard there? 



None but what I have plac'd;
 And were your Women chang'd to Sons of Mars,

 Nay, Cadmus fiercer issue joyn'd to them,
 When ripen'd first to horror of mankind, 
As the earth trembling did contain their roots;
 This Sword of mine should mow 'em down 
To smooth the path I lead.



A combination of these humane things 
So late our Arms reduc'd 
Methinks they should convert to nothing
 From a look of mine; or I lose Majesty.



This surprisal was beyond the reach of thought.







And thou that seem'st an object
 Fit to guide such base ingratitude,
 What shall I call thee? Traytor?



A name that had an honour for your Soul,
 That fill'd no less the world with wonders;
 And lest your Womens frailty should stain
 The brightness of your noble Deeds,
 I thought it justice to resist your will,
 Though I met Seas of danger in the act.







I must be plainer, 
Do you not love the King?



Suppose it granted 



Heaven does not 
And think not, Madam, that my blood,
 Though it bears fire of honour in each vein,
 But 'tis as cold to treachery; nor does the Cause
 That I maintain, less then command, without
 An arm of force 
This Lady in her own fair right, methinks,
 Should move you.




May Heaven reward thy vertue!



She is the Kings belov'd; but I have won
 Him mine by Arms.



And therefore nobler conquest
 To subdue your self: The Bays you wear
 In triumph, else must wither on your brow, 
Where Majesty and Beauties lustre twine
 To make one Excellence.



What providence has Blest me with this Advocate?



I have seen a face resembles that.




The Queen a little alters.



It must be he.



Behold then, Royal Madam, this face 
Made but my own dark copy by disguise,
 Thus clear'd to own it's just original.








In which I wear 
A mirror of my heart, that does without
 A flattery express a Soul that highly
 Honours yours, though it has seem'd divested 
Of those Charms in making this reflection
 On your justice, which here is one most
 Powerful to incline.






What is this Lady?



The Queen Parisatis, Madam.




 A meer imposture to abuse me.



We must avow 'tis she.



I am all wonder.



And I no less rejoyce to see you live;
 I hope you'l pardon, that I claim'd an interest
 In your Kings affection, when 'twas assur'd
 You had no Being in the world.



And I more humbly beg one here;
 Nor shall it e're be told that Parisatis

 Walk'd in that dark Cloud (though it vail'd her
 Actings for preservation of the life and love
 Of her Tysamnes) to live, your trust abus'd,
 Without a pardon from your lips.







Nor shall you loose, besides,
 One fruit of victory.



You were the Moor then?



The same, most Royal Madam 
And if you are my Subjects, prostrate 
Your selves and swords, with me, at these
 Majestick feet.




This is a Conquest happier then all;
 Nor shall e're Woman boast she had the better
 Of Mandana's honour Madam, you have
 Forgiveness take up your weapons worthy Souldiers.




You are highly gracious.



Where is the King?



'Twas but given out he had escap'd.




Bassanes, you'l attend him to us.
Enter Tysamnes whispering Bassanes, Foscaris, Andr. Tox. Alv. Arax. Drax. Eumenes.




Do I then live to be thus happy in 
Your grace and pardon?



Your Queen has conquer'd me Tysamnes,



After the power of your Arms was made
 My valour's glory; nor did the darts of Love, 
Which I confess, made some impression here,

Leave wounds but to be heal'd more happily 
I vow'd you, Sir, to love.



No change I hope.




And thus will make your offering here;
 She is a Jewel of a Crown indeed.




I take her on my knees 
She is too great a blessing, thus restor'd

To my embrace, to be with less devotion own'd
 From Heaven, imploring (as I kneel) thy pardon.



You have it Sir, though not a gift, where you
 Command a duty; which when most passive
 In a Wife, does but refine the gold of Vertue.



Why didst thou take this Cloud?



To dye unknown, or serve your safety.



A most heroick constancy.



Thy vertue's richer Then the world's vast globe, were it 
Converted to one purest Diamond.



And does as far exceed what story can relate.



But I have yet a load of mercy here
 To beg, my crime of Love to thee Statyra,

 Which else must cloud this day of comforts,
 And bring eternal night upon my soul.



Though I have lost an expectation of
 My greatest bliss in your enjoyment, 
That in warm sighs might soon dissolve
 A Virgins heart like mine, yet I can feel
 No want of happiness, since I behold
 Your Souls, that have already mingl'd joys,
 Meet thus, and kiss each other.



Heaven must reward thy goodness.



And my for ever obligation.



This days example gives to Love
 Such brave repute, that I who both have fought, 
And men commanded, could even yield


To hold my Scepter from obedience.



Here is a Prince within your eye (I hope
 More near your heart) that might deserve
 To rule a Throne like yours.



I know him noble.



And one, most Royal Madam, that owns 
A soul, you have an interest to command
 E're since I first beheld the glory of your charms:
 Pardon me, I now avow it, that rather
 To express my wonder of your vertue,
 Should by an humble distance still admire.



'Tis in my power to bring you nearer:

Bassanes is a Prince may well become
 An Empress of the world's great choice; and were

Mandana such, she would not think her Love
 Or Greatness stoop'd to match with thine.



You make me more then happy.



And I that honour Arms, and thy fam'd Deeds
 In War, will call it noblest triumph
 To yield thy Love a victory o're mine.



This bounty stream's so powerful on my heart,
 That I may fear it's guide, in such a Sea
 Of joys you bring.



I am yours for ever, dear Bassanes.




This day surpasses wonder.



I knew it must conclude with some
 Extraordinary Love-miracle besides my own.





Daranthe! we must now no more make war, 
I have match'd a Souldier.



One that will live and dye your just admirer.



And Women, here divest
 Your selves of Arms with me.




We all obey your Majesty.



And let your conquests henceforth be to love,
 And give Men sole supremacy 
I hope our Kingdoms shall unite in making

Laws may fit each Sexes duty.



I am oblig'd for Parisatis sake


To make Decrees, no arbitrary will
Of man shall henceforth e're reject a Wife.



Our Crowns will have a blessed union then 
What pattern shall we take?



Such as the world
With best consent does practise.




Laudable, the form of happy England.




It has been most approv'd.



Now Ladies, you are all well pleas'd to see
This peace that smiles upon your Loves, and gives
Both Sexes with our Crowns, such happiness.







We now can call our Husbands
Ours by lawful duty.



I am glad to hear that word.



And I to be secur'd thus; I was in no small
Apprehension, this female victory
Might have imporw'd them to part with us;
What a mockery of Love's Magick had I been then?



My Warriours, you will all take Husbands now?
Here are men fit to match your spirits.



Your great example must invite it.



What shall this day do for thee fair Statyra?

The bounty of thy soul deserves a recompence
Above what tongue can speak, that spreads
A volume of thy goodness, fit only
For the eye of Heaven to read.



And thither I'le devote my love,
Though while I live, no day shall pass without
A contemplation of your happiness.



You will not soon depart?



For Parisatis sake you must not.



'Tis my ambition first to fill an humble place
In your bright train of triumphs.



For which thou dost deserve a Chariot
Of Celestial substance,
Mov'd by the wings of Seraphims;



And every Virgin of most noble soul,
Attending thee with Songs of Raptures;
The Muses (as fair-Hand-maids to thy vertue)
Their best of Poets should inspire.



You too much honour my small merits.



This day does claim a glory from your worth,
And next my just devotion here my heart

Shall keep an Altar sacred to Parisatis

Constant love and praise, with yours.



And mine no less
Shall speak Bassane's fame.



I'le be your Rival Madam, there 
That am oblig'd unto this noble Prince





And I above expression thine.





Tysamnes with your Queen must lead
The way unto our joys 
And Women hence from us this pattern take,
Love, and obedience, your best conquests make.
Ex. Omnes.

