





BUt upon what injury, Phylanter?




Love and Ambition, Sir, those two great injuries
Of mens seduced minds, which fill the thoughts.
Full of Revenge, not with the justnesse of it.
What Mironault has done, moves not my hate;
But what he may, my fears. By her, a Kingdom, Sir;
And, with her self, a World 
Falls in my arms. How slow you are to crown
Me and your self with happinesse?
You can love neither, and deny.



But are you sure he comes?



I am certainly inform'd so.



Yet consider, son, how will the King resent,
That whilst he's paying his duty to the Princesse,
He should be there surprised?



That is your part for to prevent, Sir,
Telling the King, (such minds are ever jealous)
That his designes were to surprise the Princesse.
'Twill appear service then, and may destroy
My Rival's interest, if not advance my own.
Those, Sir, that traffick in these seas,
Fraught not their Bark with fear•:
Besides, there needs none now.



Yet think again, though, as you are my son,
I can deny you little; and 'tis more just
You should, deny your self, and not obey
These hasty passions. He ne're injur'd you;
Or if he had, there were a nobler way
For your reven•e than this. You are angry
That the world's pleased with him, and that he may
Enjoy a bliss you wish for; or, at least,
Because he wishes it as well as you;
A Quarrell which Mankind must lay aside,
Or all be Murtherers.



You told me, I did obey my passions,
To those you give your reasons then:
As much you may expect from them,
As if you told the winds they blew. too hard.
Think of the Cause, then judge of the Effect.
'Tis Love Love for the Princesse too,
For whose fair sake, Who'd not attempt
The angry billows swell'd with horrid storms,
The Sea-gods Pyramids, when every wave
Bears too, like those, within its womb a grave,
Or dangers yet unheard of? Determine, Sir,


For I resolve to act; and let the story then
Come to his unprepared ears.



Well, that I may proserve you
From some more unadvised course, (if more can be)
I'le do it; but take heed
Of letting violence be offer'd to him:
Preserve thy self free from so foul a crime.
Love's way lies not through blood. Consider too
What we now go to act; nor blush
To think thou didst do ill, or that 'twill throw
Aspersions on thy judgment, to dislike
The folly thou hadst dotingly embrac'd.
Hee's wise that sees his error at the last,
Who weighs all these in perfect scales,
Shame of his crime, and not his wit, prevails.
Farewell, I leave you to your thoughts.
 I'le on my way to night.
Heaven direct and prosper you.




How nice his conscience was now to my businesse.
And thou, great god of Love, that rul'st my heart,
Attempt but Fortune with as kind a Dart;
That whilst I reach at what can scarcely be,
Fortune as madly too may dote on me.
 Now all things but designe
Leave me and yet it looks but odly,
To put off all this honesty at once,
And to have none about me.
Or was it ever mine? sure I borrow'd it,
And 'tis a thing that's taken up on trust;


I owe the world so much; I'le think on't
When I can pay it. Lycespes, welcome,
Enter Lycespes.

I was resolved just now to seek you.



You would have found me still prepar'd to serve you.



You are my noble friend, nor will I say,
That I shall try it now; this onely can
Preserve it. But words are wasters of our time,
And robs us still of action. As fast then as you can
Get all our friends in readinesse, as many
As possibly you can, well arm'd and mounted.
Return with all the speed your Love can make.
As we go you shall know all,
The rest must live in ignorance.
What Power now to invoke I hardly know,
Yet every god has felt what Love can do.









COme, the Princesse is hard at hand:
And if we haste not, she may overtake us.
To night too, we must lodge the Deer.



We need not care for that; this Forrest
Is so well stor'd, that Game's in every Thicket.
It causes the Princesse constant progresse


Into these parts But who are these?





'Tis the brave Mironault.










No, my Lord, he is almost in sight.




I thank you 
 Whither does Love thus hurry me?
A Tyrant that denies the smallest hopes,
Where he gives largest wishes!
The greatest Beauties are like greatest Wealths,
Subjects for all mens wishes, not their hopes.
Fears share with Love the Empire of the heart,
Rendring alike the Lover and the Coward.
Danger's the awfull Mistresse of the one,
Who fears to tempt her, lest he should endure
That fate too quickly, which he knowes is sure.
So, whilst the other's Mistress too is ignorant,
Onely more slow, the pining Lover dies,
And that sure fate but hastes, if she denies.



Dear Sir, let not grief thus torment you.
You should have there a nobler Guest, your Reason;
And were that there, there hardly could be room
For such disorders. Passions are like Thieves,
That watch to enter undefended places,
And rob you too of all that put's a difference
Between Wild-beasts and Man. Yet, mistake not;
Your grief, if not dispair, is the fond passion
I speak against, and not the love they spring from:
That were her injury, to whom alone


All is due, as Rivers to the Ocean.
Yet Nature has decreed, that she must love:
Believe your worth and your devotion then
As great as any 





'Tis easier far to counsell than to act;
And every one's provided with the wisdom,
That has not interest in the misfortune.
And those that in Feavors, though 'tis their ruine,
Wish Rivers of drink; the standers by,
That then advise, and, may be, wonder at them,
Would, in the same disease, do just so too.



You know not, Sir, but this great goddesse
May be a little mercifull: by this hand,
If she be not, I'le be revenged,
On half the Sex at least, by proving rigorous
To those poor Wenches I have prated to;
That's every one almost that e're I saw Then for∣sooth
Will the poor creatures wish their amorous heads
Fill'd with Romances, pine, and die,
With Willow-garlands under Myrtle-shades:
And grief for them will kill the Mothers too.
Your Princesse shall not have many Female Subjects.



I thank thee, good Pysander, for attempting
To mix thy mirth with my opposing griefs.
But they are contraries, and cannot meet in one.
 but let it perish withme I must again
Desire your secresies.







Pardon me, Hyppasus 



I know it's needlesse to repeat
A wish of mine to either of you:
But what men's thoughts are full with, issue forth,
With too much haste and freedom.



Will you take my advice, Sir?



Nay pray, Sir, hear him.



Come, what is't, Pysander?




Wholsom extreamly! For the kind consti∣tution
Of a decaying Lover; this is the short Receipt.
In the first place, make your self very drunck.
Nay, nay, you need not wonder; by divine Bacchus,

'Tis a rare expression of passion to court disorderly,
To make a meer Chaos of one's self, and then give her▪
The honor of Creating you; then, besides,
All truth and all good nature will appear.
If this be not the way to be consider'd, I'l be judg'd 



How do you like it, Sir?



There's kindnesse in't to me, I know, Hyppa∣sus;

And were I capable of mirth, it might produce it.
But Grief and Love are throng'd together,
And have scarce room enough.



Have either Joy or Grief, wee'l share with you;
Nor was't our fears of having part
That made us wish you none; we value you
And our own lives at the same rate:
We wish them free from all misfortunes,
Yet share all willingly rather than part.
But we must alter now that shew of trouble
Which we have given our selves; for the Princesse


Must needs be neer.





I had forgot the subject of my thoughts,
How greedily I wish, yet fear to see her!
Like some poor Votary, whose holy thoughts
Sets off so much, the joyes of Paradise,
That it employes as many fears as wishes.
 Hark she comes! You Powers above,
Lend Love and Fortune now their eyes,
To help, or see at least, their sacrifice.



You 're well met, my Lord,
Was it a chance,
Or your designe that brought you?




'Tis all I have about me of ambition,
And of large wishes, that I may often
Have leave thus to present my service.



Your service, Sir, has been so much conside∣rable,
That I should be alone guilty of folly,
Did I not valew it at such a rate,
As the whole World have sett upon it.



If I had such a power, to oblige
As much, as you are pleas'd to say I have;
The World's applause, could not so much reward
My services, as your receiving of them.



My interest, next to my Father's,
In this obliged Nation by your valour,
Has made it gratitude ever for me,
To avow that and more.



I have then much of my best wishes crown'd,
Yet should you know all that my heart conceals,


Though it be much like this, you'd be displeas'd
With what you have pretended to allow.



I cannot find this guilt about me, and can lesse guesse.
How you should have a thought that should displease me.
You cannot but oblige, and I as hardly
Can tell what's injury, if you should do it.



This is a kindnesse, still admired Princesse,
That I must never ask the meaning of;
But to my flatter'd fancy, so interpret
As you would never do: yet 'tis unjust,
That I should use, the least kind word from you,
With an advantage to my selfe.



Sure, I may give you leave to do it,
For such a confidence I justly have
Of your great vertues, that you ever
Pursue your own advantages with others.



'Tis true, to the undeserving World,
I can perform all this, only to you
I am unjust, that never wish
A good to you, when I desire most.



I hardly understand you: if I do,
The world is more oblig'd to you than I.



Such a strange Character, my fate
Has thrown upon me, yet my selfe,
And all that World, which seems so much
Beholding to me more than you,
Are as much lesse in my esteem,
As are the sands unto the mingled jewells,
The Negro brings up from the Deep together.



Is there a possibil•y to know,
Your meaning then?



You should, if I were sure you would for∣give it,
Yet thus much take in guesses. Could Shades be sen∣sible,
And wish the embraces of the Sun, were not that Lamp,
Injur'd by that which lov'd it, could rude beasts
Be passionate for Empire, and not injure
The Throne because they lov'd it. 'Tis I
That am more dark then all those shades,
You brighter then that Sun; 'Tis I
That am that Beast rob'd of all reason.
And you above all Empires; I have acknowledg'd
My unsuspected guilt, because t'was so,
And though I cannot leave my Love,
I may my Life. 



You have done more than given me leave to guesse,
And since I have my selfe been guilty too,
In giving you the occasion I shall forbear
Such a displeasure as is due, and let you know.
T'was easie too for me to erre, that could so little
Imagine you to be so guilty: I shall adde
Only thus much, that as you valew
My presence or esteem, repeat no more
Any thing of this nature Come let's on:




So Merchants for a tempting ven∣ture
Bankrupt themselves; yet what wealth had I
Before I knew my poverty from her?


'Tis nothing I have lost, the difference is,
That I have something now I wish to lose,



She is not, Sir, a greater enemy,
To your content, than you are to your selfe:
'Tis you enlarge her frowns by fancied fears,



Those that are free from danger, my Hyp∣pasus.

May look and wonder at another's fears,
That is environd with it: 'tis Concern
That is the excuse for Passion; were you my Rivall,
The Counsell would be juster if you gave it,
 Come we must not stay behind, 
Ther's nothing but a Lover pleas'd with sufferings.
All other rigors of this World,
Our wishes and endeavours still oppose,
The Prisoner hates his bolts, whilst he remains
Pleas'd not so much with sreedom as his chains.









TRust me a little, Fortune, with my self,
I do not ask thy aide grow big my hopes,
And swell unto a Throne,
To Crown my Love, and my Ambition on;
From thence I'le view the thing cal'd Honesty,


And grieve 'tis so contemn'd, and ought to be.
 Man is like pliant Wax,
That yields unto a fair Impression,
Though sent not from the noblest Metall:
And, in this world, it bears an equall show
To seem but onely honest, or be so.
And when the Crown's once gain'd, there needs no fears:
Crimes change their natures then, or Men change theirs.
 Dye Scruples in my thoughts,
And let my mind be a preposterous grave,
That bore you first, to bury you again:
 and your base issue Fear 
Dye too, when Beauty and a Crown's so near.

 Lycespes welcome; what news?





All as you would have it, Sir:
The Troop is march'd, and stays you in the VVood,
Between this and the Castle.




For Time's a busie Offerer of our Interests
To every check of Fortune.



VVe make some threescore Horse,
VVhich will be three Divisions; one for each Port.



Let Martianus command the last.
As we go, I'le give you perfect Orders.
I wish they had some means to cherish a Resistance,
That he may help to his own ruine;
He must not live to plead his innocence.
But Time, that never will be staid,
Calls us to act what we have scarcely waigh'd.









YOu're welcome now, my Lord, and I desire
No clowd may dwell on any brow;
Let no such prejudice happen amidst our sports.



If you be not obey'd, admired Princesse,
Where you command, it is extreamly strange;
And yet, I fear, 'tis possible.



As possible it is I may suspect my power.
But, my Lo•d, I had forgot to put you in remem∣brance
Of perfec•〈◊〉 storie you began,
As you 〈…〉 it, of unhappy Lovers.




Was taken by Phylanter, whose great valour,
Shewn in that day, deserv'd all Prisoners:
To whom he nobly offer'd Liberty,
Without a Ransome, or Acknowledgment
Unlesse to you. Before she thank't him,
She made enquiry for the Prince, my Prisoner;
As if she knew not how to use
Freedom nor life without him; and by reason
That he was full of wounds, Phylanter

Waited upon her to my Tent; at the first sight
Of him she so much lov'd, cover'd with wounds,
She stood amaz'd, perhaps too wish'd her self


What she appear'd, but a dead Statue.
At the same time he rais'd his feeble eyes,
Which seem'd to take unkindly her delay.
At that she came, and kneeling by him,
Made such expressions of unfeigued grief,
That though we understood not what she said,
Yet that was plain enough. He now grew speechless,
(And she almost) yet still with signes,
That seem'd expressions of more trouble.
For leaving her then all the world
Within her arms, he died; she but stayed
To be assur'd that he was dead. Then with a haste,
That shew'd a willingnesse to follow him,
She drew a Viall from her bosom,
And drank it off, before that we could hinder her;
Whose violence, on an enfeebled heart
By so much grief, with unbelieved haste,
Wrought Execution.



Poor Princesse! 'twas her hard fate to love;
She had been else no more concern'd,
Than those that now survive.



And she perhaps as unconcern'd to dye.
Nothing but a deserving Love
Could have taught her a way so glorious
To end all cares. She now enjoys him too,
Or else insensible that e're she lost him.



Did that young Prince command that day the Army?



Yes, and, as we learnt, he was the Heir
To the Tartarian Empire.



'Tis nothing but a Prince
Could have been so unhappy to lose at once
His Love, his Life, his Empire.












Let not the Princesse see it:
The Castle is surrounded by a Troop of Souldiers,
Commanded by Phylanter; I fear you are their aim.







You may guesse the causes, Jealousie and Baseness.
Think, or you'r lost.



Ha 'tis very happy.



I don't understand that.



I'le presse them nobly: Are they many?



They are divided, as we guesse. The gates are yet kept shut.



I'le go view, and ins•antly return.




The Devill on the mischief! if their aim
Be towards me, it must be for my life.
A Parly cannot save me, I am resolv'd
To sell it.



Upon my life, Madam, there's some disorder.
View but the eyes of Mironault.




My Lord, why are you mov'd?







Pray, Sir, let me entreat of you the cause.



Nothing that ought to give you trouble, Madam,
There's something that requires
The presence of my Lord without.



If there be any that would speak with him,
They shall be here dispatcht.



That cannot be, Madam.




There's something I can guesse at (if I be not de∣ceiv'd)
That does assure me, I may command you.
What business breeds this alteration?



I dare not disobey you;
The Castle is surrounded by Phylanter

With Troops of Soldiers; and, as we guesse,
My life's their aim.



The Castle surrounded! and your life their aim?
It is impossible: they dare not think it.
I will go see their rudenesse.



Not for the world, they know that you are here:
And their intents they'l act unto their power.



Is there a better way?



Yes any, rather than dye tamely,



For heaven's sake, Sir, resolve: Phy∣lanter's now,
Enter Pysan∣der.

Forcing the gates, being denied entrance
For all his Souldiers, who loudly now
Call you, A Traitor. Upon one side
Which I'le conduct you to, it is most probable
You may escape .







May I believe, (fair wonder of your Sex)
That though your cruelty designes my fate,
Yet you're displeas'd, that these should be
The Executioners? I shall then dare


To oppose all their furies, that my Life
May be Love's sacrifice alone; forgive me too,
If I dare own that Love, you frown upon.
You need not scruple to grant this ,
To any that must aske no more.
And may that peace, you give my dying thoughts,
For ever live with yours .



Pray say no more, think of your safety,



See, she weeps .
With pitty ever dwells forgivenesse too,
My wishes then are crown'd, and I can have
No greater, unlesse that it were possible,
I might hope more and live.





So much confusion mingles with my thoughts,
I know not what to say; and yet I wish
That you might live, and cannot be displeas'd,
Though hope should be the cause.



So Saylers in a sinking vessell,
May see a calm begin . This treacherous world,
Never wants mischiefs to prevent
The greatest blessings that are near-approaching,
To crown man's greedy wishes. 
But I mistake, to doubt that Life
Which you have given leave I should enjoy.
Who only have the power of it. This shall witnesse,

How much I covet to preserve,
What you wish safety to; nor is it possible,
That I should unsuccessfull prove,


That have no other use for life but love;




The gods protect and guide you, O Phylena,

What's to be done?



Collect your self, dear Madam, all may be well,
Let's to a window, that o're-looks that side,
Where they intended to break forth.



I dare not see him fall.



Fear not Madam, Heaven will preserve.
So fair a Life, that has your prayers too.



Hark, they are ingag'd, lets see if it be possible,
A noise of fighting.
To give him more assistance than our wishes.










STay hasty drops, not to preserve
The life that does pursue you.
But the blest shrine, where Mirramente dwells,
See, 'tis not my wishes stayes the purple current:
Man's still most near to dye, when he would live,
And live when he would dye; calamity,
And, the more dangerous extream, prosperity
Commits this violence upon mens wishes.
Yet since the gods denied for either cause
To destroy life, or to protect;


In stead of Choice, we should oppose Neglect.
Hark, the noise increases still.

 sure they are lost 
They fought it nobly, though, if my ears
Deceive me not, I hear some comming.
Enter Hyp∣pasus and Pysander.

Ha Hyppasus and Pysander!

Then I am happy in spight of all mis∣fortunes.



Dear Sir, you cut your way so nobly,
We should have reach'd you sooner else.



And so we had Sir, but two or three good∣fellows
Still s•aid us upon conference 



Well, here's no staying, we must forward;
But whither, Heaven knows; 'twas an unworthy action.



For the honorable part of the story,
Wee'l, if you please, comment upon it hereafter.
In the mean time, 'tis more needfull to observe
What a condition we are in to help one another.

Hyppasus would make dainty whistles,
My bones are already rattles:
The best house of receipt I know would be an Hos∣pitall.
A noise again On, good Sir.



The most by-ways must guide us.



Heaven direct us 



O what a speech could I now make
Of this frail world. But however,
I'le not stay now to do it.









HE cannot sure escape.



Rather believe he must, there is a better fate
Reserv'd for so much worth. Our hopes are now
The policy as well as justice of our hearts.
You know we did discern, how o're the plain
Some hasted single, and Pylander said, they were divided.
At first you saw how fast he made his way,
Triumph and Danger waiting on his Sword.
The villains too, like dull opposing clowds,
Gave way to the fair Sun; And then Phylanter

Was on the other side.



Alas, Phylena, Fears are so powerfull,
That in concerned breasts they govern all.



It is our follies that enthrones them so;
And to just wishes hopes are much more due:
Use them, dear Madam 



I need not blush, Phylena, to confesse,
(And yet I shall, whilst I am doing it)
That I have more concern for him
Than others have. VVhen you know this,
You will not judge your counsell then
So easie to be followed 



Pardon me, Madam, if I confesse,
That I believ'd as much when I advis'd you.


I have had many reasons for such thoughts
From yours, though greater from his vertues.



O Phylena, advise me how to do, not how to grieve.
I see I must be forc'd to a hard exigent,
To let him perish, or in his relief
To appear too concern'd, though not too just.



Your reason, Madam, will not have leave
To decide that; 'tis Love will be the judge
Of all his dangers. But now, Madam,
VVhat is the next thing we must act?
Or must we suffer too?



Nay, Heaven knows; I sent one to enquire.
Now what's the matter?





They say, Madam, they came for Mironault,

Who had designes upon your Highnesse.



And have they taken him?



No; but we hope they will.
He has left abundance hurt and dead.



Go, be gone you fool; you are all suspitious rascalls,
Fain would be thought State-wise.







Be gone, you hoping Coxcomb.
There's something more in this, Phylena.




I cannot guesse, unlesse it be Phylanter's jea∣lousie,
Urg'd by your constant favours unto Mironault.




Its possible. Hark, a noise; we shall be more inform'd.







Now by the gods your lives shall pay for all.


You dogs and Cowards 
 Madam, I humbly crave your pardon,
My passion makes me hasly, when your Cause
Gives the just anger.







Excellent Princesse, Yours; for this foul man
That seem'd to pay his duty to you,
Bore in his breast a traiterous designe
Here to surprise you; which I hearing of,
Straight hasted to prevent it, though my fate
Was too unhappy in the losse of him.











Dost, thou not blush, or blush for me at least,
That I have let thee injure Truth thus long▪
And wrong'd an innocence, which never dwelt
Within thy infant breast? Stay not to reply,
But leave me with your tumults.




Then I am lost; my last stroak now I'le strike,
And strike it bravely too Despair,
Thou ha's the noblest issues of all ill,
Which frailty brings us to, for to be worse
We fear not, and who cannot lofe
Is ever a franck Gamester.
Nor will I fall alone, should he enjoy her,
I should repining dye. Envie's the vice
That never leaves us till we fall from that,
The best ompanion of a hastie fate:
I'le cherish it as others would a Vertue.
He that declines himself 


 when Chance or Fortune has declin'd him first,
He learns of those mean helpers to do worst.






Enter King, and Albertus.



IT was this day, Sir, that he intended the sur∣prise;
And, notice given my son, with such few men
As he could get in readinesse, he hasted thither.



'Tis well; but take heed there be no foul play in't.
For Mironault has ever appear'd
A subject fit to ruine mean suspitions.



Love, Sir, can alter all; none more than I
Did hear (and wonder, with a pittying thought)
This error of his hopefull Youth; but when I think
He is a Man, and Youth dwells in his veins,
That still pr•pares for Beauty and Ambition,
The easie heart. Then look upon the Princesse,
And see in her the pain and pride of Nature,
Her fresh unsullied beauty, that would tempt
The gods to gaze and love; I could almost forgive 
 but must believe.







To add unto the power of Love, and alf those joyes
Her heavenly beauty brings a Kingdom too:
Crowns the ambition of his high-fed youth,
That makes all dangers lesse, from whose high top
They see it lessen'd in the common vale, and onely fit
To tame the spirits of the meaner minds.
 he that dares do,
Will act what his ambition tempts him to.



I know not; I would see just to all, and would be safe;
And Injuries are as unpleasing to me as Injustice,
I would not bear the one, or act the other.
When malice spreads a rancour in the breast,
That needs a policy to bear it forth,
The minds of Kings most think to fit with jealousie,
As ever apt for that; believing still,
That all such fears dwells with their height of glory.
Take heed, my Lord, that this so loose opinion
Leads not your tongue, and casts that brand on me.
I believe well of all. On farther proof
I shall think best of you.



Would I were well off.

We have not yet (Great Sir) so little left
Of kindness to our selves, to play with Thunder;
Nor yet so mean 
A thought of you, to let you live in danger.
Heaven knows all the ambition that now rules our thoughts;


And all we hope for that should crown our wishes,
Is to appear loyall to you, we are as free,
(Whilst you are so from danger), as a young Lamb
From hate or malice.



Nay my Lord, you do mistake, if you be∣lieve
You suffer in my thoughts, I am prepar'd
Still to reward your care, equally so
To punish or preserve his crime, or innocence.
When Kings do fall from this, and let each wind
Conduct them with its giddinesse;
Their Kingdoms at the last, must suffer ship-wrack.
Perhaps your innocence, may once as well
Suffer unheard, from some malitious tongue:
I never yet harbour'd an ill opinion,
Rais'd from suspition, or a meaner thought
From others envy, nor yet forget
To cherish those, whose loyalties are greatest.
Justice is still impartiall, and all Kings,
Should only hold her scales: he that strives
To weigh down one with power, is unjust
To that Great King, that put him first in trust;








But my Lord; we give you thanks now for your early care,
We would have none discourag'd, to be loyall,
'Tis that which will adorn you here,
And help you to Eternity hereafter,
Whilst men are just, pleasing rewards will live
Within their breasts; greater then I can give.





 I would his honesty were too,
That sits upon him like so fit a garment,
The workman's paid, to have the credit of it.
Hee'l help the gods to many cu••omers.
How now!








From whence comest thou, Ha, 
What newes? my mind mis-gives. 







Why, what's the newes?



But ill, when that your son
Had round beset the Castle, and all thought sure,
The gallant Mironault, in his fearlesse mind
Weighing the bonds of death, and of an enemy,
In perfect scales; the first appear'd the lightest,
And through one Port, bravely with his two friends,
Issued like Lightning which foretells a Clap,
And Thunder follow'd too: whilst in despight
Of their resistance, through their lives
He forc'd his way and safety. 







Yes, but they are still pursuing; the Princesse too,
When that your son appear'd, as if her eyes
Had borrow'd, rage from the afrighting danger,
That Mironault was in; upon her brow
Inthron'd it with revenge, and so with threats,
Left him unto his fears, who by me
Desires you to retire straight from Court,
Whither the Princesse now directs her haste,


And march with all your forces; no other way
Is left to make Conditions. In the mean time,
He's still pursuing Mironault.








Necessity has left no other means:
Without this, he bids me tell you,
You may dye tamely.



Well, I must go; it is the fate of guilty men,
That such should seek at safety through more crimes.
Men are unhappy when they know not how
To value Peace without its losse;
And from the want learn how to use,
What they could so ill manage when enjoy'd.
Ambition gives this blindnesse, yet permits
The eyes to gaze upon her tempting baits;
But in attempting, not what dangers are,
They see the Throne, and not the blazing Star.
Thus foolish his ungovern'd youth
Has made us both alike,
Who, rather than to share a common good,
Ventur'd through danger at uncertain glory:
Nor could my power or prayers perswade him from it.
With such a grief the Ruler of the day
Shook his illustrious tresses, when he heard
The ambitious Phaeton make his bold Request,
 who did prefer 
Before the counsell of the god himself,
The long'd-for glories of his glittering Throne.
Yet Phoebus mourn'd, the bonds of Nature tye
Faster then our own good or honesty.









THat I had wings, Phylena; this revenge
Justice it self will follow.



Pray heaven, Madam, no designer
Has been before us.



It is my fear.




You may be confident of your father's temper,
Which does dispence Justice with deliberation
Besides your interest.



Would we could learn what were become of him.
They still pursue him, sure; and heaven preserve
His noble life from an untimely fate.
How the State-rascalls too were pleased
VVith the suspition of a trecherous danger;
And grew as busie as a new wak't Fly,
At the first news of Summer.



There is a basenesse runs through all their veins,
And ranckles in their bloods, which to their children
Descends; a loath'd Inheritance.



But who are these?




A very handsom person.



Extreamly fair, I swear; she bends this way.





Pardon the rude griefs of a distressed Maid,


That throws her at your feet; for your clear eyes
(VVhich sends a comfort upon pleased beholders)
To see and pitty; you, that nature gave
Perfections above all; 'tis you alone
VVe must believe excells in goodnesse too.
Nothing that's ill can have so fair a dwelling.
You shall have still a Virgin's prayer,
That yours may ne're successlesse fly
To those above, that those fair blossoms
Never have cares for to disturb their calmnesse,
Or force a wrincle on those snowy plains;
But may the beauty of a peace within,
Preserve and equall those your outward lustres.



Rise, pretty Maid, you should have ask'd and tri'd,
VVhether at first I had been worth these prayers.
She must be very good that does deserve 'em▪
See, Phylena, flowers, I swear,
she rises weeping
Receive not so much sweetnesse from fresh drops,
As she from those. Her grief adds to her sweetnesse.
VVhat is it, gentle Maid, you would desire?
Promise your self, if I can help you in't.



The gods reward you. Let me but blush,
And I will say, the act may too; he is too near
That I should tell you more. And yet, me-thinks,
He does deserve as much as I can say;
And his cause named to my poor heart,
Seems eloquence enough to move a pitty.
Pardon my disturbed passions.



Nay, fairest Maid 
You injure me and your own hopes together,
To keep me in suspence: I would as willingly
Yield you my aid, as you could haste to ask it,
For the ble•• subject of your fair opinion.



I do not doubt your goodnesse; pardon the throng
Of all my tedious griefs. Know then,
You best of Princesses, for sure his name
Has reach'd your ears, the unhappy Mironault,

That much deserv'd to live, is like to fall
By bloody and unworthy hands.



O Phylena! I'me lost.

In that beauty is all my comfort buried.



Madam, what do you mean?
Madam, for heaven's sake; why, Madam?



I prethee let me go, thou art too cruell.
I shall enjoy peace undisturb'd hereafter.



But hear her out, and do but search the truth,
Then I will let you die. I would not for the world
Any should guesse the cause.







Why, if they do, they cann't condemn the grief.



O Phylena, when Love has entred in the out∣ward Forts,
Yet there is still a small reserve of Reason,
Which Love laughs at, rather than thinks it worth
His rage or storming; for he knows it must
Perish and starve, when the relief
Of all the nobler Faculties are kept out


By the insulting Conqueror, who contemns
All the attempts I fain would make against him.



I see I am decreed to all misfortunes,
she speaks as no minded.
That I should now disturb you too, who, heaven knows,
I willingly would please. Why do you turn
Away your head? How often have I heard
His prayers sent to heaven for your joys,
That now denies to look upon his woes?
I'le kneel again, for in such a cause
It were impiety to rise successelesse.
Nothing but Seas and Winds are deaf to prayers,
And Beasts to mercy; who would expect
A hidden form in undisturbed skies?
Or in that clearer breast a cruelty?
If you deny, I'le grow a fixed Monument,
Still to upbraid your rigour.



O Phylena, why do you let me languish?
In her beauty dwells an undoing lustre.



What mean you, Madam? can you believe
The world can shew a subject for your jealousie?



I see I grow a trouble, I durst have sworn
You had been more charitable. How often have I heard
The now unpittied Mironault affirm,
You were the treasure of this world's perfections;
And wondred any thing but your fair self
Should know what joys were. Perhaps you too
Believe as much, or else you could not think


All his unpittied miscries are just. Had Nature
Given you a Brother, and your early loves
Blest undisturb'd from Nature's fruitfull Cradle,
You would have begg'd as now 
His hopelesse sister does.
But sure I should have pittied more.
And yet perhaps our interests makes us partiall:
Yes I could wish I had your power to try.







Forgive me, gentle Maid; it was the power
Of thy told griefs that seiz'd my faculties,
And left me able to do nought but grieve.
Forgive the time I lost to share with thee:
You may forgive the injuries of kindnesse.
And though my self were witnesse to the action
Thy griefs made it a new afflicting story.
Each storm renews in Merchants minds
The story of the shipwrack. Nor do I blush
To avow this, since I must not lose
The justnesse of my breast, that does believe
His innocence above suspition.



May heaven inspire you to wish well,
And grant your wishes too, you might have then,
Perhaps, a joy as great as he would have,
Did he but know you pitty him.



In the performance then of what I say,
He will have more; which I so much wish him
That you shall witnesse all pursued with haste.
Nor shall you be a stranger longer to me.
Yet I shall blush, although I give you leave


To see the partiality: but more time
Now spent in grass or leaves, would be his injury.
And we may ruine, what we would relieve,
Should we without attempting succour grieve.









WOuld I were a Dog, and could lick my self whole.
I shall be as fly-blown, as a ruine cheese,
How i'st Hyppasus!




But scurvy, would we might rest.




'Tis an unhappinesse, that I should bring
You into these misfortunes, you have deserved
Better of me, and yet you may forgive me,
I would have shared as much with you.



We would not make such an excuse then, Sir.



You chide me nobly, I find, I need some rest.
And yet by all those powers, that caused these mis∣chiefs,
My life shall end them, e're I'le be his prisoner.



Nay, wee'l all dye; I hope 'tis no offence
To talk of saving our sweet lives;


In order to that, this next fair house
Must be our Garrison, 'tis ten to one,
But there we find some three or four brown loaves,
To victuall us for a day; perhaps a sample
Of good seed-Corn, lies in the parlour Cubbard;
We shall eat moderately, come we must advance
And storm it.



You have no other way Sir, we are so weak,
There is no refuge else, and we are still
Hotly pursued, if they intend our mischiefs,
VVe may hold out against that petty number▪
If they raise more, we too shall have relief
By the Princesse, or your friends; if not,
VVe may make some Conditions. 



A wretched shift, and yet it may preserve us,
But let us use it nobly: Heaven guide us.



I'le advance, and knock: Within there▪
Ho!

He struck so hard, the bason broke, 
Enter Peter.
Ho! what a Tarquin's here,



VVho have we here?



Two or three strangers that have lost their way.



And you would be directed.



Pox on your nimble Charity;

We have been sett upon by thieves, and hurt,
And must desire some small refreshment.



Why, this 'tis; The age is grown so perfect now,
That all fall's in the way of Begging,
And by the word Refreshment.



Nay, Sir, none of your moralities on the age,
Help us to the speech of the Master,
Or Mistris of the house, It must be so, Sir;







What the Devil i'st.







Plague on your formall Coxcomb.
Lets see your Lady then,



That's more then shee'l do you.



By this light, but she shall.



Had she sworn so, she had been for-sworn;



Sir, we would willingly be Civill,
Pray let's receive your Ladie's answer,
But no more of yours:



You shall have it. 




This Rogue has bagg pipes in his Lungs.
A meer Land-Remora, we wanted but the plague
To have heard his pedigree;
He had learn't the policy of the old Roman,

To ruine by delayes; we might have fainted
Under his wise Cunc-tator-ship.



'Twas a rare Scene, be sure, Pysenor,

You shall have none of the best drink.



VVhen she comes, you shall be chief,
And we your humble servants.



And I'le be insolent enough: now Sir,
For such a Bird as the Princesse.








Hang it, this love, 'twill make your wounds ranckle.


There's nothing like a merry plaister.
Hark, I hear them rusling,
Enter Caeca, Rui∣never, and Peter.
Mercy on us, what have we here,

December, with the too scurvy months at her heels?
She ha's dig'd up all her ancestors;
And wrap't their winding sheets about her,
I'le advance.



VVhere stands he, Peter▪




Straight on; now must not I proceed
For fear I should discover, she were blind.



VVhither a divell will she march
She goes straight on.

Hippasus, lie down in the way,



And be hanged, put on your serious face,



Save you sweet Reverence.



Are you the Gentleman? Peter, is this he?







Slight, shee'd have her man make affidavit of it,

VVe are those Madam, that would fain obtain
Some pitty in your eyes, why, shee's blind,

Blind, as an old Do-Cunny. 
VVe want a Charity, and we hope
That your grave years, ha's taught you that fair story,



From whence come you?



VVe are Gentlemen, and have been hurrby thieves.
You need not fear to help our hard misfortunes,
Our weak Conditions cannot threaten danger,
You may believe, we would deserve your kindnesse,


And our lives, which if you preserve,
Shall wait upon your beauty.



What a dissembling tongue the rogue has,




We went as long, as we could gain a leave
From weaknesse, as unwilling 
To be a burthen to any, but our fates
Threw us on you, for which we dare not chide them.



This rogue would court a bitch 




Sirrah, I'le fit you. 



A fine well-spoken gentleman.



For if we did, we should be too unjust
For you must needs be good, because the gods
Let you so long live to instruct the world,
 Or else afraid of your blind company 

But at your feet 
We throw our selves and all our miseries,
And cancell fear, whilst we exp•ct to hear
Our doom from your fair lips.











I'st a handsome man?



Yes indeed, as e're I saw.



I feel just such a Qualm, as I had
When I was still falling in love, he has a sweet tongue.
Noble gentleman, you're very welcome;
You shall have all you want, pray come neer:
Indeed, I am much taken with your speech,
'Tis very curteous, once in my youth


I understood these complements,
And have not yet forgot them;
I shall remember them more fresh
If you repeat them.



Why so, I shall be engaged to tell tales






Peter, Go in, get the best chambers ready;
Let them have something presently to eat.
Pray come •n, you'r very welcom.
Your hand, good Sir.



We are your servants. Now do I walk
Like the great Turk, that newly has put out
The eyes of an old kinswoman. Here we shall find
Good Fortune sure, for that whore too is blind.









HOw much unknown is reall happinesse?
And all are cheated with the name of thing?
Or we are all deceiv'd, or else the joy
Grows poor by the enjoyment; to me
A Crown's a glorious misery,
Suspition waits on all our appetites,
And sleep not pleases but affrights.
Kings have hard ways for to preserve a Crown,


To give to others fears, and hide their own.
The way's but narrow between frowns and smiles,
To avoid both Contempt and Tyranny.
For either is a Rock to split upon
This glorious and frail Bark of Majesty;
When-People do not ask, and yet Kings give,
Content and safety with them both may live.
But when they venture to reform the State,
Princes must suffer then
By their own fears, or by their people's hate.
They hide still what they mean in a redresse,
And know ill acts are buried with successe.
Seek peace in storms, and in disorder safety,
 Till in a Chaos they have felt
Constraint and Freedom undistinguisht dwelt.
Their first fond way to reach at Liberty
Is, to assault those they believe too high.
And had the gods not Thunder, sure there are
That would attempt 
 to light a Candle at a Star.
But Kings, like Suns, that at some time must pay
Their lustres in another Sphear, must leave
Stars fitted with influence to direct this night.
 Yet, like the Queen of Night, to know,
That to his beams their lustre they do owe.
O Symathocles, you'r welcom; Did you dispatch
Enter Sy∣mathocles.

What I directed you?



I did, Sir; and the Troops were marching,
But the arrivall of the Princesse prevented.



Is she come, then?



But now arrived, Sir.





You have heard sure of the late accident:
'Tis odd; What think you?



'Tis hard to guesse, Sir, easier far to doubt.
The Princesse must inform us all.



I have suspended too my thoughts in this.
Haste is an ill companion still to Justice.
And whilst we hear at distance things unprov'd,
The story of their lives prevails still most,
That has been fair in Mironault. Yet our frailty
Guides us to unsuspected acts, so may the best of men
Fall to the least suspected crimes; that weaknesse
Crows with our years, and alteration•s still
By Nature nur•.



You have weighed, great Sir,
Things in so just and serious a scale,
That whilst thus evenly you preserve your mind,
You'l need no other Oracle; mean hasty fears
Still tyranny begets, non can deserve
Their safety, that attempt it that way
That poorly tells the world, he fears the reach
Of common hands; none but the Eagles gaze
Upon the Sun, unlesse it shrinck in clowds.
Nor do the common eyes attempt your glories,
Till shrouded in your fears. He's still most safe
That tells the world, He cannot be in danger,
For they'l believe it then, and 'tis most just,
If they will borrow fears, that he should trust.


Justice will then be ripe, when every thought
Takes its slow birth neither from fear nor passion.
And 'twill be fruit worthy a King to bear,
And bless the appetites of them that gather.



You have hit my thoughts; See,
Enter Prin∣cess, Pylora, Followers.

Here comes more Information.
I'le see if she'l begin.
 Rise, you are welcom.




I must not, Sir, till I receive
 more then a common Blessing 
Your Justice is enough to case my fears.
Yet pardon me, if so much of Woman rules me,
To tell you all I suffer'd.







Great Sir, you might believe indeed
I should be undisturb'd, where you procure
Peace from your carefull thoughts. And sure it was
The child of Insolence and high Contempt
That curst attempt the ruden•sse.



It was so, but to the matter.



When at my journey's end I was arrived,
Thither came Mironault in his own language
To pay a duty which he owed your child;
Where being scarcely rested, and resolved
With the next rising Sun to seek our sport,
But word was brought, the Castle was surrounded
By Soldiers, commanded by Phylanter;

Their businesse was for Mironault, w•o they said
Went to surprise me there, who onely came
With two brave friends, and I dare swear with thoughts


As innocent as Infants; when he heard
The Castle was be-set, seriously weighing
Not Justice sought his life but Treachery,
Disdain'd to fall upon so mean a score.
As an ungovern'd Torrent issues forth,
Bearing down all before it, and in the action
Finds its unknown power, when its streams
Are with a stop resisted, o're-whelming
What was believ'd beyond its power before.
So from resistance his disdaining rage
Atchiev'd a victory, which his thoughts
Would ne're have hop'd nor aim'd at; still Philanter's rage
Pursues his noble life. This is enough
Whilst you are just, nor need I to repeat
The injury to me.




Might have a secret message of the intent
Of Mironault, you would be loath I see
To have one testifie as much.



You cannot find one so extreamly bad,
So far from being to himself a friend;
His story in the world has nobler truths,
Than to be fouled by any base accuser.
If all were true, it is your justice sure,
And not their furie, that should punish.



For farther satisfaction of you; Who waits there?
Go call the Lord Albertus hither.




In this petition too, Sir, oyns with me
This Maid, who from one womb
With the unhappy Mironault took her birth:


You will have many knees as he has hearts;
And yet none needs to beg, for you are just:
Yet you must pardon those loves that mix with fears.
We oftner then we need wipe pretious Jewells.
His value makes us foolish.



He is beholding to you 
How now 





The Lord Albertus, Sir, is fled
As soon as he came from your Majesty,
He instantly took Horse.



He was in haste Symathocles 








Gather the Forces in a readinesse
That were to meet my daughter, then wait
For further Orders.








Your pardon, fair Maid, that I seem'd so to forget you;
It onely was my care, you shall have justice
And should have had without an Advocate,
Your beauty though's a great one.



The gods preserve your Majesty, with your years
May peace still grow, that give it unto others,
Till you shall go to have eternall rest.



Thanks, gentle Maid, the rich Arabian Fumes
Are not so sweet to the delighted gods,
As thy calm prayers from thy harmlesse breast.
Come hither, Mirramente, I have not been
At leisure yet to bid thee kindly welcom.



Pardon me, Sir, that I must once again


Trouble your ears, nor think too lightly, Sir,
Of my request, it is the child of gratitude.
I would in person, Sir, relieve
Him, that has suffer'd for my sake,
And in my sight contemn'd.




Symathocles, would you not take it ill
To have a Generall put o're your head?



Not, if it may serve you, Sir.



Look here, Symathocles, this Amazon has begg'd it.



She does the better, Sir, if there be danger
From her fair name we all shall fight in safety.



Well, take your course, on more intelligence
Move as you please.





 How happy I am now to be your Soldier,
Let those be judge that would be sure of victory.
So fair a Cause fought by so fair a Generall,
 Can never be forsaken
By Victory or Fortune 



I thank you, Sir, nor can I think my self
Lesse happy in so brave a Soldier; if you please
For to dispatch before for some intelligence,
Wee'l instantly away.



With all speed, Madam.


Manent Princess & Amione.



Which way to tell you all my heart returns
I know not, the gods in blessings thank you,
Who still assist the innocent and mean,


Because they made them so;



I thank you gentle Maid, from hence my friend,
You cannot cheat my confidence, you'l deserve it,
So does your Brother all my best assistance,
I reckon it my happinesse, to procure
Your joyes and safety; that I may then
Have mine more perfect.



Now all the powers defend, they should not be:
You never sure broke yet an houres repose
With a dis•urbing dream; in that calme harbour,
All thoughts have been secur'd from storm,
May they be ever so. 



Thy brother's cause deserves as much as that.
 A thousand blushes stop me, 

Besides thou mayest be much deceived: the ship-wrack past,
The calmest waters may conceal the fate,
As well as the insulting waves,
Amione weeps.
 Why do•st thou weep. 



To hear, you have been sad, O Madam,

•ardon me, to say an undiscerned power
Ioynes my affliction to your grief;
Forgive me that, I cannot chuse but dare,
To accompany you in any thing.
There's something tells me, that I ought to love you
More then the world does, yet that's very much.



When I first saw thee, dearest maid,
I could have sworn as much,
And yet thou didst not please me then,
Come, I shall disturb thee, 'tis an unkindnesse


Not to be pardon'd, to let thee share my griefs;



Now you afflict me more: Is there a way,
To be a friend and stranger to your breast,
Though 'tis ambition, to be an humble one?
'Tis vertue, not your greatnesse crowns my wishes,
And I shall fear, that you will think me only
A friend to that, or else not worth the other.



I do not doubt thy Love, the story will
Disturb me, when I tell it, perhaps thee,
And yet it must return to me unhelpt.



How do you know? the meanest thing in nature,
May bring an unexpected aid; Gyants that passe,
And lets the obstacles alone, do lesse
Then dwarfs that do remove them: as they are
Shut in your breast, fed with that pretious food,
How can they ever starve? they may at last
Consume your stock of joyes, he does like you,
That would defend, within a fair built Fort,
His enemies against his pressing friends
And patiently destroyed by those he saved,
If you believe me worthy, the gods have then
Finish't their parts; for they decreed us most
To one anothers aid: So to encrease
Our joyes that way, and lessen all our cares,
For still imparted comforts do increase,
And grief divided to a friend grows lesse,
Our natures too are like o'rec•arged springs,
Willing to vent themselves, and so are you,
Had I but as much worth, as you have trouble.



I am not proof against thy perfect kindnesse,


I will keep nothing from thee, but be sure
You quickly understand me, my blushes too
Will tell t•ee half the storie, what dos't guesse?



That you should have no cares 



Can love have any?



What in this world shall ever be so happy?
I hope it is not that 







A thousand times I have heard my brother pray
That day might never be, I wish as he does too.



Your Brother would not have me then?
 How innocent she is! 




He thinks it were unreasonable
That one alone should make the world unhappy.
Weighing their own misfortunes from his joy's
I hope it is not that:



'Tis that I swear. Love has caused all my trouble,
And if thy brother thinks me such a blessing
Why doth not he then wish it?



Alas he dares not welcome such a thought
He onely dares to wish none else should have you;
But who must be so happy?











Wonder no more, I could have told
When I first saw thee that me-thought I lov'd thee
As I would do a sister; yet I was jealous too:
Nay I shall blush, as much as thou canst wonder,
Yet he deserves my Love; sure you did then


Read a confusion in me; and I am still,
Disorderd by my fears;




 Pardon me to say the gods have justly so
Decreed that it should be: for I have heard
Him sit and please himself with stories of you,
Till he has made his griefs too monstrous,
And I thought then too prodigall of comfort,
Yet now I think't was all but due to you;
And though I am turnd of his religion too
And can think nothing superstition in't,
Yet you may spare the sacrifice.




I have some reason to believe he loves me,
He cannot sure dissemble; Wert thou ne're yet in love?







Pray that thou never mayst, or that it ne're
Have fears for it's Companions, night will wear
Disturbing blacknesse and not quiet shades,
The light will be too cheerfull, whilst you fare
Like an impatient Sea-man that would fain
Attain the Port, the gentlest calm
Makes mad, and crossing storms disturbs
But from our own experience thus we raise
Advices that are chid and and scorn'd by Fate
Who oftnest sends what we least wish, and makes
What we most covet most unfortunate:
But now to his relief, for time
Persues his course with an impartiall haste
And my revenge must sit upon his wings.


You Powers above what now is just assist:
Their thoughts were poor, that trifled time and wisht.










TO be still subject to calamities,
We all must bear: yet not esteem it hard
Our frailty sets this odds from higher powers,
And their dis-orders are appeas'd by ours,
It is a hard injunction of the gods
To set our natures and our selves at odds
When they afflict though due unto our crimes,
Yet they give to the nature that repines
Though if we use it well, none but they give
That blessing, that we are displeas'd to live
'Twas life first cousned man, and did entice
By knowledge its fair gift to cheat him twice;
Man was a happy stranger to himself,
When he believ'd his ignorance his wealth;
Did these Extreams our knowledge ne're employ
VVe should have lesse of cares, though less• of joy,
For in the mind, they never gain a height
From their own natures but each others weight;
Thus truly man has either more or lesse,
From what he had, not what he does possesse.


As if the god's would give us nothing here
VVorthy of our affections, but our fear,
For should we fall from happinesse the store
Makes us more wretched of those joy's before.
Such a disease is life we hold so dear,
Health's in the other world, our Physick here;
 O Hypposus what's to be done
Enter Hyp∣pasus.

Fortune has strangely jaded us 



Heaven knows: I am confident we are per∣sued,
The house is strong, had we but any men
VVe might resist their numbers, and by that time
They have supplies, we may have too relief.








Shifting from the old blind Lady, who follows him
As if he were her dog and led her,
And as the devil would hav'it, her reverend blindness
Is at a venter •am in love



We must resolve of some thing, and whats most hard
In ignorance, and without any aid: so may a ship,
With wounds in pieces torn, expect as well
To sail or fight; 
 And yet me thinks there might be made
Some use of this Pysander's fooling.



By the Masse it's true, she has Tenants
That were obliged, without all doubt to assist her
In the holy War; they live here till they dye
Of the infection of old age; see Sir,
Where Pysander comes marching with her maid.





Let's conceal our selves a little, and observe.



Nay, by this light I'le ne're lye for the matter.
If thou hast no faith •hou'lt be damn'd.



Say you so, Sir?



How couldst thou chuse but guesse it? didst thou e're know
A dunghill without a Cock upon't. Meer sympathy
Guides me to love thee, dost thou not find
Some such kind of thing for me?



Indeed I have a grudging towards you.



The devill take up the quarrell.

Nay 'tis grown to that I dream on thee,
Me-thought last night I rode a Flanders Mare,
And every night I dream of a fresh Beast,
And then I think on thee.



What means the Rogue?



Peace, on my life he has some farther pur∣pose.



Lord how she I wells, hold a stick of fire to her
And she'l pisse.



But since I love you so, you must assist me
In what I told you, for I should be loath
Now to be taken from thee; and I know
The rascalls will attempt the house for me.
This can be brought about no other way,
But by report that I should marry
Thy Lady, for then all her Tenants
Will be the willinger to assist me.
But all this while thou shalt be dear Lindabrides,

Thou shalt rule and govern; and for thy comfort
Above pragmaticall Peter; and, by this hand,


If he at all crosse us in this designe,
I'le hang a thousand crackers at his britch,
Then throw him off from some high Tower,
In a high wind, hung between bladders;
And all this for thy love.



And will you still be constant?



As a Bell, still in one Tune:
And that we may be suddain, and I safe
To follow our Amours, perswade thy Lady
And instantly conduct her this way.



I'le take my leave first 





Slid, her lips are lin'd with Cosier's wax,
She kiss'd me in a full Career.
Sure she has hoarded up a store of onyons
In her dry chaps, to butter against winter.
The Devill's troubled but with one Dam, I have two
 And there's a formall Weathercock,
They look which way the wind sits by him,
That from deliberation fetches wisdom;
And when he gapes at bed-time, 'tis a clinch
For my blind Mistresse now, whose chaps are mew'd
Of all their teeth, which yet she hopes again
Will spring like a fell'd Copice, and from the gums
New sprouts shoot up, she's almost deaf,
Would she were dumb too, for her tongue's oblig'd
To supply other organs, and tells us all
Her life, perhaps the History
Of twenty years a time This thing
Must I make love to, with brevity and ease.


I'le go through all the scenes of Courtship with her,
She shall have Serenades on an old Jews-trump,
That was Pirk-abboths, an emblem of antiquity,
And all my little Oaths shall be
By Cupid's Eye and hers, the Devill's in't
If I am then forsworn O how now,
Mironault and Hippasus ap∣pear.
What are you bolted? Come Gen∣tlemen,
What's to be done? Hyppasus, thou wert wont
To be nimble at sudden chances.



How insolent the Rogue is? now he thinks
We know not his design.



Nay, Pysander, we referr'd all to you,
We onely are your poor friends.



Well, a Mathematician would not have breath enough
To tell the kindnesse of my Starrs 



But for this rare fortune 



Why my old vessell is sailing this way,
When she appears, stand close
And you shall hear it.



Come I conceive, and did over-hear
Some of your policy, and believ't
There is no other way to save us now.
If we can get but men, 'tis but throwing
A work up in two places, the other parts
Are strong enough.



That shall be my care too, but when you see
The old Beldam comming, be sure you vanish.



We must be quick, our time has straitned us.
As soon as they can have intelligence
They will be here.



What if we could send away to Court?



I'le rather perish than believe I can
Be worth her care.



VVhy thanks then to Pysander

That believes himself 
VVorthy his own 



VVould her Ladiship were come.
Prethee Pysander let's have no time delay'd
In asking how she does, and what's a clock.



Thou hast reason to be more confident of my wit.
 See where they come 
Enter Caeca and Quinever.

And like the Graces leading one another.
Let's over-hear a little.



Indeed he is a proper Gentleman,
And 'tis great pitty he should suffer.



It is indeed, I would not for my Maiden∣head
It should be in your house.



Nor I by this light.




I think as much; indeed he speaks as well
As any that I knew these six King's Reigns:
VVhere is he, Quinever?




He said he would be hereabouts.



Now Pysander uncouple them.



So I may be hunted, but I'le advance.
 Save your sweet Ladiship 
I took the boldnesse, urged by my love,
To trouble your kind ears with a petition.



You'r very welcome, I shall be glad to hear it;
And though I am old, and people think decay'd,
I can tell how to judge a worthy Gentleman.
Hey ho, in my time I have heard many complements,
And blest was he could gain but a good look.



He shall be damn'd now that does.




The world and I am alter'd.



A Carthusian swear the world is,
 I'le swear for thee.



And yet I have warm blood now in my veins,
And it will beat sometimes: I have heard men say,
That age has vigour lies within.



She'l tell me by and by she can fart fire.




And so indeed 



I must interrupt her; But you forget
To hear what your poor servant asks.



I pray what is't?



First I must beg you, that you'l have the confidence
To believe, I love you; old Lutes
Still sound the sweetest; many a man
Has travailed many miles, and tedious wayes,
To see a lesser monument, and since I love you,
I would preserve my happinesse, sure you ought then
To return equall kindnesse.



By my troth, but justice, and indeed, I will,
I shall not be so cruell to grieve you long
So worthy a kind gentleman; I esteem
A tedious coynesse vice, you put me in mind
Of my old principles, in my Grand-mother's time.



That's according to a new account,


Three hundred years before the world begun.




And as I was saying in her time
Matters were quickly ended, I am still
Of the old fashion.



In short, then, since you see I love you,
I must beg your assistance; for these rogues
That hurt us, as I hear, are now hard by.
Your Tenants, and a few servants would with ease
Defend us from these wanderers, that I may
Enjoy my happinesse with safety. This your Com∣mands
With ease may finish, and I blesse
The fate that brought me hither.



I pray your selfe command them,
You shall have full power, that in time
Must be my husband.



Plague on your nimblenesse, how she mumps, 




When my last husband Sir Percivall died,
I little thought to have had another suiter;
But you men have the power to winn us,
And I can tell you, such a tempting Gentleman.



For ought she knows, a Sign-post
With Friar Bacon's brazen head upon't, 

 If you please Madam, I will attend you,
When your Commands have setled us in safety,
I shall presume to tell you my Love's story.



I shall be glad to hear it, pray lead on,
What you Command, shall be a law. 



  85Manent, Mironault & Hyppasus.


Yet Hyppasus, we breathe; and safety now
Begins to wear an easie shape.



The rogue has work't them finely. 



By Heaven, he is the best composed man,
I e're yet knew, for in the worst extreams,
His cheerfulnesse, and judgment is the same;
We are prepared; if they find us now,

Phylanter's bold to bring them on to action,
Fortune but guide, an equall sword to mine,
And borrow frowns from all the destinies
To hang upon thy then contemned brows.



But I believe, they never will attempt us
But seconded with more, for they will fear
What may proceed from Court.



Never believe, he would attempt this action,
But with some feigned story to my prejudice.



But the Princesse, Sir, seem'd to resent the injury,
She is too noble, meanly to suspect.



Alas, Hyppasus, they before corrupted
His goodnesse that should incline to her,
These flatterers beset the thoughts of Kings,
As an ill enemy besieges Towns,
First poisons the fair springs.



These are the worst of fears, we may as well
Hope, that his judgment scorns unlikely stories.
But let the worst that fortune can prepare
Fall unregarded on us, the least defence
Will help us to the noblest fare.




And when we fall so brave,
The world will find more losse, then we can have.









NAy, you had best teach her to beat a drum,
Do you think to make her now an old blind Amazon.
We shall have the Sheriff to send warrants for u•,
Thus to raise Forces, and not se d•fendo;




Lord, how wise you are good Peter, at least
You would fain s•em so, I can tell, I'me sure,
Where you have all your wisenesse.








All your law, out of the two old leaves
That lye behind the parlour-cupbord;
Piece, they say, of an old Stature book,
Which has been rotting there these twenty years.
And for your other talk, 'tis taken out
Of your old Erra-pater; and you, forscoth,
Must seem to be more wise then all of us.
I'me sure, when you made love to me,
And once were out of these two trodden roades,
You could not speak a word, but just, How do you.


And that repeated over with variety,
Of scurvy tones, nay. 



Why, art thou mad, or dost thou think it fit,
My Lady, should defend all wandring strangers,
And enter into warres? I am resolved
To change my station, they are digging up earth
Before the Gates, I can't passe by,
But I must think of graves, men too brought in,
I think, to fill them.



Hang your sheep's face, I see that now 'tis fear,
That your wise worship with your wonted ease,
Should not at leisure drink your morning draught,
And at the Alehouse for two pots
Hear your selfe praised,
And bribe a man to come to you for counsell
That never had need of any, you have worn your Gloves out
With biting your thumbs ends, to appear wise.
All this put together, got from my Lady's purse,
Thou hast been as chargeable as a Regiment.



Why, Mrs. Quinever, sure you once had
Better opinions of me, though you now
Wash every day your best handkerchief
With yellow starch, and your lac'd quoiff,
Till it now hangs as if the devill
Had srighted you through quicksetts, not a post
But must be beaten for the rotten powder
To make your hair sit well, and all in hopes
That some of these should fall in love with you.
I vas once thought worthy, then I was honest Peter.




Marry come up, what, love that transpa∣rent nose of thine
That gives the Serenades when thou sleepest?
Or thy wide mouth like a dead Lobster's claws,
Or thy starcht ruff like a new Pigeon-house,
Your garters tied above your boots; as if you feard
Your leg so well provided would be gone.



Why I thank you sweet Mistresse Quin•ver go on
And be all mad whiles I lament you sober:
Nay you shall fight by your selves for Peter,

You'le make an excellent ammunition-Girle
Get a bottle to carry hot water in, in time
You may arise to be a Sutler's wife.



I'le have your wise head fitted for all this
Enter Pysan∣der.
And heer comes one shall do it.



O sweet Mistresse Quinever




No fawning now you whelp.



Mrs. Quinever well met, I was seeking you.



I am happy I have found you.



How go matters? we have got some 50. men.



All goes well: but this wise Gentleman
(Whose wit lies in his breeches, for 'tis all
He has to know when he has need)
Is much displeased at our preparations,
And asks me if you mean to make
My Lady a blind drummer



And cannot you convert him?







VVhy thou ingratefull piece of wise formality,
How oft hast thou had warning to be wise?
I have threatned thee thou should'st never go
Without a rime-pind at thy back
Which should be thy own grievous Chronicle.
I told thee too that I would have thee painted
Riding upon an Asse and reading Seneca,

I thought this might have tyed thy tongue.







Nay hear and mark me, if thou dost •r'e again
Seem to be wiser than thou art, and crosse
What now is done, nay if thou dos't not help
And put thy assisting hand to't, thou shalt ride
In a hot day upon a well lined sadle
With soap in thy new grogram-breeches, till it work
Like new tunnd beer, and every day
When thou sitst down to dinner one or other
Shall pull away thy stool, I'le spoil thy gravity,
Or noint thy feet with butter, whilst a dog
Shall lick and tickle thee, and if any comes
Here to oppose us thou shalt seem a stratagem:
For on the walls we'le set thee, like a thing
Stuft up with straw, onely to make them spend
Their shot upon thee, and in thy turn
Thou shalt do duty too, and every night,
Be sure to have alarmes. Speak what you'le do.



I did but utter my opinion: I shall conform.



It's well said, and I forgive you,
But take heed you erre no more.



You need not doubt me.



Come wench, now we breathe in safety,
And thou proud Peter's conquerour.




The Devill go with you; he has conjured me.
Did ever Turk think of so many torments,
And in what order too he marshal'd them?
I am not yet out of a chilling sweat;
Nor shall I get now of enchanted Quinever

One drop of good hot water, God deliver me
From this strange hurly-burly; and yet I dare not fancy
A good strong halter and a handsom beam
I'le go to sleep, for I am now
Afraid of all things.









THe intelligence is certain they are here,
At an old Ladies, and all hurt; we can∣not misse them.



Those that I left preparing now come up
Make us 400. strong, your father too
Follows with more.



We must attempt them (though) before relief
Can possibly arrive from any place,
And if we take him we are sure to make
Our own conditions, the best we can expect:
Our resolutions arm us for the rest.



We are prepared and I believe there's few,
That serve you, question policy or danger.



Ye nobly all oblige me, and for your sakes
I could even wish I never had attempted
What I must scorn now meanly to repent of
But ill intents when they least prosper
Then mu•t be most persued, to reach again
Our first condition,



Nay Sir, I think it were no harm,
To wish us fairly off.



I would we were, but I am arm'd;
To dye I fear not, and yet I would
Fall with some pretty character about me,
At least I'le make the Kingdom joy
It had so brave a spirit, and like Rome glory
(In spight of fame) in Catiline who died
At once men's envie, and her pride,



VVe must loose no time Sir, the night
Conceales us, and as yet perhaps
They have had no intelligence,
The house is neer at hand shall we parly?



'Tis the best way to find their confidence
Nor can it be a prejudice to us; we traffick now
Onely for what we'ave lost: "If we survive
"We'le find at least a nobler way to thrive.










SO that work's now finish'd.
Let all the guns be brought into the Hall,
'Tis to defend the good old Lady
From the rudenesse of Rogues; 'twill be casie work.



Yes, yes, wee'l tickle them.



 I'le sweep 'em with my father's old Fouling-piece.



Bravely resolved; but perhaps.
There may be yet no need on't, however
'Tis wisest to resolve against all dangers.
VVell, my good Lads, be in a readinesse, if any come,
VVee'l ring 'em a peal shall make 'em forswear
Such Holi-daies: they all die rather than wrong
Sir Percivall's widow. Now all unto your places.







Now could I hug my genius, that through all
Has brought me to this harbour; and yet to think
If we should scape, what my engagements are,

Imprimis To marry this old Lady Cow,
And play at Blindman-buff, 'tis as good lying
VVith Bulrushes or penny Faggots; she's mortality
Beyond a Death's head and Memento;

And yet she bridles as if she were but now
To be new-back'd and ridden; I have heard


Of a dead body that has long been so,
And yet retain its form, but when once toucht
Crumbles to dust; for ought I know she may do so too,
And I be hang'd for embracing Mummie.
But certainly I shall touch her gently,
For 'tis a remedy to see her drest
Against all carnall thoughts, beyond bathing
In Rivers in a frosty night.
She follows me, and asks a thousand questions
Among the rest
Enquired what I was making at the gate?
I answered her, a Curtain: then she mumpt,
And ask'd, If 'twere not for her wedding-bed.
She made the truest Hieroglyphick
That ever blind Aegyptian hit upon,
For 'twas of earth, and I most fairly hope
'Twill be her wedding-bed; bar death,
The devill cannot find another Rivall.




Pysander come, we must to action.





As how and how?




Phylanter's here hard by already,
And without doubt knows we are lodg'd.



Why then he'l knock us, or we shall knock him.



It's worth no greater care, my brave Pysan∣der.

Fortune and you have done your parts,
To give us something to employ your valours,
They now shall buy us bravely.



Nay, I'le not sell my self at any rate,
I begin to have a wondrous value


Of this small composure of Pysander, if you mark it
'Tis very lucky to see an old blind Lady
 should fall in love with't,
One that runs her nose against posts.
But come, Sir, since these Lads will never leave us,
Let's in and provide for them, they may have
A better welcome than they dreamt of,
Unlesse Gunpowder lay last under their pillows.



They shall hear us 
In lowder language then they do expect.
The gods but lent us life, and we still pay
Them interest, as casualties and sicknesse;
Death is the Principall, which when we restore,
VVe owe the world and gods no more.




VVhy, its exceeding well; we shall be all
Clean out of debt in t'other world then;
Our Creditors are strangers there, so are they here
To me, I'me sure; and in the other world
If I should want, and thither must,
There's store of faith, and I'le take up on trust.









THis is the house sure it should be
By the description How VVorks thrown up?


All's quiet though; we must be cautious,
There may be else some trick in't.
 Summon the walls 



VVithin there, ho ho 
Sure they lie buried in security.
As confident of power and successe,
As if the Destinies slept with them too,
And wak't at their command.
Let's wake them all and yet 'tis hard
To rouse an innocence to disorder,
'Tis that I fear is their security.





It is as great a crime (when past) to think
Of things ill done, as 'tis unthought to act
The ill before; he that does one first cheats himself,
The other cousins him: now to be nice
Is vain, for us that have been cheated twice.



VVithin there, ho 







No, we live, Phylanter,

Mironault, Hyp∣pasus, Lysander, and others, appear above.

And far less fear that fate than you,
That have so many crimes to sinck your thoughts.
Spare your pains of asking us to yield,
VVee'l sooner find the worst of all extremities;
Danger will lose its nature when you bring it.
 Nay do not stay 
In expectation to hear me ask
VVhy you have thus unworthily thrown off


The name of Honesty: Some may fall
Not worth mens pitty, but their scorn,
And so do you.



You'r very high, so let your actions be,
Your crimes will need it. But I see words
Displease you, you shall have lowder Rhetorick.



Fear not, thy basenesse has taught us to un∣derstand
That language.



You, Lycespes, you Treason-hunter,
How, I wonder, did it happen, we did not meet
Your storming worship at the gate?
Pox on you, you were untrussing a point,
The old fighting loosenesse.



You'r merry still Pysander, and very brisk,
Are you so well already of your inlets.



Hang you, if you bleed as much
As a staid man would let out from a witch
To save himselfe from enchanting,
The Physitians, Pothecaries, and Surgeons
Must stand about thee, like Pensioners;
If Hyppasus and I, can but get a willing curre,
We are lick't whole, a dog's our only Mountebank.



Very well Sir, when I visit you,
I'le bring a spaniell in my hand.



Hang the couple of currs, say I,



Your resolution's heard, I'le urge no more,
But leave you to your fates, only thus much,
By me the Princesse sends this punishment.
The danger now growes bigger sure, 



This is mean Phylanter, and you still trifle honesty,


And I time and honour: let the storm come,
 And he that seems to fear,
Exeunt above.
May he unpittied fall, without a tear.



His Courage still is excellent, great power of love,
That made me give so much to her,
I left none for my selfe. Lycespes draw round the house,
We•'l storm it instantly, dye all you lesser thoughts,
That at a distance tell your formall tales,
Or else come neerer, and wear noble shapes,
The distance makes you mistier, the dice are cast,
Th' event will punish or reward what's past,











IS my Captain here?



Now enter'd, and like your Ladiship.



Very well, leave us then: Come neer good Captain.




Mercy defend me. A dressing, or setting up a Barber's shop,
Here the teeth lye, what's this an old head?


A lecture for the best Anatomist; like a rusty Clock,
Taken a pieces to cleanse all the devices,
Set them together some engineer for me.



Pray sit neer me, Captain,







O Captain, what a hideous noise
Was there ene now of bouncing, pray what i'st?



Only some wandring Raskalls at the gate,
They'l have their errand suddenly.



I would they were gone, truly at the first noise,
I brake one of my pots of Mit•ridate,
VVith Dragon-water, good for the head and sto∣mack.



Was there ever such an old Almanack,

At the end of the year Medicines set down?



Besides the great disturbance from your com∣pany.



Nay, you see when I have freedom
I use into my own advantage,
Visit you before you'r ready 



I shall be ready presently, the time will come
You shall be welcome to me quite undrest.



The Devill of thy young bones

Lockt in thy old Cabinet.



I shall unparrell then faster than now I dress me;
You'l help to pull out pins I'le warrant you.



Rather drive in wedges 

Why you know we men must court,
You would be bashfull else, and it were pitty
To loose that time which should be better spent.



You say true indeed.



Come Madam, pray dresse your self


I'le serve you instead of a better chambermaid
S'death would she were once furnish'd

One may dresse and undresse Long-lane as soon.
VVhat want you now, Madam?



My night-rale, good Captain.



I shall give her a sheet instead on't,
It lies about her like a casting net
'Slid I have given her never a wascoat,
And now will she call for her farthingale,
I must make haste but cannot go without her;
For her wise tenant's now before they fight
VVill see their Land-Lady



My farthingale, good Captain.



I thought so, now is she like an old Camel
VVith that hideous mount on her unfurnisht body.
Mercy how have I set her out! she may make
Good harmony; for shee's composed of different notes
She would yield a man more money to shew
Than an outlandish beast; my sweet Quinever

I have employ'd to stave off formall Peter

From making tenants seem as wise as he.
VVhat want you now, Madam?



My Perriwig, good Captain.



VVhich way to set this on now, is the que∣stion:
'Tis no matter I can't mistake now
More than I have done.



I thank you Captain, I hope you and I
Shall live happily and comfortably together.
I was told, my seventh husband
Should be a wondrous honest and an able man.



That, experience will let you know: I shall tell you
A merry tale towards bed time that will cure
The cough of th'lungs.



And make one dream huge pleasantly
And that's a sign of youth I can assure you.



That and your toothlesse Chap's are main ones.
If surious Medea had thrown thee

Into her age-renuing Kettle, thoud'st have lept out
With a medley of years upon thee.
Hark, a noise! by heaven it increases still, hark




O Captain, a noise!



Nay there's two now in the Devill's name:
It still encreases, come Madam you must down.



'Sdeath, Pysander, they'r falling on
Enter Hyp∣pasus.
The men stand all at gaze
And swear they'le see their Land-Lady,
We are all lost without some help.



Madam, you must needs walk
And encourage your tenants, to send these fools away
'Twill defer our Marriage.



Pray lead and I will follow.



Come Hyppasus, how fares the noble Miro∣nault?




As a brave Ship hemm'd by a raging storm
Resolves to throw the ballance ore,
Lose all and perish carelessly:
But come, we trifle time.



Along then, and for your blind Ladyship
If you had no tongue
You should make signs to your tenants.









COme Lycespes, is the alarme given
To amuse them on t'other side?







What resistance does appear?



As yet all's wrapt in silence.



Where did the messenger say my Father was?



At hand Sir with 5000 men; wer't not best
We should defer the storm till then?



By no means; we will attempt it first,
For by that time they may have relief
Come from the Court, my father's suddain flight
Confirm'd the least suspition, helpt by the Prin∣cesse too.



It could not chuse, you have thrust your self
Into a troubled Ocean.



I know it, and now must sink or else go on,
There is no choice in Crimes but of our Fate,
The affrighting freedom of a wretched state.
We cannot hope ere to return again
Back on our fancies to our first conditions,
What tob'd us of the safety we enjoyd
First made us to contemne it;
'Tis a stayd gamester too, that would give o're
Upon the losing-hand; the most metl'd, or let it be


The maddest one, would stake on all his wealth,
Venter to tire Fortune or himself.
We have bargain'd now, and chopt a Peace for War
'Twere foolish to d•pend on ought but Victorie;
For that will change our acts, or others natures:
The vanquish'd wear the crimes, and all will fear
To judge or question what they too must bear.
This slender glosse I know must startle thee
That has so much of honesty and courage;
And if we fail I'le quarrell with my self
That cousend thee to follow what thou once
Didst love with'honour: fearing to be unjust
To friendship, made thee more unto thy self:
I have used thee as some that have seduced
Young men into bad company, thou hast found
Things much unworthy of thee 



Tis true, dear Sir, I will not face a lye:
Our acts have given me both amaze and trouble,
The last I threw behind me, may the VVorld
Forget the rest, there is a Fate hangs over all
That shews it's force when it resolves to strike
VVhen we can act at once, at once dislike,
And t'is the sad necessity that we must
Persist in crimes again to reach the good
That you intend; this nobly does deserve
My friendship now, and if we fail
 The world may yet believe▪
Our thought's were better, let them chuse to grieve.



Set on then, brave Lycespes, danger not found
VVomen frig tchildren with, and perills met


Uncheat us of our lives, that render'd us
But an unhappy treasurie for our cares,
Made monstrous by our joys, the hopes and fears
That spring from them, onely the stock we spend on.
This cannot add, I know, to thee; and I should blush
If it could ought to me. But 'tis mens pleasure
To undervalue what they think will go,
And they must loose the world's fond nature's so;
And 'tis the bravest scorn ill men can have,
To change this world, as freely for a grave.











NOw the Devill raise a Barricado, I am storm'd too;
I have pepper'd the Rogues on my side,
I must go see how the other fares.



Is he here, Peter?




Straight on, an't like your Ladiship.



Pray stay, sweet Captain; Oh, oh,
All my corn's a-fire, good Captain.
Straight before still, Peter?








By this light, Sir, I'le direct your nose to the wall,



Good Captain, all, all, my corn, oh, oh;
The great Barn's on fire, look how it burns.
Is this your kindnesse? pray, your hand.



Pray take this for interposition.
he laies some∣thing in the way.
It will not do, she'l run her head
Against something or other, and beat her brains out.
 I must place her in here 
VVhat's this, a Corn-house Here Madam.
Give me your hand, rest your self a little,
And I'le be with you presently: and for you, wise Sir,
he places her in the Vault.
Let her alone, til I, like a good Midwife,
Come and deliver her: This, Sir, you had best ob∣serve.




VVhy its very well, I thought at least I might have given her
A hot fire-shovell to have bak'd a cake upon.
Nothing troubles me 
But that the Rats and Mice may play with her nose.
I thought she would be brought to this, Mrs. Quinever

Is employ'd in casting bullets with a face
Like fiery Sol in Leo, if this hurry hold long,
My poor old Lady may wish she had lost
All senses as well as seeing; for god knows
The employment for the rest are miserable.
Hark, a noise, they are at it, much good may't do them;

To run away it is impossible, and from my chamber
I can see all the shooting; it has made me wish a thousand times


I were as blind as my old Lady, I'le to her in the Vault,
I never thought my self too safe, he that did,
Let him leap Towers for Peter.










BRave Hyppasus, how to forgive my self I cannot tell,
For all that you have suffered.



Still on that strain, Sir!
VVe could not serve you thus if we repined,
Or feared to suffer for you; wrong not our honesty
And courage both.



They are too excellent, I swear it were a pleasure
To share in danger with you, were't not a pain
To see you there Gallant Pysander,

You brought us timely aid, and from our sinking fates
Raised us again; but you had quickly done
On t'other side.



O mine were pittifull rascalls,
Yours came to their businesse handsomly.



They did indeed, Phylanter first
Advanc'd before his men, bold in despight
Of all his crimes, and carelesse both alike
Of honesty and danger.



He was the wiser; To what purpose
Should any one be thrifty of, that the world
So little cares for, this trifle Honesty.



Come Pysander, you must get the Soldiers drest,
That have been hurt, we may have more need of them.



Yes, yes, as far as her Smocks will extend in Lint.



I find I need a little dressing too.
 Let's in, and there 
Provide for after-claps of treacherous Fortune.
We must not fear a Frown, or court a Smile;
One may the VVise, t'other the Brave beguile.









HOw far is't to his Quarters now?



A little way, Sir.



Be sure that all the Soldiers march in order,
And on their lives no outrage to the Country.
Let all be done in silence. No Scouts return'd yet?







I am jealous of this Court, the King enclined
But little, suspition could not mingle with his nature,
The Princesse has confirm'd him sure; we act
On the uncertain'st Stage, the strangest parts


That ever yet were play'd, I would the world
VVould take it so. VVe have now stept
Beyond the power of Retreat or Fortune,
The one's too poor for us, and we for t'other.
VVe are like tired Gamesters with ill Cards
VVeary to hold the game, and yet play on
To save if not to win; perhaps
If we prevailed, Ambition would as well
Play on the game as now we do,
Though from a modester designe.
How little ought man to be trusted then
With power in this world, when even the things
He aims to thrive by are the crimes of Kings,
Good Princes, like best Juglers, still find first
The lesser sleights of others. How now,
What news?




As we were scouting on the way,
Which leads unto Cracovia, we espied
The Body of an Army moving within
Two hours march.



Ha, it must be so she has don't.
Bid instantly Botiscay march with haste,

For fear we are hindred joyning with my son.
Amidst these crimes a little policy does well,
It must be so, all we can hope for now will be to make
But good conditions 
 To put it to the venture of a day were madnesse,
We can have no supplies, they may have more.
And yet I know not what to think,
Distractions mingle with my thoughts,


And we still lose our judgments with successe.
Our resolutions waited on us then
Like servants wanting wages. All Mankind
Is one of those two Cowards,
 Either to wish to die
When we should live, or live when we should die.
Some fear, some wish, too early, or too late
Most fall, yet none must chuse his Fate;
Those that prepare for every storm, do seldom cast
Themselves away,
It is but bravely sinking at the last.









1. Not any Madam.



Leave us, and give notice when any comes.








We have not now sure far,
And yet me thinks 'tis along while
Ere we are there, time is thought
The fastest undiscerned flying thing
That is, but yet Love's wings are swifter,
Swift wishes impe his ragged plumes
And pull the feathers from the wings of Time,


 And every houer bears
Double proportion from our hopes and fears.



This pretty way of account Madam, will rise
Unto a sum of ages, added
To what now Mironault's a heaping,
'Twill make a new Chronologie,
But we still reckon on the old account.



You'r merry still, Phylena, when your day comes
You'le give me leave to do the same.



Yes Madam, we both agree,
And yet you shrewdly once suspected it
Of this fair maid,



You make me blush, she way forgive me though
For she deserved it,




Could you fall so much below
The power of all your beauties in such fears
That you could justly let suspition dwell
Where you pretend an interest? The Rose as well
May drooping hang it's fragrant head
Jealous of meaner Flowers, and the Sun
Suspect his light when mortalls kindle fires.



Nay Amione you court me now
I will not call it flattery, whil'st it comes
From thee, for that's a crime
That dwells with crooked natures, yet it was
Mistaken kindnesse.



'Twas you mistook it sure, for none will find
Themselves deceived that love you,




How now, what news?



Just now for certain, Madam
The Lord Albertus joyned unto his son
With a great Body,



They have not yet attempted ought.



Yes Madam, before his Father's coming,

Phylanter storm'd the house.



Ha: hast thou learnt no particulars?



Yes all, for before the Lord Albertus coming
The smallnesse of their numbers gave us freedom
To enquire near the place of all particulars,
 And thus it was,
Soon as Phylanter had found out
The house they stayed at, presently he ghest
That wounds had caused their stay, by reason
They strove to reach no place of more security
And so indeed it was; ghessing besides,
They should have smal resistance: upon these thoughts

Phylanter draws about it, then summons them.
But in the midst the gallant Mironault

Hinders the parly with a hasty scorn,
As if he meant to drive no bargain,
But sell at his own rate, at which
The bravely bad Phylanter sweld with rage
Prepar'd to give th'assault, and in the head
Of all his men advanc't (some distance) first,
To bring on ruine great as was his crimes,
Or else to perish with them, and seem'd half willing
To be forgotten on a noble score;
So equally divided, or to hide
His mischiefs in their Fates, or in his own.


The storm grew hot, yet still Phylanter urged
Beyond belief, now out of Love with safety,
Because his foes in spight of him enjoyd it
(With an unlookt for power to resist him)
Branded the name of Fortune with a whore,
As if they had begot supplies upon her;
On t'other side his men sees shrinking from him,
When mad with rage he easily retires
With such a look as longing Lovers send
When they must part, so much he coutted danger,
And now retreating with his drooping forces,
The gallant Mironault like a bright Sun
Broke from the smoakie storm, and issues forth,
Acting new Tragedies, till, being jealous
More forces might come in,
In order they retreated, and for certain

Phylanter both and Mironault are hurt.







Madam send off the messenger, Let not him see
The least disorder.



Go instanly, and bid Symathocles

Let all the Army march in readinesse to fight.







And acquaint him with all you know
Exit Mess.
Nay do not hide thy tears Amione

They can't displease me, wench, nor shall I think
That there is grief enough for him,
Though I am fully stor'd.



Alas, what a condition Fortune throws him in?


Did he but know by whom he were lamented
He could not have so much of joy,
As grief to think how he was ravisht
From the lov'd mourner;



I prethee peace; not that I fear
To have more grief for him, for I have that
Within me has made that impossibility,
But to inlarge thy own, 'tis true too
That I should give thee counsell not to grieve,
But I shall grieve the while, yet if thou thinkest
I wrong thy kindnesse then wee'le mourn together
And joyn our stock of tears, for no one store
Is worthy of him.



Though nature made me partiall, it robd me not
Of so much reason, to be so impudent,
The Fates perhaps, or some great power
That has a speciall care for you, or kindnesse,
Preserved you for themselves, and lent you to the world
As the S•n was, not for the happinesse
Of one alone but all.



May we not yet amidst our greatest grief
Believe it is not dangerous; for after he was hurt
They leisurely retired.



Would I could so be satisfied 
And yet that clearly justifies we wish
Our own contents, then when we raise
Our fears to equall power in our thoughts
Of what we doubt, yet what we wish to have;
None e're yet wish'd a life, but fear'd a grave.



'Tis true Amione, those torturing •ivalls


Hope and fear are ever whispering,
And they that have most need of one,
Have ever most of t'other. When I think this,
Though I would willingly pretend to counsell,
Or any thing would ease thy grief, I must
Believe it both impossible and needlesse.



Were it not just to linger then no longer
In all these doubts, since we might give them ease.



As how can it be done?



I would attempt to see him, I onely want your leave.



It is impossible, the ways are all shut up.



I do not mean to go concealed.
They say Phylanter is so much a Gentleman,
He will not certainly deny a woman.
Fear not, Madam, 'tis but two hours time,
And I am there, or here again.



I can deny thee nothing, not this I'me sure;
If thou seest him, tell him, that Love and Constancy's rewarded
In t'other world, and will be so in this.
Tell him, I wish his happinesse
And mine own together. And be sure
You take a Chirurgeon with you.







I will not fail, Heaven keep you.
May I return with such a blessing
As I now bear to him.




Farewell, dear Maid. Phylena, now
The time draws near of joy or misery,
 We live at an uncertain rate,
Or flatter'd stil, or else displeas'd with fate.










I Should chide now, but the condition of your fortunes
Cannot be that way helpt, nor are you fit
For a disturbance, I hear you have succesless
Storm'd the house; Why stai'd you not till I arriv'd?
'Twas folly to attempt it with so few.



But that has hapned now which I then feared,
For I did ghesse supplies would come to them
As soon as you to us. Besides, who would have ghest,
Or now can think, how they come by their aid?
Had we proved fortunate, we might have made
Our own conditions.



In that you have hit my thoughts, for now we must
Not lose our selves by fear or folly;
The one's too mean, the other but a madnesse.
And we must look on these we have
Without a hope of more, and on them
As an encreasing body; by this we are constrain'd
Upon the nick to make our compositions,
Or put it to the venture of a Day;
The first's the better, were the last the likelier.
For I believe that, passion laid aside
That first incited these rash thoughts and actions,


You look upon't as not to be pursu'd,
But fairly to be le•t. Men may erre,
It is the influence of Chance and Nature,
But to pursue it, is their own Lycespes 

There is much due to you, you were still honest,
And most a friend in danger,
Who are in safety onely are their own.



My Lord, I always owed your son as much,
And did resolve to pay it, till I had cause
To leave, or feared to avow it.



You are still noble. But Phylanter,

VVhat certain intelligence have you?



VVe know, Sir, the Army of the King
Is hard at hand, they say the Princesse too
Is with them.



I ghess'd as much, and for that reason
I left the Court, for I heard
That she was big with rage VVell,
The time's now short, and something must be done:
Let all be in a readinesse, and prepare
Nobly to reach successe, or ill to share.
In the mean time wee'l presently advise
The honorablest way for composition.
For to be safe and good is better far,
Than trust our crimes unto the chance of War.










HOw have I thus been cousened! how mon∣strous too
It seems, still to pursue the crimes I lov'd before:
To be uncousened, though 'tis just, seems poor,
When danger gives the wisdom: how low we sinck
When we once fall below our selves!
We still must fear what others ought to do.
In crimes none can be wise and gallant too.
All this besides for an uncertain Beauty,
Nor yet possest or gain'd, the Persian so
Spends all his wealth and prayers on the Sun,
That equally dispences unto those
Which ne're ador'd him, his warm comforts too.
Farewell to all your Sex, that cannot be
Belov'd, but with unthrifty misery.
The Lover that's unlov'd, like me, must waste
His store of Love, the Lov'd may longer last.
They that joyn Stocks, with ease our-spends
Him that runs on unpaid and lends.
Farewell: I will uncheat my self and you,
For when I lov'd you first I cousen'd two.












A woman at the dore


Desires admittance to your Lordship.



Thou ravest! a woman?



So I told you.



Nay, I might wonder, for such and I
Have now so little businesse with each other,
That by my troth 'tis strange.
Seems she a person of any quality?















The Devil on the wonder! businesse with me?



So she earnestly exprest.





Curse on the Sex, Civility must wait upon 'em,
Their weaknesse makes us fools, or else their beau•ies.
Ha! 'tis that indeed that charms us from our selves,
And all the handsome actions that we do
Seem offerings to their powers, as if the Sea
Should send a tribute to the little Brooks,
Such a preposterous thing is Love, 'tis like
The folly and the crime to make a god
One's selfe to worship Now for a trap
I shall be shy of these fair baits.
 What subtle trick 
Must this fair Instrument bring about? 
 I will be deaf to charms She comes.



Ha extreamly fair 
Come perhaps for to revenge
The scandall of her sex upon me Is it on me


Fair maid, that you would lay commands?



A comely man, pitty that form
Should harbour so much basenesse.

It is you, Sir, I must petition; for commands,
Though they might seem fair attributes to our sex,
Yet when you know, to whose much hated name,
Nature has made my Love a debt,
You will believe, Thardly should petition.



I rather shall consider this fair thing,
To whom a hated name can owe an interest,
 But you have heard 
Stories perhaps, not much becomming me,
Made up of others envies and my crimes,
Nor can I tell a good one of my selfe,
But that I love an innocence like yours,
And only that, for you to have a confidence,
I hardly shall deny you.



The world has sure belied him,


Nature commands, that I should ask,
Your fair encouragement has given me hopes▪
Not to be quite denied, and I am sorry
That I must now beg a civility,
And dare not own requitall; 'tis the first time,
That justice and ingratitude were friends.



You still believe me too unworthy: they that do
An act that does deserve requitall,
Pay first themselves the stock of such content,
Nature has given to every worthy mind,
If others should be bankrupt 


Pray torture me no more but aske.



He would deceive me strangely,

Know then, the sister to wrong'd-Mironault must ask:
Does it not startle you?



You see it does not.
He that has injured Mironault, will grant it,
Trifle no more.



Tis only then your leave that I may see him,



And happinesse attend you, you shall have
A conduct with you; I did not think
That I should find so much of joy,
In that small time I have to bustle here,
As your lov'd power has given me,
Pardon me, if I dare attempt
To have a little peace within me,
Still to remember you, I fear I must,
Though both should be unwilling.



I shall promise Sir, I carry no intelligence.



Urge it no more, I do not fear,
Nor am I ignorant, of what a storm
Is falling now upon me, only grieved
That I durst bring it to't, and yet now pleased,
That I dare bear it: choise in crimes,
Is the worst part in man, and good from fear,
The meanest. But I have said to much, only thus,
The last of all my thoughts, shall be of you,
They may be good: Nay, do not wonder,
Nor be so much concerned for one so lost,
To frame an answer from a smile or frown,
I will conduct you on your way, as you come back,


Others shall waite you, for your eyes
Shall not be injured with an hated object.
Here in this world, my fate, the quarrell ends,
 In t'other sure, we may meet friends.









NAy, for certain, Sir,
We saw a body marching, which cannot possibly
Belong to t'other Army.



Why, I did alwayes believe,
My dancing daies were not quite done.



I know not what to ghesse, nor do I wish;
For in extreams, lesse cares give noblest thoughts,
Designes of wishing, are the cheating joyes
Of fearfull men, t'were foolishnesse beside;
A carelesse hope looks handsomely.



We shall so justifie our selves, but I believe,
'Tis not unreasonable, to think our innocence
Should merit some protection, the Princesse sure
Will not be last in justice.



Urge it no more, nothing is worth her care,
'Tis some as bad as those, come to assist them.




There's one without, Sir, that would desire














A woman? I cannot ghesse, 
Exit. servant.
 Let her come in.
What should this mean, deceive me not too much,
Fond hope, nor puzzle me, for if you do, at last,
I shall grow carelesse of my joyes and you;
Ha! Amione, welcome,
Enter with Amione.
Welcome, above all joyes but one.



Perhaps, welcome as that, I have much to say,
But I must first be civill. Brave Hyppasus,

May you nere know extremities, but if you should,
May you find such a friend, as you have been.



Were I not nobly paid in his desert,
I were in this?



The same to you Pysander, for to thank you
In any other Language, were too poor,
And much unjust, for to divide,
What you so nobly joyn'd in.



Now have I forgot, what Hyppasus said,
Pray take his answer in good part for us both.



You'ar merry still, Pysander.




I confesse, nothing went ever neer my heart,
Unlesse it were your Love, but what availeth sighes and tears?




Dear Brother, pardon this injury of gratitude,
That kept me so long from you; forgive me too,


If joy disorders me, I have enough
To see you safe.



Dear Amione, how long we shall be so,
Heaven knows, yet 'twas a great advantage
To live thus long to see thee: but how wast possible
You could get hither, or from whence now come you?



Why, Phylanter's great civility,
Brought me safe hither.























I will defer your joyes no longer
From the Princesse, who bid me tell you,
That faith and constancie's rewarded
In t'other world, and will be so in this?



Thou would'st not mock me sure.







O▪ Amione, Didst thou but know the joy of every heart,
That at this hour, has its wishes crown'd,
Thou might'st then ghesse at mine.
And is she there in person?



Yes, attended with a gallant Army,
Much stronger then the enemy, you might
Discern them sure; and resolved as soon as I return
To offer battell. Is Phylanter,





With any thing in spight of all his crimes,


Resolves to perish bravely, so great a villain
Ne're bore so brave a mind, tis a question,
Whether he thinks, there's such a thing as danger.



We heard indeed, he storm'd it bravely,
And that your hurts were of more danger
Then I perceive they are; 'twas the report
Of that which brought me hither.
Nor must I stay, the Princesse layed commands
Of my immediate coming back; at more leisure,
You shall have all my story, in the mean time,
I must needs tell you, you are like to be
Extreamly happy; O Brother, never was so much sweetness
Guarded so sure from crimes, if ever breast
Were Sanctuary for vertues, it is her's:
She will deserve your love I fear much more,
Unlesse its possible, men should be constant.



This is not kind Amione, her valew
Will make me wise still to preserve my riches;
And benefit is mans designe.



Man seldome though pursues his owne ad∣vantage,
Women like Towns, once wonne are slighted:
VVhat we already have within our powers,
Has lesse esteem then unatchieved things.



Urge it no more, one may as well be weary
Of the Sun's constant shining, as her influence:
He never rises, but he seems to bring
Fresh glory from the East▪ and every day
VVill adde a new discovery of her vertues,
That she will never seem enjoy'd enough.
Besides, though man's compos'd of faithlesse matter,


The Soul of one may be of nobler use
Than others are, and with that Soul
Man had not been so nobly put in trust
Had he not means left free to be unjust.
Come, so much eternitie as my love must have,
Must not be told in such a little moment
As you have now to spare, nor will I injure
The little time I have with thee,
When we shall meet again heaven knows:
For friends once pawn'd to distance there is a danger
To bankrupt hopes.
You must expect but poor besieged welcome
 Who such relief as Anchorets have
At least shall find in an expected grave.








WHat is the next thing how that must be done?
How weary all the World and I
Am grown of one another? I should be friends
With this disguise, could it but hide my crimes:
But night it self that great disguifer,
Wants power to conceal the least of crimes
From any troubled breast, when man would fain
Be unacquainted with himself again:


'Tis just too, when we have our selves betraid
That we should be then of our selves afraid
Ambition onely is our nature's folly,
That robs us of that little stock of reason,
We have at temperate and idle hours.
If we but take the inventory of our selves,
There we shall find such perisht stuff
By rage and passion, that 'tis just
We should be once forgotten in the dust;
 But for my new design ha 'tis odd
To throw my self into the power of them 
As if 'twere meannesse, or something poorer; fear 
 Yet let it dye


Ha she comes 
 A Persian's cold devotion thus,
Receives new warmness from the rising Sun
 It must be so 
He that would hide Love kindled once within,
Rakes but his fire up to keep it in.



We take our leaves now Madam, for we see
There's one attends you from the
Exe. Hip. Pysan.
Lord Phylanter,




Madam, my Lord Phylanter sent me hither
In his own language to present you Safety
Great as you merit.



I thank you Sir, he has obliged me nobly:
Had he forgot his crimes, I should forget
He were an enemy.



He bid me tell you farther,
That he had waited on you here himself,


But that he fear'd to injure your fair eyes,
That should be onely pleas'd with welcom objects.



Ha: perish you easie thoughts, that start

At hearing of that name, yet when you think of him
I may forgive you, if you then
Frighten your selves, 
And yet it may be Love; ruines of Love
And lightning are alike 
For, what would willingly resist
They both consume; I shall attend you Sir,
If you please to lead the way 









COntinue still worthy Lycespes,

To let him know repentance needs no blushes.
Or that 'tis necessary for Fate or us,
To persue cruell actions, yet with a gentle hand
That no distraction mingle with his nature;
For he is young, and youth's unsetled furie
Is ready still to act,



I have Sir, with a gentle hand
Toucht all the storie of this madnesse,
And find him too, like an experienc't gamster,


Asham'd to have been cheated, but resolv'd
Wisely no more to venture at that game:
Our whole designs must needs therefore now
Aime, but to bring us off, and yet prepare
Not to want courage in the meanest Fortune.



'Tis all that can be said in our Conditions,
In order therefore to our sad affairs,
Wee'le instantly dispatch a Trumpet
To offer fair conditions, or any thing
That may not sound like mercy from another:
That's an unworthy way to adde
To other's fames, in ruining our own;
And yet our whole desires shall be low,
Indeed they must, for the extremity
Of every unresisted Fate makes poor
Their thoughts that were as rich before.









YOu have now, Sir, performed that civill part,
That alwies shall enforce me to esteem
The Lord Phylanter, and may this Sir
She offers him money.
Tell you my thanks.



Madam, reward can not be due
To this small service, though I may do


What may perhaps seem to deserve
Something of that nature, but I must first
Desire you to prepare for to believe
Not ill of him, that thinks your wrongs
Deserve devotions, greater than his trust.



What mean you Sir?



Would it not be worth a reward at least?
That you might have within your power
The ease of all your hard misfortunes?



Certainly 'twere; the sound bears greater joy
Than possibility.



I know sometimes, that Treason seems
But ugly in the justest cause;
Though I believe that never yet,
A power like yours commanded it.



Still I understand you not, pray to the mat∣ter.



To be short then, know Phylanter loves you,
Your seeming kindnesse will have power
To draw him where you please, for to my breast
He has committed all his thoughts,
And bid me judge when I should see you,
Whether he had not cause for all his passions,
(Indeed he has) so much his crimes are greater;
Nor is it more injustice to his trust
Than due to you to tell you, if you please,
That I may bear some feigned kindnesse from you,
I'me sure 'twill bring him any where,
That you may easily surprise him.



But do you think he has lost his reason so?
To trust himself without his guards,


And his surprifall then will not be easie.



Alas, his reason's like an helplesse friend,
Left and forsaken, and nothing but your name
Must be forgiven, that would attempt to lessen
His thoughts from what he has done, you need not fear
He can be over-wise that loves so much,
Nor will his reason tell him that 'tis due
To all his kindnesse.



Nor is it sure.



But to his former storie 'tis, and present acti∣ons;
For though repentance onely at your name
Has power in his thoughts, yet he contemns
To have that Virtue on a meaner score,
His crimes to all the world besides continue.



And they may better be the punishers.



I grant you, were it in their power
As 'tis in yours, and they would then
Do sure as much for you.
'Tis but the least command from you,
My life on't, I bring him where you think best
He may be with most ease surpris'd.



But should not you consider?
That though this punishment be due from me,
The treacherie's unjust in you.
How much it is the businesse of mankind

To make a bargain for their honesty,
And yet not think how little that will yield
To others, which they make so cheap,


Man's like a barren and ingratefull soil,
That seldom pays the labour of manuring.
How has Philanter injured him, or I obliged him?
That I could at first upon a lesser score
Share with his crimes, and on a meaner now
Basely dislike, as if his choice were just,
Whose equall ease accepts and forfeits trust.

•'le tell him too 'tis base, how fain would Love
Tell his own story, through a nobler cause,
And blushes sure as well as I.
 It should be for Phylanter 

Ha! Deceive me not fond eyes, it can∣not be
she turns and sees him.
I owe amazement now so much 
 It must arrest me.



Wonder not, fair Amione, nor fear
I'le beg your pitty, that contemn my own,
And yet for many reasons think I love you;
Though I believe my time will hardly give
Me leave to reckon them Onely consider,
That I durst here avow it, I could have faln,
Its true, as nobly with my fellows,
But much more happier here; I would have weigh'd it too
More leisurely in reason's scales, till a thought
Of you broke in, and ended the dispute.
I have at my own rate procured my happinesse,
Nor have I done lesse sure for you; 'tis the first service,
And likely too to be the last I e're shall do you.



O Phylanter, you should not trust


Revenge, and all your crimes at once
In any power, though I perhaps
Shall fear to be a murtherer, so to make
My self as bad as you.



Why I confesse, I willingly
Would be as good as you, but that's a lesson
Hardly to be learn'd, and yet it looks
Much like the way to read it often;
As I have done your vertues.
I say not this to tempt a mercy,
I have deserved a great deal of unkindnesse;
But not so much as now to fall
A sacrifice to any but your wrongs.



I know not what to say 
You may repent, perhaps grow good;
Pray try.



'Tis true, I think I might;
But 'tis a question still, whe're you'd grow kind.
And indeed, the fear of that great danger
Made me contemn the rest. But I trifle time,
By all that's charitable, let me not fall
By meaner hands. Hark, some Souldiers.

Use this for pitty's sake.








How now? who have we hear, Philanter?









Nay, then I must use it.

Villains, I have a little businesse here,
one falls, t'other flyes.
I might have spared the reason though to you


They have raised the alarm; yet, Amione,

Free me from this mean ruine.



Pray put on your disguise again,
You may yet scape.



I'me glad it is impossible, you see it is,
O Amione; had I but loved you at a lesser rate,
I might have found a soberer expression.
But yet remember, a mad-man seldom loses
His kindnesse with his judgment.
A noise again! hell on their yellings!




By that love you bear me,
Put on your disguise.



Never, till my safety be worth your care.



O Phylanter, though your condition needs it,
'Tis too soon for me to say it, yet I will tempt my
To tell you, I would have you safe.



That now my fate is unavoidable, the gods blushes
Perhaps provided, lest I should surfeit
Of joys in this world; yet I shall have
Enough, if you believe, no dying mind
Can have more joy, or living love.
'Twas my grief at first to love you, and now
My fear at last you should not know it.
'Twas all my businesse too before my end.
I could wish one thing more, to be resolved,
Whether in t'other world (where wise-men tell us,
There is such store of love) our joy shall be
Greatest, to meet those friends we lov'd best here.
 but I shall be resolved. In the mean time,
What e're becomes of me,


Let your kind thoughts
 admit sometimes this minute's memory.



Alas, think of your safety; Hark! they come! yet

Let your disguise and me protect you.



When I have your protection I need need not this disguise,
Nor will I wear it. They come.
My dear Amione,


For ever live as happy as I die.



Here! here! on! on! on!



Villains, you shall buy me bravely.




Hold, on your lives; how, Phy∣lanter?






The same, you need not bid me welcome,
Nor tempt me much, Symathocles.




O Phylanter, be yet more temperate;
Pray, Sir, let me obtain a little hearing.



You may command it. The Princess!






O Madam, let me beg
That no amazement dwell upon your eyes,
Nor any thing but mercy.



I have both ready for thy sake How 

 Phylanter VVhat Riddle's this ?



I owe that name indeed, but with less blushes
Than I did once.



I promised not to wonder, my Amione;

But this is strange.



You promised mercy too.



Have you an interest in his pardon then?
Blush not,
I'le ask no more Phylanter 

This story shall be perfect at more leisure,
And all things else shall be deferr'd
But my forgivnesse. I do believe
(You came to fetch your pardon in so much danger)
You can repent or any thing, but deserve
The happinesse preparing for you.
he kisses the Princess hand.
Come, Amione, thou hast brought back
An unexpected friend. May this successe
To every one bring equall happinesse.









HAs no one yet brought any news?



Not any, Sir, O misery!
Betraid by some sleight. How now?
Enter a Mes∣senger.
From whence com'st thou?



My Lord, your son desires to meet you;
And withall you would not wonder,
That with the Princesse he waits your comming.



Stranger yet! some farther mischiefe sure!

Lycespes Draw up the Army instantly.


We must not be thus cousened.


Came you from my son?







And is he with the Princesse?











Now comming to the House.



With all her Army?



Onely with a small Guard.



There may be something then.
Fortune I'le think if now thou shew'st thy care,
Thou canst redeem as wel as bring despair.








IS this the house, Phylanter?












'Twill now be yielded, Madam,
Far easier than 'twould once. Within there, ho!





How now, what news, O Phylanter?

Is your troublesome Worship there again?
 how now, the Princesse too?








Now truly Madam, do I think
I had best call Mironault to unriddle this.
 The labour's sav'd.

Mironault appears above too.










Do you not know me?



Yes, and others too there.



This is injustice Mironault,

Can you let wonder keep you thus from me?



I had forgot, it's true, 'tis Mirramente,

And serupulous thoughts were sins unpardonable,




If I should stay to consider what this means,
I should be the last should know it;
He comes down.
I'le e'ne descend too.




 Though these strange objects might deserve a storie,
Enter Mi∣ronault.
'T would take up time, and I shall think it crueltie
To rob thee of one minute's joy, if I can give it.



If you can give it? have I thus long
Lov'd you, and lov'd you religiously, now to have
All my devotion question'd?
Can sick men joy in health? or liberty
Be pleasing unto captives? In your kindnesse
Lies all my health and liberty.



Nor will I fear to avow it, dearest Mironault,

No thoughts of crossing danger e're shall fright
My Love or me.



It's true, I am unworthy of you; but so are all,


And he that parts me from you,
Must joyn me to a colder Bride.



And more than you, gallant Mironault,

Wonder no more, nor think on stories past,
But that to come, Phylanter will appear
As worthy of your friendship,
 As he was once of hate but stay
I had forgot to ask your pardon. Indeed
He takes Amione by the hand.
Heer's one may better do it, whose fair opinion
 Will promise for me. 



Brave Sir, I hated still your crimes not you, so did she,
And if she love your Virtues, pray believe
I am her brother too.





A little honesty will make one impudent
That I must now beg pardon for others,
That scarsly should have hop't if for my self.



Rise my Lord, you need not now
Of any doubt your pardon.



Excellent Princesse, I shall deserve hereafter
What an unjust necessity made me shun to testifie.





Hyppasus and Pysander, I must not now
Forget your share in thanks,
That did receive your part in danger.



Nay your Highnesse cannot be better pleased than we
That all the danger's past, to say truth,

  138Hypasus and I were clearly your Platonicks,
And made up the Romance.

The blind La∣dy hearing his voice, calls from under the vault where he put her.






How now, what's that?




Onely an honest fellow kill'd in the storm,
And now his ghost walks; in his life time
He was a talking fellow, Hyppasus you know it.



Hang you, what do I know?







Plague on you, would you were gagg'd.







Nay your Highnesse need not be troubled,
I'le have a Schollar shall lay it at my own charge.



Well Sir, if you'le be at that cost, I'le be the Scholar,
To raise it at my own.



Pox on your conjuring fools-head,
Hyppasus takes her out of the vau't with corn upon her far∣thingale, Peter following.
By this light she rises 
Like Ceres with Plenty about her,
Lord, how Peter stares!



Captain, Pray, your hand





He goes behind the Princesse.
Now have at the Princess, la, ra, ra, ra
Your Highnesse may be pleas'd,
She runs against the Princesse.
To pardon her usuall exercise,
She was the best tilter in her time




Mironault whispers to the Princesse.


O Captain, pray your hand,



Now have I ague: what tends
This whisperig to?





The god of Love himself is blind,
She, or her estate (I hear) is very fair.



Why, is your Highnesse in earnest?
And please you shee's some sourscore,
A dog were as good a husband for her
To lead her up and down.



Madam, Will you consent to have this Gentleman?



I have already yielded.



And be hang'd 'twas before you were storm'd.



Come it shall be a match, shee'l make you her Executor.



Well, wee'l all be marri'd then. Hypassus

If you please, you shall have Quinever.




We are all happy then; we need not fear,
Unlesse my Father frown.



We shall unwillingly throw off again
Our Loyalty to him, and yet we shall
Be very ready to embrace a witnesse,
That we dare dye for Mironault.




You nobly all oblige me, and I must tell you
My dearest Princesse that I cannot fear,
Whilst I enjoy your Love, for that has rais'd me
Above the power of Fate or danger,
Nor have I leisure to think on any thing,
But of those joys are falling now upon me,


Which neither time or age can ever lessen;
For still your Virtues like Medea's charms
Shall bring fresh beauties to my happy arms.




We Bridegrooms disagree, for every day
Will oblige most that adds to your decay.


