


ZELIDAURA, Queen of Tartaria,



CLARIDIANA, Queen of Arabia,



FELISBRAVO, Young King of Persia,















ROSELINDA, Lady attending Zelidaura,





Lady Mary Salier, of the Privy-Chamber.
First GYANT,
Lady Lucy Prada, of the Privy-Chamber.
Second GYANT,
Lady Frances Quiros, of the same.
RIFALORO, the Drole,
La. Katherine Quiros.


  1Querer por solo Querer: To Love only to Love.



Drums and Trumpets, and enter at one end of the Stage the Generall with a Truncheon in his hand, and Soldiers with Banners; before him Captives, and amongst them one of better appearance than the rest: At the other, Felisbravo habited after the Persian manner, with a Royal Train; and let the General approach him, laying the truncheon at his feet; and the General is to wear a lawrel Crown, which he takes off when he comes at the King.








Rise wise and valiant General.



Give me thy Feet, these Plants shall be my Lawrels.





Gen'ral, into my Arms, into my Heart:

To pay good Services is Kings best part:
Relate thy Victory.






The Sweat was, but the Victory was thine.

With full two hundred Ships of monstrous burthen
(Cramm'd with Land Souldiers too) the Foe usurp'd
Thy narrow Seas, and hover'd o're these Lands

As o're a certain Prey, on which he look'd

  2As the sole Obstacle betwixt his high

Hopes, and the UNIVERSAL MONARCHY.
Thou (to receive this Storm where e're it falls)
Stay'st must'ring on the Shore thy fearless Bands;
In head whereof, thou Marchest bravely Mounted
In silver Arms; writ in thy Face, and Star,
THE SON OF FORTUNE BY THE GOD OF WAR:
Mean time, go I to hunt them out at Sea,

Under th' auspicious flight of thy guilt Standard

Approach'd them; Ship by Ship I visit thine

(Guiding my self a Barge's Rudder) spurr'd
On both sides with long Oares, and from each poop
Bid ours remember, in that AZURE FIELD
We are our Island's, It is the Worlds shield.
Wellcom'd on board my own with shouts, re-eccho'd
With general acclamations of the rest,

Which one by one bear up to pay my visit,
And all come sooping underneath my Lee

To fetch new courage; briskly we advance
Upon the Foe, who all this while had stood
With smiling silence on the trembling FLOOD.
His potent FLEET was cast into the form

Of a half-Moon, gaping to purse us up,
As that dire African at dismal Cannae

Did once ROMES Army led by a rash CONSUL;
Withal, to boast it self the SOVERAIGN
(Like horned Cinthia) of the curled MAIN.
My brave Vice-Admiral (a second DRACO,

Writing his laws in blood texted with flame)
Swears by the Queen of Night,
To be a perfect CRESCENT It wants light.

As the proud Bearer of the three-fork'd Thunder

And winged Lightening on her tow'ring Plumes
(On whom her Master JOVE bestow'd the Empire

O're all the feather'd People, for her service
In the fam'd rape of ruddy GANIMEDE)

  3Steer'd with her trayn, sails driving through the Clouds,

Thence stoops Plebeian Birds; so his bold Frigat
From a big Wave, on which she soar'd aloft
In clouds of smoak, flyes at the Covey intire,

Arrow of Gunpowder, Eagle of Fire.

Not Priams City crackled in more Flames,
When to the fatal Horse she op'd her Walls,
Then did those wooden Towers; nor with more fury
The Greek Host (usher'd by that Horse) did reign
In her waste streets, than I with thy whole FLEET
Sent whizzing amongst theirs (in foaming Mead)
From feather'd Squadrons Thunderbolts of Lead.

The Sea is made another Sea of Blood,

The sayling Wood, a Wood of floating Bodies.

In fine, a Victory by Sea robs thee

Of one by Land: And of this vast ARMADA

(Beneath whose weight the Main it self did shrink,
And which did threaten ev'n the Earth to sink)
The scattered fragments kiss thy princely Feet;
Ships, Captives, Banners, Streamers, Rudders, Keels,
Tall Masts, and launching Oares,

Now the torn Spoils and Trophies of these shores.
Of all thy Navy but one Ship is missing;
And thou (King of the TRIDENT, second NEPTUNE,

Lord of four Seas) hast hurld
A Bit, FEAR, ENVY, on the Sea, SUN, WORLD.



Once more, O let me hold such virtue fast!



What dangers courts not one, thus doubly grac'd,
His Kings Hand kiss'd, t' inspire him going out;
Return'd, his Arms, to fence him round about?
This rears your Bulwarks; for that Prince who takes

One Souldier into favour, thousands makes.



A MONARCH'S gracious Eye, preserving State,
Makes a brave Souldier, and just Magistrate.




Kiss all of you great FELISBRAVO's plants.







There's greatness in that countenance.



I'm sure there's woe.



This slave, of a high soul,
Thy Name did conquer.



At thy Feet I roul.



How comes so stout and brave a Man to show
Such poorness, as to sink beneath a woe?



It is the least I feel; who much repine
This should be thought to share one sigh that's mine.

To be thy slave an honour always is,
And now to me a seasonable bliss;
A Good, which I do owe my Ill.





To me thy Grief.




'Tis easier bourn, than told:
For, though my life be thine, my grief's my own.




Trust me with both, I have not Ruth alone,
But Remedy.




Though 'tis to saw a sorrow
To tell't, let me thy Ear in private borrow.




General retire the Folks.



Take then a pain
Equally hard to speak as to contain.Exeunt Gen. &c.

Great FELISBRAVE, new Founder of this Empire;
Phoenix, whose birth into the Throne began
Out of the dissolution of a SWAN;
Who in the compass of two years, hast liv'd
"A thousand Ages (for so much live KINGS,
"As they do Reign; Reign, as they do great things.)
TARTARIA, a famous Part of ASIA

(For now it rivals her fair Countrey, who

A Star in Heaven, is a Rose in Cyprus)
Hath for its Queen the beauteous ZELIDAURA,

Whom the most rich embroideries of Praise

Serve for her wearing upon Common days,
Those vulgar terms (with which a mortal Face
Men basely flatter to the Morns disgrace)
Those bold comparisons with new-born day

And mid-day Suns (which HEAV'NS and GARDENS lay
So splendidly to heart) are, of her Youths
Inestimable blossom, most fair Truths;
In whom perfections see nothing to mend by,
And miracles themselves something to envy:

  5To whose fresh Years, and Cheeks, the Aprils throng
For flowry license to be fair and young.




Is she so fair?



The least in her that's rare.








Yes, ten times more than she is fair.











Those poor Examples, in which Poets feign
Of much Romantick Princess such profane

Impossibilities, out-done by Her,

Her sobrer Beauty joyns sweet with severe,


Majestical with humble, for a King,

Not for a Woman, made: She takes the Ring,

Guirds Steel, and Lawrel: Pond'ring on the acts

Writ of Semiramis, and manly facts
Of great Penthisilea, she becomes
Of a light flame, as, at the kindling Drums,

Achilles hid in lying Petticoat,
His choice betraying what his face did not.
A Man amongst her Counsellors she lives,
A Woman with her Ladies; Laws she gives,
And Hearts she conquers; beautiful, and wise.



Is she so gallant?




With such sage valour, that the world 





Seeing Felisbravo disturbed he stops.

(What a rare Woman!)



(What a curious Man! Aside.

But, who can hear so great a Queen set forth,
And not be ravish'd with her matchless worth?)
Aside.

I, by her Fame drawn from Cicilia (where
The King my Father all those Nations fear
As far as Nile) 'mongst many, to present
My self one Trophy of her Beauty, went;
True always, always firm, always in vain:
And, when in highest tow'rings of my Flame,

In lowest stoops of humble Adoration,

Excess of Love with me was Moderation,

And wonders possible; It so befel  



















Conclude thy Story then (and let her be
In a good hour fair, and at liberty.)
Aside.




 My Father sick'ned (Noble Felisbrave)
And, in a War where Love and Duty strave,
That which I sided with was overcome;
For, with two Ships to visit him I come,
When five of that Armada meet with me
(New-wrecking Quicksands of the cruel Sea!)
'Gainst which, receiving thousand wounds I strive,
That, for their killing me, I might forgive
Their making me a Slave; Thy Gen'ral comes
To round thy Coasts: He them again overcomes,
Chains them, conducts them, where the King may put
Upon their Bellies his tryumphant Foot.
I (Captive twice) on peevish FORTUNES Frown
Pretend not to establish a Renown:
For a Fool too may be unfortunate.
But if a King; If, by an Antidate

Of early VIRTUE, when years fifteen came
Thou wrot'st Eternal; If thou'rt like thy Fame;
If thou knowest Pity: If admitt'st of Tears,
To supple thee; Of Prayers, to storm thy Ears;

Past Ages, to incite thee; History,

To make thee glorious to Posterity:
Offers to throw himself at the Feet of Felisbravo, but he doth not permit him.


Or set me free, or kill me instantly;
If it be possible a wretch can dye.



Rise, gallant Youth, and Courage new acquire.



My Soul bates to be gone, proud to expire
At so brave Feet.



(Alas, he swounds!) and mine

Two tender Passions doth partake from thine,

(Let in at several doors) Love at my Ear,


Grief at my Eye: Hoe, General!









New matter that thy virtue may not miss,
Save me this Slave from death; and tell him this,

  7A King (that knows how to be one) commands
Thee, trust thy Life and Fortune in his hands.



He would not let his wounds be drest.




As thou would'st me; and all the Gods preserve him.

The General carries him out upon his shoulders, and Felisbravo remains alone.

What Circe in a moment hath purloyn'd
The wonted peace and freedom of my Mind?
What War is this, that lays soft batteries
Unto a Soul inur'd to Victories?
What heav'nly Zelidaura is this same?
What new device of Love, out of a Name
To shoot so sweet a Poison? O, then I
Less wounded Slave! Thou 'lt leave me, if thou dye,
Something t' envy in what thou dost deplore,
And in thy Story something to adore.
But, though so great a Beauty force my Love,
And to suppress it against Nature prove,
I'le be a better Prince, than Lover: Brave,
And hard, therefore my Act! Free be the Slave:
And (if he live) see Tartary; whilst I
Of Love, of Sorrow, and of Honour dye.
And let us bring in fashion, 'twixt us both,
Justice in Rivalship, in Absence Troth.




He lies all weltring in his Blood, and live
He cannot: This fair Picture he doth give
For thee to keep: And (if he dye) for Wife
Prays thee to make a conquest of the Life,

To him (he said) and all the World, but Thee,





Reach it: Return, and let your care be more 
(Gust yield to Reason)  then it was before.
Exit.

Tempt me not, Love: The Face I will not see,
Blind Argus, if my Ears were scall'd by thee
What second engine 'gainst my Eyes must move,

  8To burn my Heart to Cindars? I, in love!
I, pangs! I, pulings! I, to be afraid
My Faith cannot deserve, my Vows perswade!

Tears, from a Manly Face! Sighs, that shall find
Themselves no more regarded than the Wind!

Oh! Why should Love such servile things enjoyn?
But why this Pride? Does Beauty not enshrine
A Deity? Did it not GODS subdue?
Then let it tame a Man, and let me view
The lovely noble Feature, and the bright,
Of this fair Shade. Love is a less'ning flight:
When he doth vail his Plumes, it's such a thing
As when an Eagle stoops upon the Wing.
Looks upon the Picture.
This Face all Soul is, and so full of Life,

That Life and Beauty are in it at strife
Which shall be more: What Spirits?  What Spells too?
If in a little Card a Compass shew
The Earth, and lay it out in several;
In this, a PENCIL hath Mapp'd Heav'n and all,
And Mapp'd it to the Life.  For on these Cheeks

Looks upon it again, and again.
(Where white and red divinely intermix)

Aurora's hands hang snowing Iesamines,

 Her Fingers bleeding Roses;  The MOON shines

Bright in these Tresses, where each Hair's a Ray;
 Two twinkling Stars;  Two speaking Rubies;  May

Buds;  The MORN Blushes;  At one skip the Sun

Gets up;  High NOON assoon as Day's begun!
I'l love, I'l dye (O most unhappy man!)
In love a Phoenix, and in death a Swan.





The Captive (Sir) is something livelier.




What doest thou say?



That he is better.






Must he needs mend?) Good News: And I would do thee
Some good for bringing it.



Heav'n keep him to thee.





Love, I shall crush thee yet, as arrogant
As false too as thou art; As I am Man,

I may be staggered; but, as I'm a KING,
(Born for more Sov'raign Ends) thou canst not throw me.

We, should, with sprawling of our Childish Arms,
The cruel Serpents of ALCIDES strangle:

We, in the midst of all the SIRENS Charms,
Should the wise caution of ULISSES carry.


Let my desire be tam'd, and not
My Obligation be forgot;
I more provoking Envy's Sting
As virtuous, than as being a King;
The World admiring in my Pains
Sober Madness, and free Chains.









My Will to me's a Law. If it appear
Prepost'rous for a Woman Arms to bear,
Let it suffice I make the Precedent.

Since there be Men effeminately bent,
We Manly Women must that wrong undo;
For you see sometimes NATURE can lie too.




Brave ZELIDAURA, thy Heroick Mind
Who does not wonder at?




Always to sloath, the Pride I have, I place
In a great Heart, and not in a fair Face.

If on the Borders of my Land, we have
A Novelty so manifoldly brave,
A woing Warfare, this INCHANTED QUEEN,
A Beauty the more sought the less 'tis seen,
Nor of less difficulty to the Wit

Than to the Sword, shall I not step to see't?

  10To see such Noble Action? chiefly I
Giving the frailty of my Sex the Lye?
Not, that my Courage hath so much of heat,
As to thrust Prudence wholly from her seat;
So metled I am not, as if that I

Affected it to quit deformity;
Nor yet so foolish as some Women are,
Who for that only do suspect they 're fair.





HEAV'N, that created thee thus warlike, stole
Into a Woman's Body a Man's Soul.

But Nature's Law in vain thou do'st gainsay:
The Woman's Valour lies another way.
The Dress, the Tear, the Blush, the witching Eye,

More witching Tongue, are Beauty's Armory:

To rally, to discourse in Companies
Who's fine, who courtly, who a WIT, who wise:

And with the awing sweetness of a DAME
(As conscious of a Face, can Tigers tame)
By Tasks and circumstances to discover
Amongst the best of PRINCES the best LOVER;
(The Fruit of all those Flowers) who serves with most

Self diffidence, who with the greatest boast;
Who twists an Eye of Hope in brayds of Fear,

Who silent (made for nothing but to bear

Sweet scorn and injuries of LOVE) envyes
Unto his Tongue the Treasure of his Eyes:

Who, without vaunting shape, hath only Wit,

Nor knows to hope reward, though merit it:
Then, out of All, to make a CHOICE so rare

So lucky-wise as if thou wert not fair.




Will men ne're leave this freak? that Beauties fate
Is neither to the wise, nor fortunate?

ENVY would have it so, She usher'd in
This vulgar Errour, or some scorn'd Mans Spleen
Or homely Womans Comfort. PRINCE, that DAME
Who lets her self be lov'd with a true Flame,

  11Considers not how ill INGRATITUDE
Will look, when she must afterwards be rude.

Should I examine if this Mans a Gull,

Or th'other Gull a LOVER? Poor, and dull!
To render him the object of my Care,

Who should be of my Scorn! Only Despair

Will I allow to Men, nor can dispence
With so much shew of hope, as diligence.

What a fond antiquated Errour? (Save me!)

I must call't Love, because a Man would have me
For his none-self: He swears he's mine alone;
Then (grosely) prays me not to be my own.




Sounds it not merit unto thee for one
To serve thee, who is braver than the Sun?



Would'st thou have me admire and value than
The painted Plumes of any Peacock-Man?
I've Pride enough my self. It makes me smile

(And yet I'm vext) to hear what Love the stile
And serving in a GALLANT; to new sheath
Himself each day, not let his Mistress breath,
But haunt her to the Park, or to the Bourse,

On that the vulgar call a goodly Horse;
Hat in the hand, her colours in the hat,

Then tell her with a trembling boldness   (What?)
That he's an Ass; Affect a diffidence,

Yet wear her Porch out; making diligence,

Smell rank of Hope. If Importunity

Is call'd Desert, what more absurd can be
Than for a fair one to become his prey

That hunts her down? Let Greater ASIA

Her Princes send their Valours here to prove:
I would see Fighting, and not hear of Love.




Our Ancestresses would; but we (more wise)
The Ignis fatuus of Love despise.




These Ceremonies which thou seek'st to bar,
From the first hallowing fundamental are

  12To Lady-hoods fair Order; for, discreet,

Secret, and stout, and gay; of a compleat

Lover, are the Ingredients: And in SPAIN
The gallant Mock-war of the Bulls, and CANE
Doth in a Courtly Valour comprehend
Both that which you, and that which I commend:
For those fierce GAMES (though Sports they called are)
Proclaim in jest what Men in earnest dare.



Secret (quoth you!) If he must trusted be
With nothing, what's his secrecy to me?

Thou (CLARIDORO) do'st extremely erre,
If thou think'st Courtships can this Bosom stir;
Not my AFFECTION, Body, Air, and Meen;
But Soul, Deeds, Virtues, purchase my ESTEEM.
Thy brave Youth hazzard in this Enterprize:

(For Sloth in Princes is a double Vice.)
Whence, if thou conquer, thou com'st burnish'd forth
With Glory; if thou dye, what greater worth

Than to lose well a Life.





But I keep mine,

To be spent better in some CAUSE that's thine;
Mean while, at thy adored Feet it lies:
And where can be a nobler Enterprise,

Than to o'recome thy Love's disdainful, high
And Beautiful Impossibility?
'T has more of danger in it too: For there
My Valour combats, but with Thee my Fear.

If thou dispraisest Praise, neglectest Care,

And hatest to be lov'd, why art thou fair?




I am not fair, nay fair I will not be;
And less endure to be so call'd by thee.

If Truth, where is the favour? if a Lye,

It mends me not. What vain Civility!
(I wonder it should please some as it doth)
A great Lye 'tis, and would be a small Truth.





Be not displeas'd that I thy Beauty praise;
'Tis a Debt which my Eye owes, and my Tongue pays:

  13Give me thy Heart then, or thou'lt dye in debt.



If I have thine, where? Shew me my Receipt.




'Tis well: The anger of a Mistress swells
In thee; in me a LOVER's Patience dwells.



If all thy Servants thus thou entertain,
I look this Prince too should be bond, or slain;
For of the other nothing yet is known.



Ay, and absence kill'd him, he hath done
The part of a Wiseman and of a Lover.





Th' INCHANTED CASTLE doth it self discover.













Shine so, what does the light that it does shroud?




The two wings various workmanship seems rather
A Sphear, than Pallace; Miracle, than either.




The uniform and equal structure vyes

Twin-Beauties so, 'tis Musick of the Eyes!
And its perfections (greater their fame)
The stile of Royal, for Divine disclaim!



It shews 'midst so much Beauty, as delights,
A Majesty that awes, Honour that frights.






That of Creet (I think)
I am surveying, and his LABYRINT.



Here hangs a Trumpet.




'Tis, without all doubt,
T' advise when any strangers are without.



Blow it, and call.



Is it no more but so?
Madam, when thou do'st call, do'st thou not know
Thou call'st a thousand Monsters?




Be, without fears, all Ladies   Blow, I say.

One Blows the Trumpet, to which they answer from within with another, and a Gyant appears upon the Battlement.












To learn before what the ADVENTURE is.




You would not use your hands then, but your feet.




With civil Gyant shall one never meet?




He knows not thee.




How many have pretence
To Valour, only by their Insolence!




Excuse them, Madam, the Books make them so.




Approaching Knights themselves in Armour show.



Again? I fear me here will be a fray.



A Troop of Horse? My GENIUS feasts to day.




Madam, we are not safe.



Mask'd in this dress
Here will I stand to witness the success.



But, Madam, why hast thou not made a new
INCHANTED CASTLE for thy Beauty too?



Because that Beauty hath a stronger fence
Which is immur'd with its own innocence.








Thy Fortune in th'Adventure try.




Ah! how much more's th' Inchantment of that Eye.









This is Love (start not at the word) 't will blind
Soonest the clearest sight, and (read) you 'l find
Great Lover, and Great Prince, went ever joyn'd.


It is a Spirit, an immortal Guest,
The prop'rest Passion of a Kingly brest,
As higher by the head than all the rest.


If Bounteous, prudent, constant, valiant,


Secret, and affable, and vigilant,

Are Royal Stiles; and Love is all these things:

See, if good Lovers will not make good Kings.

"'Tis a dull Wisdom not to love, a curst

"Imperfect Virtue; and it is at worst

  15"A Manly fault high Beauty to adore.
'Tis fit my youth  explore,
Not sweet variety to please my taste,
But (to contemplate on) a Phoenix chast:
Whom having found, out of the vulgar path,
My Soul (then wholly taken up with Faith)
Shall shut out hope; For this pure Spirit that grasps
In its immenseness whatsoever Heav'n clasps,
And Earth, contains yet but one Will; which one

Should be so brave, and firmly mov'd upon
Her centre, as to love eternally

In a Life's moment: So without a Why,

As if all Beauty it were death to covet,
Or (saving only to love it) to love it,
As if, ev'n to deserve, were to encroach,

And the least spark of favour, Faith's reproach.

Then, rackt with passion, to confess i'th' end
A flame, which only pardon shall pretend,
"Who (loving much) himself hath little sought,
"If fault it be, hath done a civil fault.
"Nor added to (in his more noble fire)
"The sin of Love the crime of a desire:

"Forcing his Mistress with too close pursuit
"To kick him off with an enraged foot.
"Importun'd pity causes just disdain:
Whilst self-denyers may enjoy their pain.





There's no such Lyar as your Lover is:
Not one of them but says, not one does, this.
Would'st thou have humane Love without desire?
No, all below is culinary fire,

Talk what they will.



The Captive dy'd, and me
This ZELIDAURA'S Beauty calls, to see
If fame have not been lavish in her Praise;
And, following the bright Lanthorn of her Raies,
(Pretending to that God a Pilgrimage

Whom superstitious Greeks adore in Delos)

  16I quit my Kingdom (a poor Complement)
For I would quit as many, in her quest,
As Spain possesses, or old Rome possest.
But, if I greater than a Kingdom be,
(Since where I am, I am not without me)
What do I quit?



Although there is no Law
Which can a Countrey, and a People awe
Like their KING'S Eye; thou leav'st at the stern two

Great Statesmen, whose least praise, is that they bridle
Envy's black Muzzel; who, of themselves good,
Surpass themselves in goodness; since we see
They are the better ev'n for fear of thee.




Their Zeal and prudent Courage prop my Throne:

Yet I too am not absent, though from home
For Princes care is over all that's theirs:

Nor can good Kings have evil Counsellors.

A King should be all Eye and Ear; he shou'd
Be learned, to be wise; wise, to be good.




I quake: This Prince was born to rule the World.

O the transcendent baseness of a pack
Of Hounds, of us, who (with what we call Loyalty)
Not follow, but ev'n hunt so sweet a King,
And worry him! For those, whom I have known
To boast most faith, and pure devotion,

Have never been concern'd how Riches Stream

Ebb'd with our Master, so it flow'd with them.




In RIFALORO (for thy Recreation)
Thou hast a Mirth without scurrility,

An understanding wrap'd in Raylery.

In him is found a sober Madness, sport
Without abuse; all very new in COURT.
A Man so honest, that he will (I know)
Speak always truth to thee.



He will not though.
Nor lye, nor truth, shall from my mouth proceed,
(Good my Lord General, there's no such need)

  17Not lye, because to lye, is a disgrace;
Not truth, for it belongs not to my place.
My gay and frolick humour shall dispence,
Not lyes (I scorn't) not truths (they give offence.)
I, Truths? I'm not a Fool to that degree,
'T would count'nance lyes, to have truths told by me.




Such then about all Majesty should come,
As will tell Truths, and whom Truths will become.

Sound a Trumpet within.











To noble Ears the sweetest Musick is.
Amongst these Trees a stately Pile I spy,
Fair butt of the Desire, bound of the Eye.




Is 't not the Sphear of that Illustrious QUEEN?
Thy Heart's strong Load-stone, drawing it unseen?




We are not got so far as Tartary:

For yet we tread the Happy Araby.




Draw neerer let us.



Rather let us balk
Vain Curiosities: For, when I walk

Another way then towards my North Pole,
I am complain'd upon by my own soul.




See, various Works, and strange Inscriptions under,
Where Novelties lay to arrest our wonder.





Reads upon the 〈◊〉.

I am a Bondage, or I am a Prize:
I Marry with the Valiant, and the Wise:
Valiant or Wise, alone, will not suffice.


  And it says here:

Beauty is deny'd a voice,
In making for it self a choice:
'Cause Reason would not trust a Bliss
I' a thing so prone to chuse amiss.



  18The words are plain: But why they are writ here
I cannot reach.











To make wise fools of all that pass this way.







Here hangs a Trumpet: Must we call?







If here I shall
Be held, but for one instant, my Love mourns:
For a true Lover's Heart sits upon Thorns.

They call as before, and a Trumpet answers from within, and another different Gyant comes up, who puts off his Hat.







Your pleasure, Knight? Draw near.




'Fig for your Courtship! Prodigal of Hat;
Thou sleep'st in sheets, drink'st thy Sherbet with Snow,
And wait'st on Ladies (doubtless) to a Show:
A Gyant A-la mode  




What is your Worships pleasure?





Mountain of Bone, if thou canst tell us, do,
What is embraced by this Castle's Dyke?
Say, prodigy; to humane creature like.




The fair Claridiana, who gives Laws

To all this Countrey: For so strange a cause,
And in so strange a way, Inchanted here,
As (if you are at leisure) you shall hear.

The first Gyant comes up very angry, and the second sneaks away.







Peace, Busy; get you whence you came.










He seems a GYANT, is a LAMB.





Who is't would be inform'd?











Squires are no piece of History: Retire.



O Rogue! as long as this year and the last!







Squire? It makes me  



Nay, I deserve no better: Was I drunk,
To raise that scandal on my self? Thou, Trunk;
Thou, Pomontory; thou, deluge of flesh;
Some Errant Knight with a white face shall thresh

  19Thee out (I vow) and not one whole Bone leave thee,
With glittering Morglay: For the gentle slit

Over the Nose would never Gyant fit.









Great Porter (Gyant is no more)
Answer.




(Th'art troublesome) Upon what score?
Wert thou a Knight, I would; but with this Mace

I'l come, and purge you All out of the place.



Must I hear this, and purse up the disgrace?






('Twere good, in troth,
If Gyants should take notice of such froth.)




Knock, knock a thousand times, for I am 








To break in fitters these enchanted Gates.
But, what's Claridiana unto ME?
Whether the wonder of the Earth she be,
Or Envy of the Heav'n? Away, away;
My Soul crys shame on me for this delay.



Sir, though Love spur you, and your heart say no,

Sleep, rest, repose a little; since you go
So tyr'd: Do more for Nations (whose Lives sheath
Themselves in yours) than for one Picture; Breath:
Enjoy this cool cessation of the Sun,

The gentle April's greenest Mansion.




This flowry Wood (so well describ'd) enjoy;
Thy love goes too, if thou thy life destroy.



Sit by this silver-fed, and murmuring 



Means he by that a COURTIER? or a Spring?




I go to see the Palfreys, do not move
From the King, Rifaloro.






I am the sleepy Burgess. Sleep'st not thou?



Ill custom this of sleeping; a dull badge

Of humane frailty: Thief of love and life.




Has the world such a pastime, as dear Sleep?

  20O folly of transcendent gust! to wink,
And for some certain time of nothing think;
But, if I were a King, I'd never lay
My lids together, to reign night and day.



If sleep invade me strongly, That may sever
My life some minutes from me, my love never.
But 'tis impossible to sleep (we know)
Extended on the Rack: If that be so,
Takes out the Picture.

〈◊〉 Larum, come thou forth: Eloquent Mute,

For whom high Heav'n and Earth commence a Suit:
Of Angel-woman, fair Hermaphrodite!
The Moon's extinguisher! the Moon-days night!
How could so small a Sphear hold so much day?
O sleep! now, now, thou conquer'st me  But stay:
That part thou conquer'st, I'l not own for mine.

Tempest I seek, not calm: If the days thine,
Thou quell'st my body, my Love still is whole:
I give thee all of that which is not Soul.
And, since in Lodgings from the Street Love lies,
Do thou (and spare not) quarter in my Eyes
A while; I harb'ring so unwelcome Guest
(As Men obey thy Brother Death's arrest)
Not as a Lover, but a MORTAL  

He falls a sleep with the Picture in his hand.


He's faln a sleep; so soon? What frailty is?
More like a Husband, then a Lover, this.
If Lovers take such sleeps, what shall I take,
Whom pangs of Love, nor Honour's Trumpets, wake?









Solitude, of Friends the best,
And the best 〈◊〉:
Mother of Truths, and brought at least
Every day to bed of one:
In this flow'ry Mansion

I contemplate how the Rose

Stands upon thorns, how quickly goes
The dismaying Iesamine:
Only the 〈◊〉, which is divine,
No decay of Beauty knows.


The world is beauty's Mirrour; Flow'rs,

In their first virgin-purity
Flat'rers both of the Nose and Eye,

To be cropt by Paramours
Is their best of Destiny.


And those nice darlings of the Land,

Which seem'd Heav'ns painted bow to scorn,
And bloom'd the envy of the morn,

Are the gay trophy of a hand:




We, that are Queens, in stile and power.

Serve but to take up a Man's Game,

Into his hands to put the same,
Who may neglect us the next hour.
"She on whom greatness Heav'n doth showre,
"If she the Main is, or the By,

The means of knowing is debarr'd;
Therefore my CROWN I would discard,
Because it lets me not descry
Whether my FORTUNE'S lov'd, or I▪

  22I am not foul, nor very proud,

Yet, out of measure jealous grown,
Least Suitors (who my Pallace croud)
Are come a woing to my Throne.

But, as in vain, with rueful tone


The am'rous Birds in flow'ry Vales

Tell the fair Morn a thousand Tales;
In vain do me these Lovers haunt:
Little Twat'lers, ignorant
Importuning Nightingales.



With shooting I'll divert me  


Rifaloro talks in his sleep, at which Zelidaura startles, and, turning, spies Felisbravo.







I hear a Man   A Knight there lies,
Who, in a Picture (eyes) the vaunted spoil
Of some Court Beauty (whom he will beguile)
Holds in his hand the Idol of his eyes.


She draws nearer him.

He sleeps; she loves him, by this light:
For Men, if handled with disdain,

Cannot sleep (they're in such pain;)
But if once they're lov'd, good night.


SLEEP, and LOVE, are two blind Gods
That have always liv'd at odds.
Therefore th' Man that sleep is taking
Little cares for him who's waking.



Lullaby'd in FAVOURS lap,
No wonder this should take a nap.
 Bless me! She loves him past all bound,
His sleep could not be else so sound.



  23He, her for ends, I lay my life;
Those compast, his flame dyes.
Sure, he consider'd her his WIFE,
For she hath clos'd his Eyes.



O that her self had napping catch'd
Her Knight! that she might weep
To see the much, for him sh' has watch'd,
Rewarded with a sleep.



That she with rage might understand,
In Men, that Truth most prize,
How soon a favour in their hand

Is less'ning in their eyes.


She draws yet nearer.

LOVER (because ungrateful's worse,
I say not foolish Lover)
Thou shouldst have put it in a purse,

The disesteem to cover.



I'l take it from him: Let him wake
As rightly serv'd, as inly madded,
Fond Ship-wreck of a Bliss to make,
Which he despis'd because he had it.

Takes the Picture from him.

Lady, thou art reveng'd by me;

Without thee let him 'bide,
Who, being in thy company,
Could take himself aside:


Whom favour made to face about:
Who neither loves thee, nor did keep 

Looks upon the Picture.

But, what is this! without all doubt
I dream, if he 's asleep.

  24I feel a hidden hand distil
A poyson flow into my will.



My Organs in their places stand?
Tis I (unhappy Beauty!)
I, limn'd? And in a Poltroons hand
That sleeps upon his duty?



Where's the due reverence to my state?
(Heavens!) What is this face become?
I, pocketted? And by a Mate

That uses me for Opium?



The Root of Womans Pedegree
Makes me fear my self his Bride;
Because my self I taken see
(Whil'st he sleepeth) from his side.


I should love him by ONE Token,
That his sleeps are so unbroken;
But he wrongs me (I'm sure) by two,


Pictur'd, and neglected too.


To know who 'tis, more fear in me
Then Curiosity doth move:
For little is his Quality;
If 'tis not greater than his Love.



Another fault I cannot find:
A sweeter Man my Eyes ne're saw!
Here were a LOVER, if his Mind

One by his Face and Shape could draw.


If I have cost thee Love, (a pain

Thou hast so rare an Art to hide)
Thee I conjure, for my disdain



She hears the footing of some-body.

  25(People approach.) Mask'd with my fear
In this same place again I'll be,
To know news of him   (Love, hold there)
I was about to say   Of me.











Hear (fair one) thou a Man hast slain,

Yet fly not for it;
For, besides that 'tis in vain,

'T will make the fact more horrid:
In vain: for (Flow'rs up-growing
Where thou art going)
O ZELIDAURA, see
Each ROSE accuses and confesses Thee!


Through this dark Wood I shoot,
Where thy scorns lead,
And (Pencil of the Mead)
Thy Milky Foot

A Miracle doth show,
That the red Flowers should spring from the white Snow.


If thou'rt enraged to find
My Murdress, I declare,
My silence doth prepare
To pacifie thy Mind.


But (HEAVENS!) How is that possible,
Since when I tell my fear, my Love I tell?


Felisbravo wakes, and begins to speak to the Picture.




Can, Can it be that I have slept?
Then let my sin my pennance be,
For all that while I have been kept
(Companion for a God) from thee.



  26Hah! The Picture? I had rather
My self were lost, (O heav'nly Father!)
He whom to wake that could not make,
Let him sleep, and never wake.


In my Coffin I should blush
Though I now dy'd of Grief and Love.

One Life would for offending thus

But slender expiation prove.


If I dye, my grief dies too,
If I would kill grief and all,

Death hath something else to doe
Than to come when Wretches call.


If I dye in fine, in vain
Will a demi-cure be wrought:
Death, that takes away my pain,
Cannot take away my fault.




Live then, I, and live my GRIEF;
Wander my surviving Ghost

(Stripped of her Solace chief)
Round about this treasure lost.


Let my Soul a stranger be
To what e're of comfort tasts;
And my Body dying see,
Whilst long-lived sorrow lasts.


Ill on me is well bestow'd,
I have deserv'd so cross a fate,

Whose misfortune most is show'd
In that I once was fortunate.






What does he prole about for here?




'Tis stoln from me (my Anger grow )

This Man hath stoln it   Cavalier,
I'm one the WORLD (I'd have you know)


  27Hath bourn so great, that (though in jest)
I cannot any wrong digest;
And (by none else to be dismay'd)
Of my own name I am afraid.


Never did I, my whole Life long,
With RAUNTS (you understand)
Give to a Braggadocia Tongue

The office of the Hand.



Therefore, in courteous sort I pray,
Deliver the Sun back.





What means the Man?



My Soul I say,
Which I too long do lack.




Is he not mad?



Think not to put me off,
By putting strangeness on; with it, in one

Pencil, restore a thousand rays, a thousand
Suns in one Picture.




Yet, I cannot reach him.



Restore it, or (I vow to JOVE) th' art dead.




I neither know your meaning, neither fear
Nor esteem you: For let me tell you 

Rifaloro wakes, and gets upon his feet in a grant fright.



What clattering 's this?



Not understand me? little
Know'st thou whom thou offend'st.




Thou know'st me little.

Rifaloro draws and puts himself on the side of Claridoro.


Do, tame that Colt.



Thou do'st misken me doubtless.



No, no, but to help one (a Medicine try'd)
Clap a hot Coward to the other side.



No fooling, my chaf'd fury shall consume him:
Once I have sworn.





And, if my honest word
Thou wilt not take, I pawn thee here my Sword.

They fight, when suddenly let there be a noise within, many Inven∣tions are shot off, and all that may move horrour and admiration. Trumpets and Drums loftily.

  28But what is this!



What horrour! 'less Heav'n falls,
Th' Inchantment is dissolving: or these Walls.








The Adventure is try'd doubtless by some Knight.




Hide me (rough Bark) while I enjoy this sight.
But he that comes to try it, is the same
That wore my Picture. O, fair Knighthoods shame!

One Woman pictur'd, and another sought?
That thou a Traytor art, is thy own fault:
But, wert thou an ungrateful one, 'twere mine.

Let all the stair-case be coverd with Arms, and Appurtenances of War, and the covering and floor covered therewith, and let there fally out of the mouth of a Serpent a black Gyant armed with a Club, and spitting fire.








I cannot now the while, I do fear so;
Fear with me, and hereafter we shall know.

Floranteo puts himself between the two Adventures.



Generous KNIGHTS, ambitious of the honour
To interweave LAUREL with OAK, and twist

MARS with APOLLO. From this dazling wonder,

From this fair Prodigie, from this (now) truth,

But a Romance to succeeding Ages,
This general Loadstone, BABEL that threats HEAV'N,
A great ill Neighbour with fantastick Towers
Your coming hath proceeded.
Hear what it promises, what it contains,

To what it binds, what it observes, what teaches:


  29Laeomedon (the Glory of these Provinces


Wise, learned, valiant,) in ARABIA was
The last of all her Kings, whose Magick Voice,
Which silenc'd Circe's and Medea's Charms
(Bridle of Sea and Winds) gave the Stars Laws.
A Daughter had he (Natures Master-piece)

Who might boast verify'd in her perfections

All that base FLAT'RY LYES, so without Art

Handsome, that her unaided Beauty chides
The lyes and dims the truths of Rose and Snow,


Her (crown'd with Roses and pale Iesamines

A MAIDEN QUEEN) twelve flow'ry SPRINGS being there
Out flourish'd by her Beauty, the sole Heir

Of her Sires REALM and FAME, and that so sole,
That she stands fair for sole Executrix

To the ARABIAN PHOENIX  
He (judging Beauty fit to be an EMPRESSE,
But an ELECTRESSE not, as having given
So frequent cause of sorrow and disgrace
To the unhappy Boasters of a face)
To all the NOBLES of this Land presents
And in her hearing uses this plain Language,
One foot now in the grave. Love and Ambition
Will from the spatious Universe hereafter
Draw many Suitors to my Crown and Daughter:
I will not that endanger'd by the SYREN
Of cruel Flattery (which sings in Rocks
T' intrap the wariest Ears) a false supplant,
Or soft heart counsel her, Misfortune dark'ning
The splendour of her Beauty; and, instead
Of chusing a WISE Husband and a VALIANT
(Her Eye, perhaps, swaying her to a fair one)
A COWARD or a FOOL govern ARABIA.

This said (and seconded with a dire SPEL)
The cleft Earth trembles, utt'ring to the Air

This glitt'ring EDIFICE; In which incloyst'ring

  30His fair INHERITRIX (with double wards
Of task on task secur'd) He one INCHANTMENT
Locks in another, leaving (to the end

Great Souls may try th' Adventure) much for VALOUR
To cut, as much for WISDOM to untye;
To have ARABIA so (Her Queen the Prize)

Defended by the STOUT, Rul'd by the WISE.
For (to oblige his Realm) he did ordain
These two (which make one PERFECT PRINCE) should Reign.
Then on, Young-men, A Beauty and a Crown
He gains that wins, the loser gains Renown.




He who doth seek this Realm, this Beauty wish,
Let him these dangers conquer, court this Bliss:

Not he, who doth adore a greater LIGHT,
And mourns its absence in a longsome night.




One worn? One sought? A third lov'd? (facil Man!)



Nor think inamour him that Scepters can,
Whose Mistress is all Dowry, who reproves
The Common truck of Mercenary Loves

By his more noble thoughts, and doth disclaim
All guerdon but the glory of his Flame.





The same say I, and that I too adore
A greater Mistress, fortify'd with more

Impossibilities than Heav'n hath Lights.



I must propose a Question: Are ye Knights?













Then tell them (BROCADAN)
The LAW observed here by every Man.




The LAW is this; That whatsoever KNIGHT

Presumes t'approach this famous CASTLES sight
Shall, if th' ADVENTVRE he shall then eschue,
Confess himself a FOOL and COWARD too,
Else We, the GYANTS, and WILD BEASTS that wait
On our Commands, are bound to fight him straight.



And Whoso tries it, and shall fail, that he

Remain behind t' expound the Mysterie.

  31My Case: Who had the Heart t' attempt the thing,
But not the fortune to succeed therein.



Such baseness do these barbarous Laws obtrude
On KNIGHTS, twice Valiant by their Oath and Blood?

I'll end th' Adventure, that another's Eyes
(More fair) may have a Rival to despise.




Vyes he the Game? then I will see't,
Whose LAWRELS here I vow,
For strewings to another's Feet,

Not garlands of my Brow.


Trumpets and Drums softly.



Let the Trumpets give the sign
Let the second Draw bridge fall,
And to the proof of WIT divine

Both enter, for that first doth call.

The Draw-bridge falls down like a Percullis, and let Rocks full of horrour appear, and in them many dreadful Animals spitting fire.

This Labyrinth decides the thing,
Which he will shew he understands,
Who by the one door entering,
Comes forth by that which right against it stands




Have at the Castle then.




The same I say,
This day I am immortalliz'd.





Imp I new feathers in the Wings of FAME
With which to Heav'n she shall advance my Name.



Clear Spirits both; and, if one's WIT burn dim,
I, in my Picture's right shall blush for him.

But, if he twice prove VICTOR, he must Marry
Th' Arabian Queen  It cuts two ways 




Exceeding long (me thinks) my little bit
What if try'd of Prowess, and of Wit?

'Tis but to thrid a Maze, and t' other thing
Of being Valiant, and I am a KING.




Said not I, Squires are only to look on
In acts of CHIVALRY? Presto: Be gone.



St. Belianis! a Snake stung my toe.



IN COURT THERE'S NOT A WORM BUT STINGS YOU KNOW.
Rifaloro either flyes back, or is swallowed into the mouth of one of the Monsters, or a Gyant snatches him, and the Gyant goes out in wrath.








The Prize of Wisdom?  

Claridoro enters at the contrary door.









Of PALLAS, shadow with that Tree thy Head,
Which ciphers hope, and yet of scorns 'twas bred.


He proffers Claridoro a Crown of Lawrel, and he refuses it.




No Conquest this, since for an unseen face,
And ZELIDAURA is not in the case.






I lost the Prize of Wit (the stuff that lines
A gallant Man) fond Errour! which defines
It WIT, a misty LABYRINTH to hit,
More savouring of Memory than WIT,
Whose lofty Plumes to higher things aspire,
And fetch from Heaven the Promethean Fire.
Quite contrary, a Memory was never
A friend to Wit, but its discredit ever.



The Man wants BRAINS, and well he may, that gives
His Mind to sleeping so, and idlely lives.


  33Trumpets and Drums softly:



Again, Young man. Those Monsters which did bear
Thy Wit respect, make now thy Valour fear.

Claridoro draws and charges, and the Monsters spit fire.




All their grim horrour does but whet my Blade.

Have at you dogs.




How bold he does invade!



How bravely he attacks!





Impossibles; for though my Soul's on fire,
Though it scorn all that's Monster, kick at danger,
My strength is not immortal like my anger.

O, Devils! Devils!  

Claridoro retires, and Felisbravo assaults the shut Gates, and they open in two parts, and the Gyants appear to stop his passage.



This day it will be seen, if Heav'n think fit,

Valour shall recompence the the want of WIT.
I come, pale Monsters: Coward Beasts, 'Tis I:
In my HAND Thunder, Light'ning in my EYE.

The Serpents spit fire, and go retiring and sinking down, and let the Gyants come with their Clubs, and let there be much tumult and demonstration of war and danger.


This can my valour suffer! to forsake
My King's brave side! INCHAUNTMENT I would make
My way thorough thee, and his displeasure too,
But that I know his Sword can more subdue.



They run, they run, with steel, and terrour strook:
Trumpets and Drums.
His arm may play, he kills them with his look.


Let the Gyants and Wild Beasts fly sinking down.


Fantastick dangers! Conquests of light Air!
Give me fresh Foes, for I have deaths to spare.
Within.
Floranteo Crowns him with Lawrel.






This Lawrel MARS presents, there to root, grow,


  34And multiply. Th' Inchantment 'twixt you twain

Is now dissolv'd; In her it doth remain
To chuse: And (see!) her Godhead doth unshrowd,
Like Phoebus breaking glorious through a Cloud.



Let the Castle come down, with much Musick, and let doors fall open with Chrystal Casements, and much splendour, that it may be admi∣rable to behold, and sitting in a Throne the Queen Claridiana with a Garland of Flowers upon her head.

What a rare Beauty!




May she WIT abhor.



Grant, Love, she may not like a Man of War.


Let Claridiana come forth of the Inchantment.



Arrogant KNIGHTS, who (foolish and presumptuous)
Before you have been SUITORS, would be HUSBANDS,
One of you two ye look now I should chuse.

How fond and vain an Errour! since there be
Yet greater charms to overcome in Me.

'Twere more than time the disinchanted Queen

Thank'd both your Loves for taking down her skreen,
Could me by CONQUEST any Mortal claim,
Or by his Wit (as people win a Game)
I'd burn my self alive first. But, is't Wit

The windings of a Labyrinth to hit?
To overcome two Serpents, a pretence
To be the Son of Mars? To speak a Prince


Valiant to cut and slash, doth not suffice,
Nor to resolve a RIDDLE stiles him wise.
Speaks to the Company.
To be a King (wise-valiant) of these twain

Which Battels wan? which Rul'd a Land with BRAIN?
If my free choice my unjust Father rest,
Why was my WILL, why was my REASON left?
I, by Inchantments over-rul'd to be?
Not for two Thrones. My Body, but not Me,


  35He did inchant  Prepost'rous! to bring one

For us to see, when all's agreed upon?
That our imposed Masters we must go
First to obey, and afterwards to know?

I ask not the sole making of my choice:

But why am I deny'd my Negative voice?

This Victory to me worse THRALDOM is,
If it oblige me to be his, or his.

But it shall not, I'll love my self alone;
Not of the WISE nor VALIANT, but mine OWN.



Madam, a Queen might well chuse either;
But of the two 



This Queen likes neither.
I, for a Husband, the Discreet would have;
But, for a KING, one both Discreet, and BRAVE.
One I'll not injure, nor to two belong:
Wise and stout you see are twain:

Then (till they be friends again)
If I refuse both, I do neither wrong.



How resolute, and how discreet!
Envy couches at her feet.



How can be so wise, and fair,


One that is not ZELIDAURE?




O, how worthy my applause!
Though my LOVE another cause.



I find I'm not in love, since I

Nor Envy feel, nor Iealousie.




First plead the Cause, and try by dint of words
If Brain or Valour most adorns a King;
Those proving vain, then come t' appeal to Swords,
And let those tongues of steel decide the Thing:
He who the Bays of both these Duels gains,
May wear CLARIDIANA for his pains.



(How little I that Glory prize!)
Aside.





(How much do I that bliss despise!)
Aside.




Where we left off, remember Knight,

And the proud wrong which thou hast done.

They lay hands upon their Swords.



Thy Insolence doth me incite
To end the Quarrel we begun.




A Man who with my Picture came
To combat for another Dame!
I'm vext, but jealous not a whit.
Trumpets softly.
Hah! have we more Inchantments yet?

They begin to fight, and let there be a noise like the first, and let them be all divided, as if they saw not one another.



The Earth is hid with terrours dire.




Heaven lets down sheets of fire.





























Let twice my Liberty



Let them all disappear, the Draw-bridge be closed, the Percullis drawn up, and the whole vansh in a trice.
The End of the first Act.


  37At the End of the first Act, the Lady Mary Cutinio, and the Lady Frances Tavara, came forth and Danced with swords (in form of a chain) The Gallery of Love.
Then the following Song, between the first and second Act.
I.WHere TAGUS, Crown'd with plumes of Woods,

(Now master of the field)
Makes to his Chrystal Yoak the Floods
Of proud HARAMA yield.

II.BELIZA (Shepherdess on Earth
The best that e're sway'd hook)
The day of her Phileno's birth
Did like an Angel look.

III.And a new Quire of NIMPHS appears
To celebrate in Verse
(At least if Gods do count their years)
His happy Anniverse.



  38CHORUS.And in this Novelty,
With brave variety,
We all joyn as one;
For the better adorning
In the Western Levant the fair years of a Sun,
Which make all but one Morning.

IV.Now festive, and Majestical

Have lost, on Tagus's shore,
The fear of being match'd at all,
The hope of being more.


V.After so much of Greatness shown;
And an applause not under,
Nothing will ever dare to own
The title of a Wonder.


VI.For that BELIZA's Name (the stuff



Alone is Festival enough,
And hath to spare of Glory.



  39CHORUSAnd in this Novelty,
With sweet variety,
We all joyn as one;
For the better adorning
In a Western Levant the fair years of a Sun,
Which make all but one Morning.


  40The Persons of the second Act, are the same with those of the first, adding,



The Lady Isabella Gusman.
A GENTLEMAN

The same Lady Isabella.
A SERVANT of Prince CLARIDORO

The Lady Mary Salier.
A CITIZEN

The Lady Lucy Prada.

  41Querer por solo Querer: To Love only to Love.








IN what a War, Father unjust,
Hast thou plung'd me? for what cause
Didst thou confine my choice to Laws
So Heterogeneal to my gust?

What satisfaction to thy dust
Can it be, I so should wed?
Who put that fancy in thine head?
That I should not be capabel
To chuse for my own self, as well,
As thou for me, after thou'rt dead?


  42O (in thy own opinion) wise!
How have thy spectacles discern'd,
That there, where I am most concern'd,

I must be cozen'd by mine Eyes?

Admit, they should their choice revise,
And rue too late with sad reflection
Their Errour in their undeception:

Were it not better owe that Ill
To the deception of my will,

Than to the wilfulness of thy deception?



If to Inchantments thou confide
My happiness, thou may'st with much
More ground, what I shall chuse for such,

Trust to my Spirit and my PRIDE:
If a Star's trusted to provide
A Match for me, though that see far,
'Tis fair, and therefore like to erre
In Happiness, and (with thy leave)
As to Love matters (I conceive)
A Woman knows more than a Star.



If it be noted a thing rare,
For Beauty fortunate to prove,
Yet I may fortunately love;
For what have I to do with Fair?

But Beauty now will quite despair
That ever Bliss to her should come,
When (cruel Father!) by thy doom
I, who have none, condemn'd must be,
Dead to my self, to live to thee:
Like a Watch-candle in a Tomb,



  43Is it decreed I must admit

Perforce of Love? what madness, this?
Serves Beauty only to hand bliss

T' another, that usurpeth it?
Virtue, Education, Wit,
To be noble, to be fair,

To be ev'ry thing that's rare,

Let not these for ever be
Woman's infelicitie,
Let not these for ever scare.



My years in HYMEN'S slavish bands!
The freedom of my Soul reduc'd
To live after another's Gust!
I, moulded in another's hands!
At an imperious Man's Commands!
It must not be: Let Men divine
With similies; Let them in fine
Date Beauty by a flow'r that blows:
(How everlasting in a Rose!
How trivial in a Iesamine!)


Fright Fools with this, That Youth 's a blaze:
That, which my Envy doth engage,
Is the Prerogative of AGE;
Which from a higher ground survays
The Labyrinth of humane ways,
And, undeceiv'd by Time, doth know
That all's deception here below;
And whether calm, or storm appears,
Is laid up in the Bay of Years,

And lets it shine, and lets it blow.



  44No ancient Fester, no new Sore,

Makes Age wish CUPIDS Bow were burst,
For TIME by this hath cur'd the first;
And high time 'tis, to have no more,

Love's golden Field being now all hoar.


Free I was born, and remain free;
Mine own I am, If I will be

Another's, 'tis my fault; with whom

For me unhappy to become,
Can never happen without me.




Liberty, my noble Will:

For these Ills, so well forecast,
How bitter will they be to taste,

When, imagin'd but, they kill?
Indeed the Fates have us'd me ill:
I ask them not Revenge, nor Pelf,
But quiet, and to 'scape a shelf.
This sure can be no great offence;
'Tis begging in my own defence
To pray I may but save my self.









This now is LOVE'S last Will, and last shall be,
Which (thankful to the hand that gave me death)
Shall leave my Murtheress a Legacie,

And sigh her Blessings with my dying breath:


And these shall be not the first tears, which, still'd
Out of the Bosom's principaller part,
Shall have the Fate of Wealth profusely spill'd,
Which seldom meets with any grateful heart:


  45And this shall be a Love so obstinate,

That, for all Love it shall a pattern grow,
To live in spight of Time, or Change, or Hate,

Yet there's one comfort amidst all this woe,

That, for a wretch his way to death to grope,
There needs in fine, nor Remedy, nor Hope.




Upon the License giv'n by thee
This glorious Pil• to come and see,
Hundreds do flock, to view the Place,

But thousands to behold thy Face;


Whom, though these Knights did disinchant,
Th' Adventure is not finisht ye,
Because that WISE, and VALIANT,
Have not in one subject met:
So, in the SWORD again it lies,
By DUEL to decide the Prize.





I weigh not my dead Sires command,
Where his Will his Law I find;
No King that ever Rul'd a Land,

Could stretch his Empire to the mind,



I wonder in my heart, that he

(With all his Wisedom) could not see,
The Husband he did fore-decree,
Would not so well examin'd be
By an Inchantment, as by Me:


Nor so authentick in Love-matters
An Old Man's judgement, as his Daughters.

This is a Lott'ry, I profess,
Not giving him the happiness
Who hath most worth but best success.



  46And may not I acquainted be
With who they are?





To know, they're both of Knights degree,
And that thy Sire was very wise.



I have a better way to know
Who's Valiantest, and Wisest.







He shall be the Valiantest
Who my scorns best suffer can  








And him that loves me best
I shall count the wisest Man.


But sadly, I do live in fear;
For, though I would not fair appear,
And, though in truth I am not fair,


Haunted I am, like those that are:



And here, among these rustling leaves,
With which the wanton Wind doth play,
Inspir'd by it, my Sense perceives
This snowy Iesamine (whisp'ring) say;


How much more frolick, white, and fair,

In her green-lattice she doth stand,
T' enjoy the free and cooler Air,

Than in the prison of a hand,





Madam, Thou might'st be pleas'd to read
Other Lessons in this Mead;
All whose Flowers (as from the Spring)
Take from thee their life and being.



See, this JESAMINE; which doth owe
To thy HAND fingers of Snow,

To its soveraign whiteness, how
All his silver Banners bow!


  47See, that sanguine Gilly-flow'r

(Spicy, big with pearly showre)
Which a new AURORA dips
In the scarlet of thy Lips!


See, the LILLY'S so pure white,

It might be margent to the Light!
Such a white Foyl to those black EYES
Is that smooth Forehead's christal Rise.



See, a quire of Nightingales;
Bidding thee a thousand Hales;

Twice taken for their MORNING bright,
By the Flowers; and by the Light!


For in those clear Eyes, Ray for Ray,

The SUN'S translated, and made better,
And, flow'r for flow'r, in those Cheeks MAY

Copied in a FAIRER LETTER.


But, least in limning Thee my Art

Should play th' unskilful PAINTERS part,
Let this Christal RIVER pass
For thy liquid Looking-glass.



See thy self there! but, if thine Eye
Too long on that sweet Centre dwell 





This Man (I fear me) by and by
Will drop into NARCISSUS WELL.


Since now I came, where I am Witness to
The WORLDS Ambitions, I have no content.




Not, that your self you disinchanted view.




Thou nam'st the thing which I do most resent.

  48Till then, I liv'd in jollity,
On others dangers looking down,
From the serene Tranquility

Which my Soul truly term'd her own:



For, plac'd above what MAN calls Bliss,

And (into her self retir'd)
By a heavenly Ecstasis




She saw the multitude of Woes,

A fair one on her self bestowes,
When 'tis her Riches, and her Pride,

To see her LOVERS multiply'd.


Who, ev'n to qualifie disdains

(For, not disdaining, BEAUTY's dull)
Must be content to take the pains
To be reputed Beautiful.



And, if with beautiful disdain

To let Men fall, it be her stile;
Ev'n by Refusals this they '•l gain,
That she hath thought of them the while.


I look'd, if underneath the Cope

Were one that lov'd, and did not hope;
But from his Nobler Soul remove
That modern Heresie in Love:



When, hearing a shrill voyce, I turn,
And (loe!) a sweet-tongu'd Nightingal

(Tender adorer of the Morn)
In him I found that one and all:



  49For that same faithful Bird, and true,
(Sweet and kind, and constant Lover)
Wond'rous Passion did discover
From the terrace of an Eugh.



And, though ungrateful she, appear'd
Unmov'd with all she saw and heard;
Ev'ry day, before 'twas day,
More and kinder things he'd say.



Courteous, and never to be lost,
Return'd not with complaints, but praise;
Loving, and all at his own cost,

Suff'ring, and without hope of Ease:


For, with a sad and trembling throat,
He breaths into her breast this Note,

I love thee not, to make thee mine;
But love thee, 'cause thy Form's Divine.



Here now was candour! Here Faith strove!
How rul'd a pain! how full of duty!
Not his own happiness to love;
But to love anothers Beauty!


Where (O how base!) the Man, whose flame
Soars highest, if he spy no Game,
AURORA'S self (so fresh so gay)
Shall see him late a second day▪:


And I was scandaliz'd at Love
(If, since the thing did hence remove,
The name remains) to find one can
Believe a Nightingale, and not a MAN.





Believe 't (when he does love) a MAN
Loves more than BRUITS or do, or can:


His tow'ring Passion scorns to vale
T' a silly short-wing'd NIGHTINGALE.


The Nightingale loves nothing else
But the presence of his Dame;
Love (like Faith) in this excels,
That see, or not, it is the same.


The MORNING hears his Roundelaies,
Which though she do not thank him for;
A Dame, that listens to her praise,
May be presum'd not to abhor.


The diff'rence then is very great:
For, where there is most diffidence,
A Cause that can a hearing get
Will pick an Eye of Hope from thence.



But Oh! the space (Madam) the space
Betwixt his passion, and relief,

Who suffers, and restrains his Grief,

Nor open'd to the JUDGE his Case.



For once I will discover mine,

Not to perswade thee to incline
The least, but only let thee see
What silence thou hast ow'd to me.



O, how it sweeten would my pain,

Could my CAUSE hope but to be cast

Out, after formal sentence past,
In the fair Court of thy Disdain!


  51For, though I have a Patience

Which needs not this experiment,

Yet I would owe experience

It self to being a Patient.






Henceforth thou shalt not to my face
Tell me I would not hear thy CASE;
Nor me with thy dumb Passion twit,
For thou hast disinvelop'd it.


Him, who his silence for respect

Obtrudes upon my estimation,

For punishment I will direct
To speak in nothing, nor no fashion.


For, if he persevere not mute,
I'll tell him, and I'll (smiling) do 't,
What time his pain hath speechless been,
'T was 'cause (being small) he bit it in.


Which if he now could do no more,
But LOVE brake ope his prison dore;
Though with dark-keeping he was mad,

He 's tame, since he began to gad.



I make no diff'rence 'twixt a wrong,

And telling me thou do'st despair;
LOVE haulks at hope, when in a Tongue

He walks abroad to take the Air.


If nourish hope thou ought'st not, Thou

Do'st thy self wrong, as well as me,


Confiscating by speaking now

The merit of thy Secrecie.



  52He, that of honour understands,
Pain'd, hath his cure in his own hands:

The glory of concealing it,
The smart of suff'ring it doth quit,


And (FLORANTEO) for the Truth

Of thy Affection, I should doubt it,
But that one thing confirm me doth,
That I desire to be without it.





My Errour did not think to be
So much beholding unto Thee:
And faintly hop'd, from thine own mouth
The undeceiving of my Youth.


I, better than I look'd for, fare;
Though I presum'd to entertain
Some thought, that to compleat despair

I might be help'd by thy disdain.



Be not so prodigal of scorns,

On me thy Rigours do not wast;
With such a deluge of good turns

I may grow insolent at last.


And I to thee would owe no more,
Meaning to dye to pay this shot,

And set thee something on my score 




I hear thee, and I hear thee not.



My death will bring some good to thee
In ridding thee of me.





Thy death will bring no good to me,
For I'll be rid of thee without it.

Offers to go away.


Into the Garden comes a Knight.




Withdraw, that I may see, unseen,
Whether, or no, he doth acquit
The promise of his Princely Meen.






No Man was born to be my Husband, no Man
Deserves a Love. For as, when this Man's scorn'd,

His everlasting whining deafs a Woman;
So that grows sawcy, if his Love 's return'd.



The best unjustly blames the worst of Fate,

Is it unjust to give to all their due?
He is a Man; enough to merit Hate:

He loves me; that's unpardonable too.


Nor let fair Virgins murmur at their chance
Of being entit'led to ill luck. O dull,
Though frequently repeated, Ignorance!
Is 't no good luck then to be beautiful?

For if to make us happy, Men were able;
What needed more to make us miserable?








A second ARGO, fraighted
With Fear and Avarice,
Between the Sea and Skies
Hath penetrated
To the new World, unworn
With the red footsteps of the snowy Morn;



She comes rich back, and the curl'd Rampire past
Of watry Mountains, cast
Up by the winds,
Ungrateful shelf near home
Gives her usurped Gold a silver Tomb.


  54A devout PILGRIM, who
To forreign Temple bare
Good pattern, fervent prayre,
Spurr'd by a pious Vow,
Meas'ring so large a space
That Earth lack'd Regions for his Plants to trace;


Joyful returns, though poor,
And, just by his aboad,
Falling into a Road
Which Laws did ill secure,
Sees plunder'd by a Thief,
(O happier Man than I!) for 'tis his Life.


Conspicuous grows a TREE,
Which (Wanton) did appear
First fondling of the Year
With smiling Braverie,
And in his blooming pride
The lower house of Flowers did deride:


When his silk Robes, and fair,
(His Youth's imbellishing
The Crownet of a Spring,

Narcissus of the Air)
Rough Boreas doth confound,
And with his Trophies strews the scorned ground:


Trusted to redious hope
So many months the CORN,
Which now begins to turn
Into a golden Crop;
The lusty Grapes, which (plump)
Are the last farewell of the Summers pomp;


  55(How spatious spreads the VINE!
Nurs'd up with how much care!
She lives, she thrives, grows fair!
'Bout her lov'd Elm doth twine)
Comes a cold Cloud, and lays
In one, the Fabrick of so many days:


A silver RIVER SMALL
In sweet Accents
His Musick vents
(The warbling Virginal
To which the merry Birds do sing,
Timed with stops of gold the chrystal string)


He steals by a green Wood
With fugitive feet
(Gay, jolly, sweet)
Comes me a troubled Flood,
And scarcely one sand stays
To be a witness of his golden days.


The SHIP'S up weigh'd;
The PILGRIM made a Saint;

Next Spring recrowns the PLANT;

Winds raise the CORN was laid;
The Vine is prun'd;
The Rivulet new tun'd;
But in the Ill I have,
I'm left alive only to dig my Grave.


Lost BEAUTY, I will dye
But I will thee recover,
And that I dye not instantly
Shews me more perfect LOVER:

  56For (my Soul gone before)
I live not now to live, but to deplore.





(This is he that was more stout.) Aside.




In these blind Paths I go,
To hunt my Foe;
Whom having once found out,
His Blood shall purge the soyl
Of a short nap, and an immortal spoyl.




(Well (believe 't) the Man's no Fool,

Nor a boist'rous Sword-man solie:
For Wisdom (taught in Sorrow's School)
Is the Child of Melancholy.) Aside.




Am I a Prince? or am I vile?
Am I a refined LOVER?
Am I stout? yet all this while
Not the PICTURE to recover?



(Heav'n be juster then that he
Have a Picture had of me!)
Aside.




Fairest Madam, well 'tis seen
I was ignorant indeed,
That durst wrong so bright a Queen 



(Wrong'd he me in word or deed?) Aside.




Yet wise enough I am to know
Losing my painted Mistress,
The unpainted one will after go 



(Else she her self a STATUE is.)
Aside.








He has me in his Ear,
Therefore will I my self unshroud,
And try his Wit too  Knight.




Claridiana shews her self.

What Heav'n! what Sun breaks through a Cloud!





Though my presence All admit,
Thy presumption wants much Wit,


Be wholly finish'd, thou suppose
To pry into the Mysteries

Which these inchanted Walls inclose.


To tame two Dragons you account
Is one Woman to subdue;
But, upon an Audit, true,
It will not to so much amount.



When they sigh, and when they weep,

When before our Feet they fall,
When they stand in studies deep.



MANHOOD I despise not (This,

And justly, all the WORLD approve)
But show, what kind of Manhood 'tis
Which conquers in the Wars of LOVE:


And, the great odds if Thou regard
Betwixt MY SELF and this dire Spell,

To vanquish It Thou found'st it hard;
But Me it is impossibel.







RESPECT may to this Dame be shown,
Though MISTRESSE I another call:
For, though the Heart can lodge but one,

CIVILITY hath Room for all.




CLARIDIANA (Theam of FAME)
I am a Man would blush my Flame
Should own an Object, but the most
Accomplisht one the WORLD can boast.


  58And know my Spirit is so high,
That at less Game it scorns to flye
Then where the greatest difficulties lye.



This, which my lucky SWORD hath lately reapt,
Was not the Victory I did design;
Whose Valour for a SHIELD is kept
To bear the brunt of scorns divine.


Over strong Spells to be victorious,
Guilds (I must confess) a name,
But, to submit unto a DAME,

This to me seems much more glorious.


For there, my valour takes my part,
My strength, and my good Sword, befriend me:
But in this War I have no heart,
No steel Brest-plate can defend me.


If, first the Foe's invincible,
And I betray'd by my own fear;
T' o'recome how is it possible
Where arms against my self I bear?


In the glorying of my Love

I abide no Competition,

Nor in the cause whence it doth move,
Nor of the pain in the fruition;


Yet, so great Love my grief exceeds,
And this grief likewise owns a chief:

For a lost Lady my Heart bleeds,

But 't will not break, and that 's my grief.








Equally witty, and discreet;
He covers, but not hides his Flame;
Holds his Game so, that I may see 't,
Yet I'll not seem to see his Game.


With what end lov'st thou?






My Love is the perpetual moving;
No end in loving I pretend,
No end will ever make of loving.



Love is of Love the only scope:
Love scorneth to be mercenary:
You find not such a word as Hope

In all the Lovers Dictionary.


Nay, LOVE alone doth scandal me:

For the silent'st and most wise,

From sights, from peeping is not free
Out at the casements of the EYES.


See, 'twill now and now 'twill hear;
And the least of joy it gits,
Whether at the Eye, or Ear,

Puts it clean beside the wits.



First know, I have a Misteriss;
Then, that to her true Faith I bear:
And, where Faith once through kindled is,

Superfluous are the SENSES there.











Either hope, or yet desire.

Yes I do, to live and dye
In this elemental fire.




She, in her self, is proof 'gainst all:

Then, for me to aim at her,
Were to add a Brazen Wall;
So successless is my Star.



Nor so alone in things of Love;
But my Life over and above,
Because on her it doth depend,
I have no power to make it end.


And (the full Case to understand)
My Life and Death, because in fine
Love hath put them in her hand,

Both are therefore out of mine.







From the mark I shot not wide,
When him of folly I did quit:
For the sharp SWORD that arms his side
Hath much to envy in his WIT.


'Tis not against Majesty

His discretion to approve;
Nor, if his good parts I spy,
Must it presently be love.



His goodly shape, his flowing meen,

His talk, and what his valour wrought,
May claim attention from a QUEEN,
Yet ne're sink deeper in her thought.



  61A leaning (KNIGHT) I do confess 







In this Countrey-tone and dress

Disguised rudely, safe we are.





Man-like bent to feats of War

Of a Woman's left in thee
Only Curiositie.



What boots it thee to understand
Who a Man is?





When I my picture found in 's hand,
And now may opportunely do't?





Lies your happiness in this,

To overcome the other Knight?



Madam, all my life and bliss.




In the name of MARS then, fight  
Aside.
Who grant (say I) thou maist subdue!

Zelidaura spies them together▪



Bless me! who is this I see?
(Is it?   'Tis not ) Ah! 'tis HE:
With CLARIDIANA too:


O Sigh! base brat, not of the Royal Mind,

With which I'm lin'd,
But of this Clown's false cover

I have drawn over.
What matters it?   Much, the contempt  In Love

The least misprission doth High Treason prove.

  62This hath a tang of Iealousie.

I, disorder'd? Plaintiff, I ?
Should any thing the Heav'ns beneath,
Make me a mean complaint to breath!
I, resentments! I, in wroth!
I, concern'd in breach of Troth!
I? who, to make fond LOVE depart,
Hung padlocks on my Eyes, and Heart.

Though in this war, I feel beginning,
I doubt not in the end of winning
The victory; one moments wasting
This way, I pay with blushes everlasting.


CLARIDORO scorn'd, and curb'd,
Not for neglect, but too much Love?

Am I asleep to one I have disturb'd?

Doth one, that sleeps at me, my Larum prove?


Odd figaries hath this CUPID;
Strangely kill'd, and strangely born;
If kindness make him dull and stupid,

And if that he be rows'd with scorn.



But what have I to do with LOVE,
And the frailer WOMAN'S LAW?





Women are there in this grove?

Then 'tis time that I withdraw.




'Twas for manners I forbore
To take leave of her before.
Ah! ZELIDAURA, (Mistress fair)
No joy is, but where you are.







Of Valour thou maist justly boast,
That conquer'st wheresoe're thou go'st.

Claridiana goes away by degrees casting looks back at him.



So is split in twain a RIVER,
And the streams (bound sev'ral ways)
In a kind of am'rous maze

Back at one another gaze:
As this melting Couple sever.




Inclination, not so fast:
For from me one gracious look,

Speaks more in that diminutive book,

Then other Women in a VOLUME vast.


From me then (LOVE) enough is wrung:
For where HONOUR tyes the tongue,


She, who doth a Suppliant hear,
Makes him answer with her Ear.




Knight, to overcome endeavour.




Lady, I shall do't, or dye.






Disinchanted, more than ever

Re-inchanted now, am I.





Just there, where I did point thee, stay:

But come, if any bend this way.




Alone you'll be, if I am gone,



By my self, is not alone,



True: The Man doth still remain.



Then, I am alone again.


I'll see, whether his wit keep pace
With his valour, garb, and face.




What a spanking LABRADORA!



Yow (th'unkent Knight) Godyegudmora!



(The Time of day thou dost mistake)



 And joy  









By a sure sign, yow are awake.





Awake?   the sign?




Yowr being a Lover.



In love am I?









Deep in love? how is that seen?




Perfectly: yow do not sleep.






And discover that sweet face,

Which covers so much Wit and Grace.




Yow but dreamt so: sleep agin,
And forget it.








Why? the LADY, that went in,
Lukes, as if that she did paint.



What has that to do with sleeping?

She is, indeed, Angelica•




That Picture now's well worth yowr keeping:
For why? 'tis an ORIGINAL.



Is this Shepherdess a Witch?

Or saw the sleeping Treason, which
I committed against LOVE,
Erst, in the INCHANTED GROVE?

  65Me, hast thou ever seen, before?




Seen? I, and know thee, for a Man
That will turn him, and sleep more
Than a dozen Dunces can.


Thow kenst little, what Sighs mean!




Unveil (by JOVE) that Face serene.



What, to make thee sleep agene?









This pinching wakes him by degrees.



Art thou a Nymph.








Sleep I, indeed? or am I mad?




None serve thee, but th' INCHAWNTED QUEEN?
I think what dull conceipts y' have had,
Of the Bird PHOENIX, which no Eye

E're saw, an odoriferous Lye.



How, of her Beauties spells, she's told;
That by her spirit thow art hawnted;
And, having slept away the old,

With this new Mistress worse inchawnted.






I affect not, Shepherdess,

My self in such fine terms t' express;
Suffizeth me, an humble strain:

Too little happy, to be vain!







Sir Gallant, not so fast.

He offers at her Scarf.



See thee I will.




See me yow shall:

But, towch not Fruit, yow mun not tast.
What says it, now the leaf doth fall.




It says, 'tis worthy to comprize
The KERNEL of so rare a Wit:

Nor, that it grows in PARADICE,
But Paradice doth grow in it!
The tall and slender TRUNK no less divine,
Though in a lowly Shepherdesse's RINE!
Aside.
This should be that so famous Queen,

For unquell'd Valour, and disdain.

In these INCHANTED WOODS is seen
Nothing but Illusions vain!



What stares the Man at?




A Picture, I once mine did call,
With the divine Original.





Fall'n asleep again yow are▪


We, poor humane Sepherd-lasses,
Nor are pictur'd, nor use Glasses.

"Who skip their rank doe 'mselves, and Betters wrong:
"T' our Dames (God bless them) such queint things belong.



Here, a tiny Brook alone,
Which, freng'd with borrowed Flowers (he has

Gold and Siller enough on 's own)
Is HEAVENS proper Looking-glass,



Copies us; and I•• reflections
Shewing natural perfections,
Free from soothing, free from Errour;
Are our Pencil, are our Mirrour,





Art thou a Shepherdess?




On a Mountain called, There  



Wear'st thou ever heretofore
LADY'S Cloaths?









Yes (what a treach'rous Powl have I!)
In a COUNTREY-COMEDY
I once enacted a main part
(Still I have it half by heart)


The famous HISTORY it was
Of an ARABIAN   (let me see)
No, of a Queen of TARTAREE:
Who all her Sex did far surpass
In Beauty, Wit, and Chivalree:



Who, with invincible disdain,
Would fool, when she was in the vain,

Princes, with all their Wits about them;
But, and they slept, to death she'd flout them:


And, by the Mass, with such a Meen
My Majesty did play the Queen:
Our Curate had my Picture made
In the same Robes in which I Play'd.




And what's thy name?







O pleasant Play, and bitter truth!
That I, who dreamt of ZELIDAURA,
Should wake, should wake, and find her LAURA!



O beauteous Counterfeit of Majesty!
NATURE, what made thee make so fair a Lye?

Where is that crowned Beauty now become?
That Lyon's Courage, kindling at a Drum?

Those manly Deeds? Those Papps, which Armour prest?
ACHILLES once more in a Kercher drest?
SEMIRAMIS 'is Mode, who not with Box,

But Teeth of LAURLEL, comb'd her golden Locks?
Where, my heroick and dear Flame, which sprung
From Painters Pencil, and a Captives Tongue?
Consum'd to ashes of a Rustick Love,
Rude Goddess of these Rocks, and this wild Grove?

Is't come to this? I then absolve thee, sleep;
And blame my high thoughts, that so low could creep.
To TARTARY will I, But I am mad
If I do love that Queen, unless she add.
This Beauty to those Virtues; and shall rave

If both this Body, and that Soul, she have.




What stands he mutt'ring to himself? May be
He likes me not. If he fought after me
Under the notion of a QUEEN, I'd have
Him find me a mean Shepherdess: I save
My Honour so. The Traitor shall not think
He (ZELIDAURA in his hand) could wink,

Hence Women learn, for all your LOVERS brags,

Men are no friends to Beauty cloath'd in Rags.

If Beauty strike LOVE'S Fire, why should it, less,
Than in a QUEEN, plac'd in a SHEPHERDESS?
Nor does; but (when it seems the World to set
On fire) where dowry wants, the tinder 's wet▪



Mought I entreat yowr Worships Name,
And the bus'ness yow have here?



Squire of a forreign Prince I am,
Who to this glorious Theatre  



Not a Master? By my troth
My own tongues end it was upon:

A mischief take thee, by thy sloth
I thought thou wert a Zerving-mon.




No more that string.





A Knight he is I'm certain; At
Th' Inchanted Castle I saw that;
And, by his garb too, 'tis reveal'd.
To Him.
Follows he (saidst thou) this Emprize?





In love, upon the score of Fame,

With the most accomplisht DAME
That ever murther'd Man with Eyes,



And the Worlds greatest Queen; to this

Inchantment came he, where an envious Thief
(The Coward Rival of his Bliss)
Found means to rob him of his chief
Delight, and Glory, in that thing

From which his most Heroick thoughts did spring.




O Usage, courser than my Coat, and more
Then I could bear, were I as Lambkin meek!
That one, who ZELIDAURA wore,
Should CLARIDANA seek!

  70'Tis to apostatize from Reason,
To think more of him. Treason! Treason!
To enter my Benevolence,

At the back-gate of an Offence!






CLARIDORO comes  he's here:
Muffle thee quickly.









One, to be born a Mountaneer,

That ows such Beauty? how unjust!  







A Man, of whom I stand
In awe a little.



(O, that hand!  )

Rural Goddess, keep'st thou Sheep?




Yes, and my self I better keep.







I'd love without reward, and cannot do 't,
To love, is Love's Reward; I would endure
For her, what not? and that such joy to boot
That in my smart I play the EPICURE.


I pray 'gainst Life, and with the self same breath


Unpray that Pray'r, lest it the GODS should hear

'Tis to be out of pain; I then fly death,
And Valour councels me what others fear.



If I do live, my wound may seem but slight;
And if I dye, LOVES TROPHY I remove:
To live, 's to pine; to dye, 's to lose her sight;
My two supporters then, are Grief and Love:

For where Grief's Dropsie, and Love's Feaver strive,
Though either kill, both often keep alive.







In fine, aspir'st thou to be glorious
By conqu'ring thy Competitor?



'Tis that my Love contendeth for.





O, Maist thou never prove victorious!


But do: for mine own self, I conquer will,
And whom thou conquer'st then, it doth not skill.


Claridoro turns and sees them.





What's this? what see I there? Is 't not
ZELIDAURE, who (meanly clad)
Hath her own Majesty forgot,
And affronts my Love too bad?


What jealous thoughts surprize me? I do fear
She (bent to Arms) affects the Valianter:

But he was not so; if to dare things high
Be Valour, who was valianter than I?
I, who her first of Alms am yet to gain,
Of her facility shall I complain?
Was not enough for me my own distress,

But I must dye of others happiness?

My Soul contending with so many Foes,

I would not have it sink with Envy's blows.
"More gen'rous wounds were made for nobler Hearts,

"and in base blood are steep'd pale ENVY'S darts.

Thus, jealous I should be, and know not how.

ENVY I could, but ENVY disallow:
Then must I bear it? must I? let me think  
'Twere monst'rous tameness to look on, and wink.


I'll chide then, mixt yet with respect and Love.






Ho! Shepherdess, is this well done
To mind thy Recreation
In Gar•••, whilst another way
Thy flock doth on the mountain stray?
Although he•d-shepherd thou have not,
Yet nothing is by gadding got.
Perdie, to see thee in this plain,

Grypes many a sprunt and jolly Swain.

Back to the field, and Brooks return,
And Pastures graz'd in heretoforn,
Nor mell with any others sheep,

Sith thou a flock of mine do'st keep.




Nor Thee, th' ambition of whose fire
Doth (soaring) to a QUEEN aspire.
Beseems it stoop from so high place,

A Rustick Shepherdess to chase.




How courteously the cares that do him press

He hath cut out, and measur'd by my dress.





In rustick phrase his jealousie

Of her he vents, and pike at me.



Then I suspected not in vain

He stole the Picture; in the face
(When he espy'd it) reading plain
The features of this RURAL GRACE.


Undoubtedly she is his own  




You will not now, Sir, face me down,

  73But that, when I bad watch did keep
(Surpriz'd, e're by the foe, by sleep)
Thy treach'rous Envy came an stole
(Not more out of my hand than soul)
A Jewel which I then call'd mine,

Though much despise it since 'tis thine,

Yet must and will I have it back,
Not that I It esteem, or lack;
For, the whole gust I take therein,
Is now, to take 't from thee agin.





I think thou art not yet awake,

But I shall rowse thee   Do'st thou stare?



A truer word yow never spake:
He sleeps with spread Eyen like a Hare.




Traitor I'll be reveng'd  









Must I step in to part you than?
If I do rear it, on my word,
This hook shall be a two-hand-sword  

This she must say Majesticaly like a Queen, witho•• Felisbravo's perceiving it.

Hold both, or I  






Though not thy Quarrel, mine I understand  



Hold, CLARIDORO: It is I command  





In fine, do'st thou deny it still?  






I obey thy unjust will.






ZELIDAURA was 't you said,
Like to a Shepherdess array'd  
Turns and sees them quarrelling.

Swords drawn i'th' Garden? who are we? 



Why Gentlemen, it cannot be,

  74Whilst yet th' Inchantment is not brought
T'an end, in COURT a Duel fought

Unlicenc'd? when with licence too
Ye may the same thing shortly doe?







I come  



Or do but stand me there  



I'm rent with doubt.




I dye with fear.





Provide ye Arms, and fight it out  













I never provide any thing  
Within me I of all am stor'd  



And I both a sharp stomach bring,
And a long knife to fall abord.










They do a fresh in Battail join!



May neither conquer in this Duel.




Yes, one! and then the Conquest's mine.



In either Valour doth abound.




Discretion is in neither found.





With thee how little I perswade?




Of Monarchs that last Reason will be heard.

She stamps, and sallying out, the Guard parts them.




Madam, if now you stop our rage  



The promis'd Combat  



Take our gage  

Throws her Glove to Felisbravo.




Would'st thou have me believe a Queen, whose name
In Tryumph sits over the wings of fame,

Lurks now disguis'd in ARABIE?



If her such manly virtue decks,
That she's the wonder of her Sex,

Were't not another wonder, she

(Greedy of Knowledge, as of Arms)
Should leave unseen these fights, and charms,

Thy Realm too being so neer his own?



Withdraw I'll talk with her alone.





CLARIDIANA this way doth make
To speak with thee 



Two short words take 
Your Count'nance hold, what e're you hear;

Stop your mouth, and ope your ear.









What commands thy Ladyness?



Discover, by thy life, that face.





Now by the facks) this of your GRACE
Needs no comfort, nor no foyl,

For Skies and Meads it doth revile.

Or see (if thow mun needs have one
To set it off) you cloudless Sun!


Then for thy Beauty (challenging
Of Heav'n the witness principal)
O're me a Gloria to sing,
Would prove a conquest very small.











And so civil (markst Thow that?)
That to acknowledge I'm not squeemish

Her to be fair, who hath no blemish,

Nor, where it is, will hit a Blot.




Whom loves an ugly woman best?



An uglier woman  Was 't well guest?



Thou, a Shepherdess? Prompt Lass,

What is thy Bus'ness in this Place?



Marry (no Treason 'tis I ween)
To zee the fair INCHAWNTED QUEEN,
And the brave dundring of Alarms:

For, from my very Nurses arms,
According to our Country word,
I lov'd the slish-slash of a Sword.



Loe, half thy Errand! I am she:

And therefore, give consent that we

Our Eye too with the sight may bless
Of so divine a SHEPHERDESSE.



Highness, mock on:   Behold the Wight!

Takes off her silver Scarf▪


O Golden Morn of Silver Night!
What modest confidence! quick Air!
What Spirit! what excess of fair!
What queint, and more than courtly dress!
What exquisite neglecedness

Of those curling billowy Locks

Flowing round two Ivory Rocks!
What hands! that have to take their part
Not care it self (so far from Art)
Yet conquer all the World: wherein
A red Soul peeps through the white Skin!
SOL might envy her least grace.



I knew, yow'd mock me to my face.
How easily are People got
To praise, that which they envy not?
I am not yet a Clown so much,
But, when I see yowr Beauty such,
I find, into my CROWN yow beat
The part, I should to yow repeat.

  77Nothing beneath, or in the Sky,

Holds beautiful when yow are by:

Possessing not so much in common,

As Envy, with an ugly woman:

But, when the splendor of your Rays

Is more than all the World can praise,
Releasing much of what should come to you,

Yow pay to all the World above their due.




A new delight her words provoke
By the rare grace with which they'r spoke



I know, why LADY likes my wit;
And why my Face remains her debter.








I know  



Then out with it.




Vaith, because her own are better.


I'd have all fair ones discommend
My Face; I would upon my word.





Why so, my understanding friend?



O! then, they are with Envy sturd.



But Envy croaks, and Snake-like stings  



Believe me (Princess) no such matter:
No Sycophant so sweetly sings:
"For she that envies me, doth flatter.
"This back-hand praise goes homest still,
"'Tis strucken with so good a will.



ENVY is Adulation then?



Thou hitst the Nail on the head right:
And I have heard from Book-learn'd Men,
"'Tis courtly Rudeness, and kind spight.




Prethee, what wouldst thou counsel me to doe,
If me for Goodness ENVY should pursue?




Be ten times better than thou wert before,
That ENVY may pursue thee ten times more.


That is the way which I affect,
No treason lurks, no malice there,
If I my self alone correct,

To be at full reveng'd on Her.





In every point she doth perform 




Envy, a piteous creeping worm!
"A brave, and happy Pride it is,
"To envy neither WORTH, nor BLISS.



Do'st thou happily know LOVE?




Who is his Worship? Is it not
A forreign Prince, who, they said, dy'd above
A twelve-month sin of a great Cold he got?
Yes, by hear-say, I do know him,
Not that any spleen I owe him


For mischief he to me, or mine hath done:
Though I have heard a long-long-while agon
The COURT he troubled, and the COUNTREY spoyl'd,
Till he both COURT and COUNTREY was exil'd.




Do'st thou not Love?




To ask a fool, have I not youth?



Whom lov'st thou then?





My sell alone 
Nay, I have a curious tooth 


Love? what a base disgraceful word!
The sound is harsh, and shrill.
Lyes all the Valour in the Sword?

No conquest o're the Will?



  79Nor it a decent part hold I
(So much unto my self I owe)
To speak of that thing knowingly,
I do not, nor I will not know 


But do yow love?




What is to Love?








Hard question to one bred in Court 't would prove 




Not when she's in her Teens my word I'll pass.


If yow do love, with wond'rous Care
Hide that unfortunate disease:

For (feggs) declar'd Affections are
The Mother of Unthankfulness.


I knew a Gallant (from zuch keep)
Who, having zome how made his prize,
But a Dame's Picture, dropt asleep
With that Sun shining in his Eyes.





Troth, let them sleep or let them watch,
All Men alike are cheap with me:

To whom (for favours none they catch)
They never can ungrateful be


From Love (a contemptible Foe!)
My retreat make I by broad-day;
And look on Suitors just as though
They were Mad Lovers in a Play:

No, Fear not me, in such a way.




Kenn'st thou the Tow're where Confidence doth dwell?
REPENTANCE lives hard by in a low Cell.





(For now dissemble Shepherdesses too)
If thy Courtesie 's not less
Than thy Beauty, thy Name shew.

  80By my Life.




This now would make a Gallants heart

Leap out, much more his name 




Tell me both what, and who, thou art.




I say I am no Shepherdess 



A Woman asks not like a Man 
Tell me thy Name 




I am   (suppress


My Name I will ) a great Lord's Daughter,

Nor a less Soldier; taking after
My Father so much, that his Trade
I follow in the Mountain-shade:
For such do I take HUNTING for;
Not counterfeit, but substitute of WAR.


Rev'rence I bear to thy Command 
But, Madam, do not ask me more:
The Keys are in a sullen hand,

And Porter Silence keeps the dore.





I will not press thee 'gainst thy Mind:
But since thy Soul hath manly scope,
And that great MARS, and PHOEBUS (joyn'd)
Are Masters of thy HOROSCOPE;


I will that thou, in habit fit,

Come streight to witness with thine Eyes,
And by Our Self in Iudgment sit
Betwixt the Valiant, and the Wise:



And I shall then make my Election
More by thy vote, than my own Eye;
"For more (and chiefly in affection)
"Than Gamesters, see the Standers by.





Madam, my part is to be rul'd.
To whether stand'st thou most inclin'd?



To him that loves me most.




To him that bears the bravest mind.



My liking upon thine depends  
(Thus I shall dive into her ends.)




I'll study the contentment of your GRACE 
(But (with your leave) mine own in the first place.)








Good fac'd Gyants and discreet,
Spight of so many lying Books
That paint you Fools with ugly looks.
ORLANDO, and the KNIGHT O' TH' SUN,
Pay you this good work ye have done;
And peaceably dye in your beds,
With all your senses in your heads;
No Errant Knight, in hideous duel,
Be so unconscionably cruel,
Armour and all, with Blade in fist,
To cleave you down from poul to twist.
Squires (inconsiderable Wights)
That bind your selves Prentice to Knights,

Mark well this doleful Story all,

And take Example by my fall:
Leave ERRANTY to those staid Wags
Who charge upon their running Nags,
Who enter ne're the Lists, though sore
Threat'ned above a Month before.
To those too, who do there appear,
Having nothing to do there:

  82Their Gennets Bells, and their own Gulls:

The Peoples laughter, and the Bulls;
Leave it  








If I am not abusive, How
Shall I in reputation git,
And be canoniz'd for a WIT?
A Drole, and not satyrical?

I never knew but one in all
My life, and 'twas a precious Fool,
The never-enough-prais'd O TOOL!




Sas! Coward, bustle up thy self.




Ah! Brother, do not harm the Elf.




O Gyant of my Guard! into
Thy hands I recommend me do.




The PERSIAN entertain no fear.




I do not, but it will be here.





Shall I heal thee in a trice
By Magick?




Hast thou that Device!




See! thou art whole.



Hah! I am well:
A MIRACLE! A MIRACLE!
St. Sacrapant! I run, leap, skip
And fly, like Beggar cur'd with Whip.

Let not the DOCTORS know of this,
For they will take it much amiss
If any 's cur'd without their aid;
Yet where's the Cure that they have made?
The Church hath DOCTORS too, and they

Complain of wrong too in their way:
That Emp'ricks DOCTORS are become,
And DOCTORS Patients now  but Mum.





Horrid confusions do I tread:
And Mazes upon Mazes thred
In this new COURT, where FELISBRAVE
Transported with his Conquests brave,

  83In the pursuit thereof suspends
The progress to his amorous Ends.




RIFALORO, wilt thou eat
(For I would give thee some choice meat)
A salv'ry Leg, or little Wing
Of a Camel which we bring?



I would not rob your Grandiships:

We say, LIKE LETTUCE TO LIKE LIPS.

This, if you please (having been sick)
A Chine of Beef, but not too thick.



Of Rifaloro somewhere near
The whining Ecchoes strike my Ear.





Say, shall we post thee through the Air in nimble

Egg-shell, to PERSIA, or in vagrant thimble.


They go about to lay hold on him, and he crys out.


No, no, a sober Mule: the Spanish pace

On foot, or mounted, not the Wild-goose Chase.




'Tis he, and those same Gyants dire
About to murther the poor Squire:

Hold, Cowards! what is this ye do?




Slave, who are we, and what are you?




Hold, tardy succ'rer of distress!
These are Gyants of the Peace.





Consider, valiant Knight 






That raunt, my Courtesie is Blows.

Loose me that I may kill him.





Presumption; but be sure strike home:
Those Rebel-Gyants I would scorn to fear,
Whose Mountains, to scale HEAV'n their Ladders were.



GEN'RAL, y' undo me with your wroth,
These Worthies are my friends in troth,

  84I tell you true, done more for me they have,
Than my good Grandam who is in her Grave.
I owe (and shall acknowledge whilst I breath)
A thousand favours to their Worships: Sheath
Thy Blade, and be advis'd to be more plyant:
The Knight's not always sure to kill the Gyant.





This more: Since the dissolving of the Charms,
Know, that we Gyants must now lay down Arms.



Well fare thy heart, O Gyant well inclin'd,
Holy and sage, and of a peaceful Mind!
He tells you true, the Books are clear in't all;
To wit, Parismus, Amadis de Gaul,

And Cavalier del Phebo  Then 'tis rare,
To unpick quarrels, when Laws studied are.






Prince FLORANTEO willeth you
From CLARIDIANE to shew
Unto the Noble Strangers, all
This Inchanted Court.





Mark; and thereof ye shall be show'd
Each Rarity, and every Mode.




Are there Complaints? Are there Ambitions?

Lyes are there? Are there ill Conditions?

Are there Envyings? Are there Words

Sweeter than the Tunes of Birds

Before one's face, behind the door


Back-racket-strokes of a left-handed MOOR?



How e're inchanted, Court 'tis still,
Here they do lay their sick and ill,

Of vast extent their SPITTLE is:
The Quarter of the Grumblers, This.





Bad men they are; yet have they had much wrong;
Reaping Rewards, which to the Good belong.




There are the enviouus.






They kill themselves: Give me such Foes.





There, those, good Fortune, puffs.




I'll talk with them. "Such never can bear sorrow.





There, those, who judge by the successes still.



May all their Actions be condemn'd by Ill.





Here, those, that trust in PRINCES FAVOUR.




Presumption! bind them to their behaviour.





A swarm of DUENIAS, there.




I will not meddle that have stings.



I leave to bold Plebeian Stages.

In COURT is sacred ev'ry Lawn,

Each setting Beauty, or which now doth dawn,

I there adore: Each Tyar a DIADEM,
A weilded SCEPTER each shak'd Fan doth seem.
I call each Quoif, nay ev'ry Bib, a CLOTH
Of STATE, and all for fear I'll take my Oath.



Of Court Diseases talk no more, for there

Of others weal we all are sick I fear.



What, not one honest Man in Court then?




A Thousand in the Spanish COURT there is:
Whom you shall see in Magick Perspective,

Applaud the Golden Age they now retrive.




What is that old short Man we spy?



I take 't he writes a Comedy











A flight of Birds the first of May:


  86Whose chirping Bills (which true Division run)
Will flout, and out of Countenance dash the Sun:

And I can tell a Secret of them too:
But if thou tell 't again, By all that's true  








They would have Husbands, and exact
From him a Farse, themselves intend to act
On that high day which to the WORLD did give
Their Royal Master on whose Beams they live.


And four hundred Columns terse,
And a conceipt in every verse,

And a disdain to each eight feet,

And a Sonnet in each sheet,

And to every part, they ask:
To comply with which huge task,

The foresaid Poet by main strength

Wire-draws his PLAY to such a length,
That, for a •ife 'twould serve, of one

That does no good under the Sun,

Or after whom there's an Advowson,

Or before whom there are a Thousan,

Or of a Suit in CHANCERY,
Or of a COURT •xpectancie,

Which is th' Eternal of Eternitie.






Four hundred howers last let it,

And he who so is wearied wo't,
The name of tedious shall git
Unto himself, with Clown to boot.


For a FESTIVAL, set forth
To celebrate PHILENO's years,
By BELIZA's Royal worth,
Should stop the motion of the Sphears.



And merits to last evermore,
As do the years it doth adore.

  87Come, see Wonders that surpass,
In this inchanted Looking-glass!




Relates, as seen in the inchanted Glass, the Festival which the Queen of Spain made at Aran Juez for the Birth-day of the King.



Here view I (with what sweetness blest!)
Beauteous CYTHERIAS Nest:

And a BABYLON of Flow'rs

'Mongst so many pleasant Bow'rs.

What an illustrious Pallace fair!
Such a Play-fellow the Air

Hath not elsewere: None so nigh

And splendid-neighbour hath the Sky.
If DRAGONS kept the GOLDEN-FLEECE,
And Apples of th' HESPERIDES,
In the Fable: In this Truth

(Fairer than the Morning's youth)

HARAMA (a glib Chrystal Snake)
A Girdle to her Fields doth make;

TAGUS (a silver Gyant) falls
At the feet of her proud Walls.

  This SEAT
To whom belongs it?




Shepherd PHILENO, who appears
Fuller of fame, and Worlds, than years.

Whose foot, whose hand

(Both temp'rate in Command)
The one an easie yoak doth sit,
The other is a prudent Bit.




Leads to this Bow'r of Bliss?





PHOENIX of Spain, swathed in fire,

Son of himself, and his Great Sire.

Fair seav'nteen Springs hath he compleat,
Whose understanding is so great,
That in his pupillage appears
Th' expecience of an hundred years.


  88And in these fields is celebrated
That happy day unto the Earth

When he receiv'd his Royal Birth,
Whence GOOD MENS hopes, and BAD MENS fears, are dated.



Him his two Gallant BROTHERS follow,

Luminaries bright of SPAIN,

Sparks that fly out of his Flame,

For they are Stars, if he APOLLO.



On whom both Purples we shall view,
Of TIBER, and of DANOW too;
The one his CROSIER glorifie;
The other raise his SCEPTER high.


The Festival you see doth come
From his Illustrious SPOUSE; in whom
(Of two WORLDS sitting at the Helms)
EARTH more perfections sees, than Realms.



For but of one Ray of her Hair

(Since seldom Kings have Kindred waigh'd)
On the meer score that she is fair,

A Clasp for two Crowns might be made.


Not Lilly of France, but Rose of brown


Casteel, that to our SOL shall bring
A Spanish Violet to heir his CROWN;
'Sted of a Flemish Iesamin.





SHEPERDESSE, that, stead of those
Flocks of Swans, which TAGUS shows,
Shall reign the EAGLES of the RHINE;


  89Fair SISTER of the MASTER-SWAIN
(Whose parts betwixt respect and fear

The proudest merits do constrain
To strike their sayls) consorts with her.



And of an hundred NYMPHS beside
(The love and envy of the SUN)


So without earthly Paragon,



That not her Train, and less her Eye

Fill'd up to the brim with Glory,
Either her Royaltie belye,
Or leave imperfect Beauties story.



Majesty, and sumptuous Cloaths,

And the Art to put them on,
And variety of those
All without comparison.



The Valleys sing, the Mountains skip,
The Elms and Poplars dance and trip,

APRIL himself a part rehearses,
And pricks his flow'rs in all the verses.




NIQUEA's GLORY (whose strong Spells

Even conjure up Impossibles,

And Miracles of Wit do muster)
Is the Theater's first lustre.


The second is the golden Fleece,
Which having first begun in GREECE,
The way to TROY did after find,
And ends in SPAIN with ILIUM'S fire refin'd.


  90And now the Play without doors is
A dull Man's (who his homely Quill

T' excuse in part) can tell you this;
Without command he writes not ill.




A world of People flock together
To be spectators of the sight:

And from this Instrument I gather
Th' approach of one, and t'other Knight

They sound another Trumpet near.

To the crown'd Lists.   Let's go, to gain
A fight of them: And live this MORN,
And rising Sun, and Stars of SPAIN,
Till crippled Time be made their scorn.










Be sure this part now be well plaid,

Ent'ring as if thou wert afraid.



Put no, if, to 't, I shall be so.




(By this Invention I shall know
If Zelidaura's stay here, be












This is the War alone
Exit Servant.
In which I fear to be o'rethrown.

Now let the Curtain be drawn back, and each make a pro∣found Reverence to the Queens, and the Queens rise from their seats, as likewise the Ladies, and then the Knights make a Reverence each to other.


With what a careless Bravery They
One another do survey!



And how compos'd, like honourable Foes,

They interchange Salutings before Blows!










Yet I with each am in such wroth,
That I to neither side incline,
Though I am one's, and t' other's mine.





Hah! ZELIDAURA on the Throne?
She doubtless hath her self made known
To CLARIDIANA.





Am made up of perplexity!


The Picture went at first for ZELIDAURA,
TARTARIA's Liege! then represented LAURA!
A Shepherdess! and now again one seen

In Soveraign posture by a Crowned QUEEN!


Once more sleep I bolt upright:
When shall I wake, for I do move

Like one that's waking, and my sight


Equivocates, but not my Love?

Who will this glorious Woman prove?





Knights, the Queen stays; and now the last


Dice of FORTUNE both must cast.

  92Dispute, if that untye it not,

Your Swords must cut the Gordian-knot.


Claridoro takes off his Hat, covers again, and begins.




MADAM: (Since you remitted have to words,

That which at first were better try'd with swords)
I argue thus; By Books Wars Art is taught,
And without WISDOM no great thing was wrought.
Thus the great Son of THETIS (dire annoy

And ten years Plague of miserable TROY)
Had his Head arm'd with Prudence more than Steel,

Or than his Mother left unarm'd his heel

By the learn'd CENTAUR: Thus KING PHILIPS Heir
(Who envy'd t'others TRUMPET more than SPEAR)
Instructed was, in Aristotles Cell,
To understand the World, and then to quell:
Thus March'd high CAESAR through the heart of FRANCE,

A Pen in one, in t'other hand a Lance,

And, in the Pride of that Success, did show
To BRITTONS bold an armed CICERO.

With the same weapon (to abridge disputes)
Men conquer Men, with which Men conquer Brutes.

Of BEASTS, more fierce, more strong, more arm'd are many
Than MEN; and BARBAROUS MEN as stout as any,

More num'rous far. But WISDOM tames the BEAST,
And WISEST NATIONS master'd still the rest,

Until the Brutish WORLD its own strength knew,
And with their MAXIMS fell their EMPIRES too.
'Tis not the brawny vigour of an Arm,

But inward courage (which the heart doth warm)
Makes FORTITUDE: A Life-despising Eye,

And (not to conquer, but) to dare to dye.


Strength makes it not. It I like strength did want,
And met like dangers, I'm more valiant;

  93Because my Soul was of a larger growth,
And, when her Second fail'd her, fought for both.

He that out-lives his Honour is a Fool:

To Cure a Coward send him then to School.
But many Valiant have out-liv'd their Fame,

For lack of Wit to play an after-game.

The Wise weighs all things, who sometimes doth know
The Souldiers Praise is to decline a Foe;
And (slighting Rumors) his safe glory sums
In this, that, "He fights best who overcomes.

"Who rashly fights (though he the World amaze)
"A valiant Fool will be his best of Praise.
When a great CHIEF his Squadrons up hath led,
With others hands he fights, but his own head;
Therefore (and fitly) for such valiant wile,


His head hath BAYS, his Souldiers hands the SPOYL:
And when the Sword decides a bloody Fray,

Their HANDS that one, his HEAD fights ev'ry day.

"Thus only Prowess unto KINGS pertains,
"Who ought to wear their Valour in their Brains.

As, though ten thousand hands a PALACE frame,
Yet he, whose Head contriv'd it, bears the Name:
Just so a PRINCE, who acts with others hands,

(His own Head steering) EARTH and SEA Commands.
Upon a Couch the CONTINENT he awes,
And from a COUNCIL gives the OCEAN Laws.
To hack wild Beasts is not a Soveraign's part:
Kings fight not with their Hands but with their Art.

I end: In Iron WAR, in PEACE's Down,

Their MAXIMS Conquer, and their COUNCILS Crown.




With the noise whereof Feli: bravo rowses as out of a deep Muse.



(Little of all he said heard I,
Such a diversion have I had
Of Beauty, like a Rustick clad
Sometimes, sometimes with Majesty!)
Aside.


  94THE SWORD 
Takes off his Hat, makes a Reverence, then, covering again, proceeds, speaking to the Throne.
 Made EMPIRES; VALOUR guards rich WISDOM'S Coffers,
As Fear betrays the succours which it offers:
He then whom Danger mazes, may for Brain
Go to the Camp, he went to School in vain.
When a great Leader, a great Rest doth play,
PRUDENCE gives aim, but VALOUR wins the day:
And, though he's not oblig'd a Breach to enter
The first, his Men must know that he dares venter.
If Valour he ne're shew'd, what's truly Wise

Will be in him reputed Cowardize.

COWARD is a Disease bred in the Liver,
Which qualifi'd may be, but cured never.
Wise Men (and therefore they are Wise) do know
How to seem valiant, if they are not so.

Who venters farther than is fit, a Sot,

A Mad-man may be call'd, but Coward, not.
And, who his Valours Proof doth long forbear,
Would be thought wise, but will be thought to fear.

To dye is very well; but yet to kill,

Is more; the Victor is the Victor still.
A Souldier boasted to a King his gashes:

But give me him (quoth he) that gave such slashes.

A valiant Prince, he is his Empire's Wall:
Safe without Armies, Terrible to all.

Of Realms acquested, THESE THE SWORD DID WIN,
We say, though POLICY did most therein.
Now, to whose Name the FECIT put you see,
The MASTER-BUILDER, past all doubt, is he.


Council may moderate a Prince that's rash:

But who shall fortifie a Spirit lash?

  95High Mettles, like strong Wines, may water bear:
But Council's vain, where there's the Traitor FEAR.
No King should so presume on WIT, to think
To govern Lands with Pens, and Seas with Ink:


Better than at a COUNCIL-TABLE, He

In TENTS the Land, in CABBINS rules the Sea.

Well may a Prince be learned, Perfect none

Who wants that best supporter of a Throne.
But (for we skirmsh'd have too long with words)
Prepare to feel that SCEPTERS live in SWORDS.


They Draw: The Queens rise in their Seats, sound a Charge, the Gyants put themselves between the Knights: A Cloud descends, and in it the God of Love with a Nymph, who in a Bason brings many fresh Flowers, and amongst those some withered.


How's this! Suspend your Furies.




With wonder new lets down the Skies,
And crowns the Earth with Prodigies.



The Valianter did much out-go,



That is because you wish'd it so:
But the Dispute was ballanc'd even.





Claridiana fair and bright,
I am LOVE who come to light
Thee out of this dark Wood th' art in,
And if thou wouldst have him to win
Who loves thee best, I'll let thee see
Which infallibly is He.

But (will or nill) the soveraign
Decree of Heav'n doth thus ordain,
That he by whom th'art most ador'd,
Shall be thy Husband, and thy Lord.







Since he that was the Valianter


Loves me, I'm sure, what need I fear
The sentence, but may well submit
My Soul and Will to Heaven and It?

Thus cut I with my People's grain,
Nor can the losing Knight complain.


Great LOVE, my Glory 'tis that thou

To clear my doubts to Earth wouldst bow:
With thee I trust them.




Who these wither'd Flowers can
(Put into my hand) recover
To pristine state, is thy best Lover.




Who but that stranger Knight there can it be,
That came to fight for her, and injure me?





In me what venture is't, if I
Do for ZELID AURA dye?



If ZELID AURA I adore,
I may venter upon that score.






Let him take a dry Flower, and put it in the hand of Cupid, and let it dissolve to ashes.




In Name of the ARABIAN Queen
Let this wither'd Flower grow green.



'Tis faln to ashes.













Stays, with my wishes wings to fly.




O maist thou ne're victorious prove!







I deliver thee this same
In CLARIDIANA'S name.

This Flower too falls to dust.



Dust it is, and transitory.












Into my Countrey I will carry
A Receipt so necessary,
To prove all Men what ever Lyars,

Who blind poor credulous Women with false Fires.




Brave FLORANTEO, draw thou near.








If he in worth and birth is peer
Unto the proudest of them all, in vain,
CLARIDIANA, dost thou him distain.







In name of fair, but merciless



Much Love, and little Happiness)
Receive this Flow'r.




See how it gems,




Smiles, and recovers! Noble Youth,

Loe, LOVE in person doth reward thy truth!




Offers to join them, and Claridiana flyes back.



I'll lose my life first.




Thou't obey HEAVEN; and HEAV'N will be obey'd.











Claridiana, and All dye.




To FLORANTEO 'longs Arabia's Throne:
Give him the joy, and homage every one.



Is HEAV'N become a cousener too?
What ill Example!  Trait'rous Crew!  



Of FLORANTEO Wife thou art,
And he our King.




Dare none to start
From his Allegiance.





In her defence do I this Sword display.








Mixest thou in Quarrels here,

When in Tartary they are

All in confusion, all in War?

For ZELIDAURA being self exil'd
In uncouth Mountains, and in Forrests wild,


Nor chusing any Husband out,
Her Subjects to uncrown her go about.



Thou then (since of her Blood thou art)
Draw thy Sword to take her part,

And thy faith, and prowess high
In that just Cause alone employ:


If thou linger 









Heav'ns! I shall be sure accurst
If my Sword aid her not the first,
For an eternal Love, and tough

Revenge, for Cause declared now,

Me furiously into that War doth throw.










You know I trundle
Under you Gen'ral  By my Persian faith

This sweet inchanted Creature is a Bundle.

And Nosegay, of AURORA'S.





To serve you Madam: So LOVE wills, that I
Who dye his Martyr, should your Souldier dye.



What an unlook'd for Change!





(Heav'ns) in my absence, without doubt,
Is blown up into Tumults  Queen and Laws

Of Hospitality, perdon the Cause.

Now no more curious Fooleries, in old

And valiant Earnest let the WORLD behold
Arm'd ZELIDAURA, and TARTARIA feel
The dire effects of her provoked Steel.











Villains, in your Throats ye lye.



To Floranteo, Madam, yield your Hand,

Or all Arabia falls from your Command.



Coward and Raskal-Heard, that shall be try'd.
This is my Hand  Who? who, will give the Bride?

Approach that dare  See, Traitors (whom my breath
Draws.
Should drive like chaff) It holds the Key of Death!


And Floranteo draws in defence of her.



Retire: His Sword for whom ye mutiny
Defends Claridiana.





To thine own Heart! Thy self, and all the Gods
Thou dost oppose, provoking their just Rods.












Serve her, than have her.



O, my deep-read Father,
Permit'st thou this? Now save me by thy Art:
Now is the moment.




Madam, Take good Heart.

He drives them out, and returns to Claridiana.
The Cloud's dispers'd; y' are safer in my Guard
Then if the Stars all own'd you for their ward.




The End of the second Act.

  100The Persons of the third Act, are the same with those of the second, adding,






  101Querer por solo Querer: To Love only to Love.






THis is t'entrap me; well, my Foot
Within the City I'll not put,
Till a full Tryal make it clear,
Whether things are, as they appear.





Great Madam, 'tis enough the Realm
Thy secret wand'ring did incline
To murmur at thee, and repine;
Our Pilot absent from the Helm.


But, to be censur'd once disloyal,
TARTARIA merits not. What Tryal
Would'st thou have more, than the Applause

And Ioy, which thy Return doth cause;

  102Both this, which meets thee on the Bounds;
And that, which from yon Walls resounds?
Though, as to lighting us, some time,
Abscence eclips'd thee to our Clime;
Not as to Influence; for, to Faith,

No Back at all a SOV'RAIGN hath.
Since the false news did thee no harm,
And now thy Beams TARTARIA warm;
This Errour's debtor we remain,
For giving us our Queen again.
Enter the City (we implore)
Nor let thy Anger cost it more.




First, in that Rural Palace hid with Bow'rs,
I'll rest  But what's this noyse?





Within a great noyse of Swords.
The World sinks with their stroaks.



Make hast, hast make.






Now, on thy treach'ry will I take
A full Revenge.





Now, on thy Head

Shall be reveng'd what I have bled.



Rule me those Swords, two lives defend,
Which th' Owners prodigally spend.
(O Heavens!) 



Leave, of all his Train.
Not one alive.




Ye muster Regiments of Hares:

The more you are, the more your fears.




What Fury! Tide encounters Tide.
(Vain Labour!)



I am by thy side:
None of your petty Clownlings, we;
The Bombast of a Comedie.




Part them, I say. The two that fight
Are CLARIDORO, and the Knight






There's thy score 
Rifaloro hits one of them.

No fencing it with RIFALORE.

The Knights are parted.


That, e're so many People came,
I kill'd him not, I blush for shame.




That I, by these should hind'red be
From killing him, it vexes me.








First to be Cur'd: And, OFFICER,
Quarter him in the Mansion

Of LAURA'S Father, CORIDON.








(Whose Life I fear less of the two)
Place in an equal Quarter near.







Before you go (d'ye hear!)
Clap in such wise on both a Guard

That they perceive not their way barr'd.
I would secure them each from either,

Yet not be seen to do it neither.

The Captain comes to Felisbravo, and Aurelio to Claridoro.
Aside.
And how (O LOVE) how shall I know,
Whether he fought for me, or no?



Please you to come where they may cure you?



The wound is nothing I assure you.



By your Life (Sir) consider't more



Prince, reply not, y' are hurt sore.




A scratch, believe 't.



You'll find it none:
Howe're, the Queen will have it done




A spark of pity now from Her!
Then look for quarter from a Murd'rer.




Captain, how far from hence to Court?




Your Cure (Sir Knight) doth more import
You, than that knowledge.




ZELIDAURA, is my Cure.




What Faith a groundless lye will win!
And O! how late it is call'd in?
But, come along, and you shall see
How well this Care may spared be.



To my Revenge I do prefer
The greater sweet of serving her.













'Tis so: Now, Madam, I do find
You (who ev'n then are cruel, when y'are kind)
Because from Life, I sue out a divorce,

To punish me will make me live perforce.





Do they bear them Pris'ners hence?




Pris'ners? I'll follow my dear Prince,
Resolving by his side to dye.



That's not for me; and yet I lye;
For I (to give my self my due)
Do whiff the smoak of HONOUR too.










I come to call you.




You pick out of this face, and meen,

No higher Title? Well 'tis seen
You know me not, you don't in troth,
You don't  How low our Market go'th?
You have been somewhere neerly bred,
So thin your Courtesie you spred.

'T has vext me  Gentleman, quoth you?
When Knighthood is so common too!

  105Well, your bus'ness?





Herself the Mistress of these Walls 



Is a Goddess, and clep'd is  



What a new strain, new Humour's this?

If she a Goddess be, or no,

Let thine Eyes tell thee.






Rifaloro turns, takes off his Hat and falls at her Feet.








Now let me never stir,
What diff'rence 'twixt the Sun, and hir?
A Clustre of ripe Stars she is:
Let me that hand, adoring, kiss;  


That hand, by which the LILLIES brown appear,
And the Crystal is not clear,

Lac'd with Saphyr, tagg'd with shell

In which the Orient Pearl doth dwell:
Give me that pretty foot, which goes
Knitting sweet flow'r with Ivory Toes,

But none so short as It; for thine

Is BREVIAT of a JESAMINE:
Give me 




Withdraw, and let him stay.
Roselinda goes aside.

  Art thou the Stranger's Servant? Say.



I am, nor of him do complain.



Is he so good?




So bad; w' are fain
At ev'ry turn to be made friends:
But seldome in this World meet Ends:

Ill Masters have good Servants, Good

Are answered with Ingratitude.









An Office of great trust.











His MUTE? I must
Confess, that's not for a FOOL.



There's an Exception to each Rule.

  106For (let me tell you) I do blend 'um,
Holding the latter in COMMENDUM.



Thy Conceipts like me past expression.



'Tis incident to our Profession

That (let it miss, or let it hit)
We Fools are off'ring still at Wit.



Who is thy Master?





Whose Countrey I'll to you make known,
His merit, humour, disposition,

But his Name, on no condition.



And why his Name wilt thou not tell?



For doing of a Miracle:
That once this saying may be true,
A Servant told not all he knew.



'Tis not worth thanks to hide his name,

When all things else thou dost proclaim.



Of the old Apple a new slice!

Mother EVE'S inquisitive Vice!
His name? in troth it may not be.














"With a base mind, what gentle courses

"Cannot perswade, that Rigour forces.








Hang presently  




Say not, by thine Eyes; for I
Shall then prevent the Rope, and dye
Of the unkindness.






Layes hold of him, and he struggles.






A pattern make him
To Fools, who shall pretend to hold hereafter
A Secret  (My Intreaties made a laughter!

  107I pray in vain!)



By this good day
I think thou know'st not how to pray.
In fine, I must be hang'd.




(Without his name) forthwith be truss'd.




Then drive on, Cart, Note WORLD, a Woman hung
A Man, because he held his Tongue.
March, March.



(For once it shall be told,
A Woman could from knowing hold
A Secret, which she dyes to know; withall,
Which a Man says, he'll dye, before she shall )
Aside.
Leave him at large  What Countrey-man
Aurelio goes aside.






For whom great MARS bids make already
All his tryumphal Charets ready.











Valiant, bountiful, and sweet

In his deport, that he's the great


Idea of a PRINCE COMPLEAT.









Is that Name known? No, 'tis not He.

'S precious! that Royal Prodigy

Above the bounds of MAN doth fly.



And what's his bus'ness? To this Coast


What Wind brings him (for thou know'st?)







Speak, go not about






Then, turn me inside out,



They say there's in TARTARIA here
A Mad-cap Queen, that kembs you wyre,

And wears a Helmet for a tyre;

  108Who, 'sted of a wide Vardingale

And reverend Apron, puts on Mayl,

And glitt'ring Arms, in which are writ
The valiant Deeds she did commit;
Who nothing but the Spear, and Rest,

And Pouldron, minds; She hoops her breast

With Brass, and her long fingers fair,
The deserts of the Needle are.
A mischief take the Woman! Let her
Resign to Men (whom it suits better)
INCAMPINGS: Let her Kerchers hem,

Leave hemming in of Troops to them.

If a Spider cross her sight,
Let her take a famous fright;
And purse her Mouth when she says, Man,

Or Husband, like the Nimphs of SPANE.
Let her tremble at a Rat,

More than it doth at a Cat.
"She, for a Beauty who would pass,
"Must be as nice as Venice glass;
"And, if one hold his hand up, wink,
"For fear he brain her with a pink.

In fine, to see this Queen we came:
When a Knight (Rival of his Fame)
His Fury would have kill'd: They both

Lie hurt, and I am so in wroth
With this Man-Woman, Angel-Devil,
(Who to the Sun would scant be civil)
That could I light upon her GRACE,
I'd tell her roundly to her face,
Spin Highness, Spin (as good as you have spun)
For y' are a Woman, not an AMAZON.



(He serves me right ) Who sent him?




You'd have me hang'd)  He came of his own head.

  109For he hath Valour, Birth, and All

With which a QUEEN in Love should fall:
And I (his Servant) shall not bate
Much of a COUNTESSE for my Mate.

I know too in the World a QUEEN
(I name her not, but) she hath been
Late disinchanted, for which pains
Such favours upon Him she rains,
That   But I stop  



Say, prethee, does he love?




Is he a Brute?




And is he lov'd?




A curious Question  This (shall I be free?)
Is a graft too of the forbidden Tree.

From me no more is to be got,
And therefore (pray you) press me not.
Good faith, 'twere much more like a Friend

To hang me, as you did intend.



This one thing wilt not let me know?



Pray, why should you desire it so?



Only to keep it secret still.



Forbear to know it, and you will.



How mainly thou art giv'n to scoff!
It is not noble to put off
With a light jest a serious suit.





No? as great Men as I will do 't.



But come (since you will have the truth)
He is a Man much lov'd by many,

Yet one of such a curious tooth,

That in his life he ne're lov'd any.


White Hands, black Eyes, curl'd Locks, have no more force
On him, than Physick hath on a dead Horse.

From some dry Mother-in-law the Man did learn
Not to relent  He? He hath no concern,


  110Cannot discourse of love, though in his prime,

Though on all other Theams his tongue's a Chime,

Though none so drest, none dances so, none pours
Himself so out; for He's a rock of Flow'rs.






A Knight that's so accomplish'd, not
To love, appears to me a knot.

I must undo it by some Art:

For at this secret hangs a Heart.



Pleas'd me thou hast exceedingly:
And I unthankful shall not be.



I kiss thy foot, and am thy slave.




Here me AURELIO, take this Knave
To prison.









For being a Blab.








Are these thy thanks? and do'st thou fix
The name of Blab upon me too?
O! take by me example, you

That are Gallants, you that love:
Thus do Ladies thankful prove.

He is carried away to Prison.


Should your Highness be more cruel

Than you are to this sweet Iewel;
Never was't so well bestow'd,
Or so like a Mercy show'd.






Dissolv'd in Tears, and languishing delight,
The whisp'ring FOUNTAIN is a tale of LOVE;
The Rosie MORN, inam'ring at first sight,
Sweet PHILOMELA's Oraisons doth move;


  111The smiling FLOW'R▪ the tender peeping BUD,
APRIL importunes with soft show'rs; the DOVE
Lives vow'd to everlasting Widdowhood,


Temple of LOYALTY, and Soul of LOVE.


Love grasps both Globes: LOVE all below inspires:
Love guides with constant change the sphears above:

MARS feels LOVES darts, APOLLO feels LOVES fires,
Ev'n HE that hurls the thunder, yields to LOVE.
All these to me no warrant; whose intent
Is not to vouch, but make a PRECEDENT.










Leave haunting me, and leave thy vain
And impertinent desire;
The more thou do'st of me complain,
The more 's the honour I acquire:


For (credit me) I more approve
That all the World should be my Foe,

Than I defended by thy Love:

It is a debt I would not owe.



Though Heav'n with plaguing me tire never,
I hope yet it will use me better
Than (to compleat my Plagues) that ever
I should be my Tormentors debtor.



Return, and let ARABIA gather
Her Rebel-Armies in thy Name:

Be kindling there seditious, rather
Than kindled here with amorous flame.



  112The cause of this disguise you see,
Is, that your self and me,

You now no more may vex,
But look on me as one of your own Sex.


Be gone, provoke me not too far,
This field presume not to transgress;
For, if my Eyes such Murth'rers are,
My Hand will be a greater Murtheress.






BELLONA, armed with the Sun;
That Conquest which thy Face hath sure,

Some hazzard in thy Sword may run,
Although its temper too be pure.



For Hearts ignoble (which your sweet
Majestick Eye cannot command
To lie down trembling at your FEET)
Reserve the anger of the HAND.


Not revilings so well spoke,

Not the pain with which I'm stung,

Not thy scorns can me provoke;
"For want of luck is not a wrong.


Nor merit I to be exil'd
From the dear place which thou art in,
Though scorn'd, tormented, and revil'd;
For, nor is want of luck a sin.



T' obey, I do not ask thee now
High Heav'ns by thee despised will.

But that (abhorring ME) yet thou

Would'st give me leave to Love THEE still.


  113Nor do I so much thank the Gods
That they were pleas'd to vote thee mine,

As that from all the World the odds
They judg'd to me of being thine.



But, since thy hate I constant find,
This Cruelty hath op'd mine Eyes

To see that all the Stars are blind,

And thou than Heav'n it self more wise.


Return into thy Kingdom free;
There, at the ALTAR, I'll refuse thee:
Let not ARABIA lose THEE,
It is enough that I do lose thee.



Forreign Succours thou need'st none:
Return, thou hast (if thou canst see)

Champion enough in me alone,

And in thy self a Victory.






On thee I lay not all the fault,
For (FLORANTEO) without doubt,
That, against which I bend my thought,

Heav'n is too prone to bring about.


Now, as for Beauty, I pretend
To none, and, if I had such lot,
My Beauty's Conquests should extend
To something that I hated not.



That thou art object of my Hate

To impute's erroneous vanity,
Unto thy being unfortunate,

And not unto my knowing thee.


Makes a streak on the ground.

  114Step not an Inch beyond this line.

For, should the World arm all agin me,
And all the Elements combine,
I have my Victories within me.





Most Beautiful, Illustrious, Generous,


Divine CLARIDIANA, whom t' excel

Self-Rival'd Nature being ambitious,
With flesh and blood found it impossible.


New PHOENIX of Arabia, Miracle
Greater than She, who in of Her SELF lyes,


Dies when she rises, rises when she dyes.




Celestial Princess, able to make Wars
Out of the private stock of thy Perfections:
(For thou might'st press full Regiments of Stars,
Would'st thou but give thy foot those bright directions.)



Advance, thy Beauty's Royal Standard spred;

Beat up thy Drums in Hearts that freedom plead;

Give out Commissions under white and red



To kill and slay, to burn, and to make prize,

And let thy Foes look Armies in thy Eyes.



See, how thy fugitive feet, by calling Strangers

To thy assistance, steal the Victory
Thy face (if shew'd) would gain, dispersing dangers

More than the GORGONS HEAD! that spakling Eye,


The whiteness of that Hand, without a Blow,
All that contrast with thee, must overthrow
In a celestial War of Fire and Snow.



BEAUTY pretends not warring with a Sword,

But with a gentle look, or a kind word;

  115To be robustious, furious, warlike, are
Not Graces, but distortions of the Fair.

A scorn that sweetly balsoms when it wounds,

A word that striking courteously rebounds,

An em'rous Frown; these tye Men to their duty
With cords; for "A perswading War is Beauty.






Thou seest I ask no Prince my part to take
(How brave so e're) none such my Champion make.
But beg (how meetly!) ZELIDAURA'S Aid,
A MAIDEN QUEEN to right a CROWNED MAID.

She (the illustrious Bulwark of her land,

And Mistress of a SOUL white as her Hand)
Disdains her Name, and her Heroick Sail

To such a trifle as a Man should vail.

Since then the Tartars unrevolted are,
And now in Peace, though always prone to War,



Their Martial Spirits let her exercise,
T' undoe a wrong which loud for Vengeance crys:
I, by a Woman or by none, will rise:


Too proud, my life (if sav'd b' a Man) to own,
Or with my Freedom to redeem my Throne.

To be robustious, fierce, and arrogant,


They are not BEAUTIES proper Arms, I grant;
For her smooth rigidness her slack comptroll,

Cloath not with steel the body, but the soul.

I grant, Cheeks swoln with choler have no hooks;
That no temptations are in furious looks:

For the Brest's inward softness (without doubt)
Is Beauty's soul, which seasons that without.
But, ceas'd SEMIRAMIS, to be a Dame,

PENTHASILIA ceas'd she to inflame,

(Theit Helmets off) because, when on they were,
This HECTORS Sword, That shook ACHILLES Spear?


  116Discreet, prompt, active, gallant, happily
Are they entayl'd upon DEFORMITY?
And evermore must Beauty bear the taunt

Of luckless, cowardly, and ignorant?

To a discreet and an obedient Lover

Her self in her own shape let her discover,
("For when all's done, to pierce a Wiseman's breast
"Beauty's the sharpest sword.) But for the rest,
Who vex, who cross me, them, not with a white,

But armed Hand, I'll take, kill, burn, in fight.

Here 'tis, that BEAUTY quits her native charms;
And plays the Souldier with those borrowed Arms.

Shall I those People that would suck my blood,
Slay with a LADY'S Weapon? (That were good:)
And REBELS, shall so sweet a death o'rewhelm,
As by my BEAUTY? No, the impious Relm

Shall rue their work   What talk'st thou of my Face!
It is my Sword must right me in this Case.
My HANDS must quell those that against me rise:
For other are the Conquests of my EYES.









Transform'd CLARIDIANA who can know?



Thy Beauty in such Characters is writ,
That a dull Eye may soon discypher it.



By thee (who art my shadow) me it may:
Back therefore, FLORANTEO.




The Tyranness, I am thy subject still:
Then cease thy Anger if I do thy Will.



Claridiana and Florinda remain.



In her superlative perfections,
Thou wilt see a peerless Dame.



Of her Beauty faint Reflections
Are rendred by the Glass of Fame.










Madam, are you well?




I ayl nothing ROSELIND 



What new Disease!   I cannot tell,
This disinchanted Queen is wond'rous kind,



Or wond'rous grateful Thought, thou 'rt not my Friend 



Leave me thou too   we would be left.






Hangs there and, if that Heart beneath it bend,
Believe me it must needs be great.





What tyrannous resentments move
Such monstrous billows in my brest?

Iealous am I, before I love?

And before I fear, opprest?



If CLARIDIANE is Queen
Of Araby, what makes she here?

Is it to see only, unseen?
That much unlikely doth appear.


If for the Love she bears the Stranger, ill
Did he to leave her, though worth spurr'd him on:
But, if he reign'd as King in her good will,
She did as good as bid him get him gone.


 Fool, Fool, to be concerned so
In wrongs her Beauty doth sustain;
When all the pity I can show
Is not enough for my own pain.





Approach, what fear'st thou?








Yes, I know that Face,

Claridiana knows Zelidaura when she sees her, and Zelidaura knows her.

And that gate too 






She, whom I saw in a course case,









The wrong'd CLARIDIANA doth pursue
The Stranger whom she loves  Down flames 




My name but sounded, brings me all her Pow'rs.



Couragious Queen, bright honour of thy kind,
At these tryumphant Feet thy Slave's inclin'd.

Falls at her Feet.


Rise, and inform us what thou art.







(Fam'd ZELIDAURA) an Arabian Knight,

Who beg thee drown'd with pity in the name
Of my dread Mistress, brought into sad plight


By Rebels   If thou art the blew-ey'd Maid,

Who is the Deity of War; Aid, Aid,











In her dear Countrey, in her Throne replant
CLARIDIANA; then thou shalt not want

New DECADES to thy Story, and give Fame

(Who loves to sing thy Praises) a large Theam.
Arm; let thy valour freeze th' Usurper's veins:
Nor let thy hand kill less, than thy disdains.

Thy Beauties in their dazeled faces shine,
And teach thy Sword to conquer, though 'tis thine.

On Spanish Gennet hang 'twixt Earth and Air:

Nor MARS, but SOL, be now the God of War.


  119To Cowards, and to Valiant, fatal prove:
Making those dye for fear, as these for love.





In flatt'ries wrapt, her purpose close she bears:
How well they 're call'd, the poison of the Ears!


Another now (thus jealous) would be thought
In love, but I'm not guilty of that fault,
Yet here are sighs would make me think I were,

And never lye, did so like truth appear.
I'll answer coldly, till I know if War.

Be in her land, or love do make 't on her.

If Treason drave her thence, without delay
My conqu'ring Flags I in her Cause display.
But, if (a frantick Lover) she pursue
The gallant STRANGER, I will make her rue
She e're came hither; and upon them both

(Though I should dye for't) wreak my burning wroth.



What is your answer?



Is there, did'st thou say,
Such a Rebellion in ARABIA?









And did that Queen send thee

To make request for succours unto Me?









And as certain, this,

That she doth hope them from me?







And for my Answer wert thou bid to stay?














How's this? An Answer how unlike her Fame?

Are these the Actions that cry up her Name?

Is this that they call Manly? This to be

Invincible? What an Indignitie!

Upon how slight an Errand FAME will go?
And how it gathers like a Ball of Snow!

  120When I suppos'd her Valour would burst out,
And sow with Squadrons all my fields about,
To reap, for our two heads, a twofold CROWN,
Of Gold for mine, of Laurel for her own:

When the two sweetest things EARTH can afford
I made account to owe unto her Sword,


Revenge and Empire; paying me in brief
The common Wages of a light belief,
She answers (neither brave, nor pitiful,

Nor courteous, but pitifully dull)
SHE'LL THINK OF IT. And if her Bowels yearn'd
Not now, will she with thinking be concern'd?
What shall I do?



Sue to some King, and chuse
Him such a King, as you did most abuse.

If you obliged ANY heretofore,
Take heed of him upon that very score.
How well your Entertainment she doth quit!



Her rustick weed bely'd not her Soul yet.
"THE WORST OF FOES ARE THANKLESS FRIENDS; for those
"One ne're did good to, are at worst cheap Foes.

Ingratitude is cruel. Seek I must
(I see) to my wise Father, though unjust.

Ah ZELIDAURA, thou hast a Man's Heart,
Because untouch'd with sense of Woman's smart!









From this deep Vale, with horrour crown'd,
Whose bottom not the Stars can sound,
I breath up sighs no less profound.

Where, if hard trees, and harder stones,
Hear my moans;
Never again
Will I to cruel Womankind complain.



Silence not still respect implies:
For he from whom, when rack'd he lies
Nothing is wrung,
Slights his Tormentor whilst he holds his tongue.



What need of silence hath respect?

It looks to me as if the Flame
Were held a shame,
Which all the Care is how not to detect.



Here, here, let me let loose my groans,
Let the great Bell out be rung:

Here safely all my LOVE at once
Unload thy self into my tongue.



If she should overhear it, Crime 'twere none;

Faith is alive, but hope is dead and gone.



If our Predecessors Passions
Had been regulated thus,
BEAUTIES new Fortifications

Had not been rais'd against us.


For who could take a just offence
At an humble Patience,
At a true Hearts silent aking,
Or ev'n a suit presented quaking?



That dost in highest Orb of Beauty shine,

Pardon'd Murd'ress, by that Heart


It self which thou dost kill, and coveted smart:



Though my walk so distant lyes
From the Sun-shine of thine Eyes,
(Into sullen shaddows hurl'd,
To lye here buried to the World)


  122'Tis the least reason of my moan,
That so much Earth is 'twixt us thrown.


'Tis absence of another kind
Grieves me: For, where y' are present too,
LOVE'S Geometry doth find
I have ten thousand Miles to you.



"'Tis not absence, to be far;
"But, to abhor, is to absent.

"To those, who in disfavour are,
"Sight it self is Banishment.


But I love thee with all my heart,
Whom therefore thou canst never fly;
Since, in whatever place thou art,
Th' art present to my Fantasie.



As th' Optick 's turn'd, the Object comes and goes:
DISDAIN no presence, LOVE no absence knows.



Custom of Ills is poor relief,
It only stands on the defence:
The faint Compounder of a Grief

After the first violence.


Nor hath that place in a new Wound,

And my Wound is ever new,
And ev'ry day is more profound,
And ev'ry moment festers too.


Only one Woe (for 't were a Crime)
I never can be guilty of:
To love her less than at this time,
Or not to love only to love.



  123Nor would I quench the fire in which I dye,
To be the light of any other Eye.







The wounded Knight I come to see:
Let no one stop me  Is that he?




Who is so out of fashion, as to look
Upon a Man whom Fortune hath forsook?
What a sparkling Shepherdess!

(Here may be more than I yet guess.)



Ay me! 'Tis CLARIDORO, This.




Through her disguise how fair she is!
'Tis ZELIDAURA (for my sight
Hath found her out by her own light)
But 'tis a Happiness, and I
In that may ev'n mistrust my Eye.

Possible in nature is it,
That to me can be this visit?

Or, so beside my self am I,
To think ought mine that is Felicity?





He knows me, but I'll face him down
I am not I: But he is such a Clown

He'll not believe me, should I swear it:







Why might not my immortal passion merit,
And force thus much, from Her? It might do so,
If I were not a Man made sure to Woe:

Nor would it the first glorious tryumph prove
O're scornful Beauty, by submissive Love:

Though I do mainly doubt it, and should say
'Twere a great wonder, were it true: I'll pay

  124My truth her wages with believing 'tis:

And so deceive my self into a Bliss.


Addresses himself to her.

SHEPHERDESSE, whose Sheep-Walks reach
From CHINA'S WALL to the MUSCOVIAN BEACH;
Who to a thousand Flocks do'st look,
And rul'st them with a Golden Hook;
Whom Title, Beauty, Wit, combine
To render in all points divine:


Humane only toward me,

Nor that till thou these hurts didst see;
As if (to dye) that I had need
By other hand than thine, to bleed.


Such pity ZELIDAURA keep:
For all these Wounds I long may live:
A Foe's Weapon cuts not deep:
Pity that, a Friend doth give.


For this high Grace, thou now bestow'st 





(Were 't meant, I see it were not lost.
But yes: It were an Ill-plac'd Boon

On one, that can believe 't so soon)
To Him.
Where's any ZELIDAURA here?
Dost thou a simple Body jeer?
'Tis well 




You over act it ZELIDAURA:




ZELIDAURE not me, I LAURA
Am, the Daughter of thine Host.


Thou, little, Zelidaura know'st.
A Majesty so proud, so grave,

To come and visit thee? do'st rave?

  125With me thou double-wrong'st her GRACE,
In her Discretion and her Face.



I'm pitifull a little, much at home:
To see thee (hurt) on these two scores I come.





Thou art my Health, when Health's away,

And of my Hopes the only stay.




Thou 'rt of the Sect of HOPERS than?




Fair ZELIDAURA, if you can,
In this sweet truth, or errour, dye let me.




Either I am not, or will not be she.





Goddess of snow, fair Copy of the Sun,
Ecclipsing this, and making that look dun;
Whose piercing sight (predominant in Souls)
Two Globes of Light, two Sphears of Beauty, rowls;
'Bout which ten thousand flutt'ring CUPIDS swarm,
And sindge those wings they there presum'd to warm:

Whom with one gracious smile if thou requite,
Thou kill'st with Life, and strik'st them blind with Light.


Thou, from whom (arm'd with steel and love are sent
Thy Billets into every ELEMENT

(Inraged) rending.) and ADORNING (Fair)

The Earth with Stars, with Cannon-shot the Air.

The WOODS (from which all other Sun is shut)
(With Lilly Hand, with odoriferous foot,

(Speeding unerring Shafts, recruiting Bow'rs)

Thou robb'st of Beasts, and pay'st again in Flowers.



Celestial ZELIDAURA, fair Comptrol

Of all that share an understanding Soul,
(For 'tis the least of Praise thy Beauty boasts
To trample outward force, and vanquish'd Hoasts.)

  126Though, 'twas the dream of one that ill did rest
To fancy gentle pity in thy Brest,

(The wrack of Hearts, and temple of a Saint
Whose Walls can boast not one reliev'd Complaint.)


It was a vanity my LOVE brought forth,
When I consider'd that, and not thy worth.
Nor dare I so much wrong that noble Passion,
To think it might not merit a Compassion,

Though not return: Yet, Bliss on any score,

Which knock'd at mine, it seems mistook the dore.

For when THOU com'st (and then THAT comes) to ME
BLISSE, is not Bliss, nor ZELIDAURA, She.

I know thee not (let not thy choler rise)
For I believe THEE more than my own EYES.




Alack! alack! much loss of Blood
Hath turn'd his Brain, and makes him wood.





O LOVE (thou well maist be call'd blind)
The happier Stranger came she not to find?
O Heav'ns! with this suspition I do pass
To be envious and base.



But if blind LOVE made me conceit

Fondly of her, as to me:


Stranger, the wonder 's not so great,
If I think meanly of her, as to thee.









Now 't's too late:
Poor Soul, thou talk'st at a strange rate!


Besides, I do not like thee half so well,
Since I perceive thy thoughts so vastly swell.









Why (ungrateful) fly'st thou me,

And seek'st my Rival? Was disdain
(O HEAV'NS!) too little, without JEALOUSIE?
Envy, was 't not sufficient to complain?

Kill'd with anothers Happiness?

Suffic'd not for a WRETCH his own distress?



I took anothers Bliss for mine


That harms themselves cannot my Wits refine!
That from my ill, that good I could not get!
That I should, not be able
To make some use of being miserable.



My Soul shall follow thee,
Too fleet for me:
For from my Soul I'm sure thou canst not go,
And I know all the paths that lead to Woe.
O Life, with Sorrows rife,

Only to Misery thou art a Life!










Lash'd by the Winds, the OCEAN raves, and craves
To be a Star, and not an Element:
The WINDS cry FREEDOM from their horrid Caves,
Not clogs of Mountains can their scape prevent.


The MOUNTAINS crack; the crouded Air upheaves
The Pillars of the Rocking FIRMAMENT:
For none, to that which smart or loss receives,
Forbids a sigh, a tear, or a lament.



I only (a dead mark of Fortune's spight)
Stand on the highest pinacle of Grief

Firm as a Diamond, silent as Night.

O Smart well disciplin'd, without Relief



  128For a poor LOVER to support his woe!

So much a sorrow doth to custom owe.


Immortal, doubtless, is the thing
Which me doth pain,
And that again
Which doth eternally remain
From a Celestial Cause must spring.



My Soul is short as unto Me,



But, Madam, to the World I came

Eternal, as to loving Thee,

For unto thee, all Soul I am.


The greater torment I sustain,
The less I wou'd
My days conclude;
For, dying to be out of pain,
Is the Cowards fortitude.


Grant, I should (my pain to cure)
Suffer Smart


Can I another Heart procure
To love with, when thou broken art?


But little skill in love thou hast,
Who e're thou art that think'st or Bliss,


In dying for 't; since, Life once past,
Neither LOVE, nor his PANGS, last.


Therefore would I alive remain,
'Cause (dead) impossible 't would prove
To obtain
Either more Love to cause sweet pain,

Or more time in which to love.



  129I do not with presumptuous Heart
Value my self on FORTUNES Frown:
He, that's o'rethrown
For want of taking his own part,
Gets no Honour by being down.


The Man that merits not good Fortune,
If he complain,
Is not in vain
Complain'd of: For, in due misfortune,

To murmur, is t'offend again.


I hold it for a wither'd Bays,

For which I nothing have to show,
But that proud Fortune is my Foe:
A poor it is, and heartless praise,
Which to my misery I owe.





And blame not thee, my Misery
Being ow'd unto my self alone.


From others pity I could ne're
Extract a Bliss; nor fit
Imagin it,
That others should the sorrow bear,

When I the folly did commit.


In thy regard, alive or dead,
I cannot be
Comforted:
For, whil'st I live, thou 'rt lost to me;
And, dead, I lose the loving thee.



  130When shall these Eyes behold the light
For which I
Languishing, dye?

When?  But what needs corporeal sight?
LOVE can see without an Eye.


That I, a Persian, should Adore the SUN,
Is no wonder;
But, in some Pool 'tis safest done,
Or when a Cloud 'tis under.


For, my best SUN, if Thee
I should see,
'Twould scorch me with the heat, 'twould blind me with the Ray,
Unless (as thee I once survay'd)
'Twere in thy Picture's cooler shade;
Or thus, by strength of fancy, when ev'n that 's away.


Stands or lyes down, with his Eyes fixt towards the door, as upon the dear object.





The Patient stays in pain, make room,
A goodyer take you, let me come.
To Him.
Will your Worship be drest now?



The Chyrurgioness art thou?



Yes, and might be too the wound.



Thou might'st indeed: For the most sound,

If with this object he did meet,
Might dye of a Disease that's sweet.








Not I. I'm prepossest.



But a new, outeth an old guest.
He looks upon her amazedly.

  131What do yow gape at?





I do not sleep, nor All INCHANTMENT be
Which I do lay my Eyes upon, This Face

I've seen, with wonder, in another place.
She 's like the SUN in all: save that the Sun
Is sole, but ZELIDAURA is not One.

Did Nature dote so on her pieces worth,
As to give sundry Copies of it forth?
Or (which no less upon my wonder calls)
Hath that one Picture four Originals?



Now his Brain works like Wax, and his five Wits
Relapse into their Apoplectick Fits.

I am resolved I will know his Name,
Having already broke the Ice of shame.
What so becalms thee? Grievous is the wound?




Not, now, that of my Body.






That of thy Soul is, thou inferr'st. Take heed
Of Sleep, for that will make it inward bleed;
And the Man's giv'n to Sleeping.




If but of wonder.



Where doth thy pain lye?



Just at my Heart: INCHANTMENTS are the Cause,
And absence of a Queen that gives it Laws.



Peace: I would be contented to know less.



'Tis she, or else her Shadow.  SHEPHERDESS
Come hither, have I seen thee before now?



Can I tell what thy Eyes have seen?




Been ever in ARABIA happily?




(Once, but no Happy ARABY to Me.)
To Him.
How curious to know all! I ne're was out
Of these sweet fields 



And therefore past all doubt,
They are so sweet  And how art thou call'd.











  132(I fear a new Intrigue) Seen thee hath she?




Tell me thy Name, and here I promise thee
A Secret which may fully recompence
A Courtesie of greater consequence:
For to this Graunge comes ZELIDAURA oft.
And these dumb flow'rs, these murmuring springs, this soft
Consort of Nightingales, this Garden Wall,
Those circumjacent fields, LAURA and all,

Are witness to a pain she doth deplore 
But till thou have oblig'd me first, no more.



(O jealousie! and was not Love enough?
Jealous so soon? Am I such catching stuff?)



If it import thee to know more of this,
Say what thou art, and why thy coming is.




Forgive me Modesty, it doth behove
I lay thee by, to seek (not Praise, but) Love.
To Her.
Friend have your Wish.









Nor with (O yes.)




You have a merry Frend.




A King hath PERSIA (FELISBRAVO hight)
High Envy of the GODS, MANKINDS delight,

His birth-day a few Mays have mark'd with Flowers:
The same (join'd with the drops of April show'res)
Summe up his virtues. As in LOGARISM

Nine figu•es makes of numbers an Abysm:

So a few Springs (as he hath order'd it)
Have multiply'd his Years to Infinit:

Who, though not full eight thousand mornings strong,
He that now wrote his Life would find it long:

His Body and his Soul are so well met,
That the best Gem, hath the best Cabinet.

  133A Veil of Love his Majesty doth shroud;
Which yet is so seen through, that the most proud

Tread upon fears, and hear their faults aloud.


He walks through the wide Fields of History:

North-Star of Kings, to steer a true Course by;
And, for their Faults, a GLASSE that will not lye.



His Hand is of two Natures: It doth hold
STEEL, that is clapt into it, lets go GOLD,
Yet strong submission wrests there out the Sword;
And, frank of Deeds, he's niggard of his Word:

Lest bashful Bounty make him say the thing
Which will not hold: For that's unlike a KING.
Lets no base whispers misinform his Youth,

Nor thinks it thrift on Trust to take up Truth.


Vice he hath none, nor any Age hath seen
Amongst so many Flow'rs so little green.



He looks on BEAUTY (pleas'd) and passes on:

A FREE PRINCE still, ev'n where she plants her Throne.
The light thereof he takes, the Fire he doth

Reject: A temperate and a glorious YOUTH!
Till some just War shall wake his sleeping Sword,
And splendid Theams to Tongues and Pens afford;
He follows peaceful War, breaks truce with Beasts.
Sloth Foe to All, but most to Royal Breasts.
The second SOL without his radiant Hair,
He sacks the Woods, dispeoples the wide Ayr:

The first ADONE, without his VENUS, Groves

He doth adorn, and peoples those with Loves.

This Prince felt never, never he LOVE'S smart,
Nor his most Golden Shaft durst wound his Heart;
Until a Captive did in Persia thunder
Such Praises of a PRINCESSE (the Worlds Wonder)

  134As stunn'd his senses, set his Heart at Bay,
'Twixt trembling boldness, and 'twixt bold dismay.

Of Wounds less mortal dy'd the Royal Slave,

Who ZELIDAURA'S Picture to him gave,
Mute Circle of two Suns. Th' inamour'd King

(Whil'st he, impatient, settles ev'ry thing
In order to come after, that his Realm

Lament not his short abscence from the Helm)
Commands my Journey to Tartaria poast,
T' inform my self whether the Picture boast

Real Perfections of her Queen. I fly,
And reach in a few days to ARABY,
Where (Mortal Frailty yielding to Sleeps pow'r)
A Villain steals it. An Inchanted Tow'r

Is interpos'd 'twixt our drawn Swords (at once

That thund'ring with its fall, and I with groans)
Thence to this Forrest we adjourn the War,

His Treason's Altar, my Revenge's Bar.

We meet; when ours so many Swords repel,
As if each Blade of Grass were one of Steel.


To lose my Picture, and not lose my Life,

I pierc'd with Woe;
And that to Poison, that to Sword, nor Knife,

My Death I owe.


To Persia dare not (for the King) return
(For coldest Hearts, when fir'd once, fiercest burn)
Who, sweetly snar'd with ZELIDAURA'S Fame,
No Love else answers, hears no other Name.
Rare SHEPHERDESSE (whether thou be the Flow'r

Of forreign Plains, or of these Hills the Tow'r)
If help thou have, or help to thee be known,

If more thou art, or canst, than thou dost own,

Pity my Woes, set my Confusions right,
Ease so great pain, shew day to so great night.









Most undoubtedly 'tis He,

Because (for more disguise) I see
His proper Praise he did not spare.



I shall soon find it.  Thy great Care


And Courage (PERSIAN) I admire.
Couldst thou the Picture know again?





If it take up my Thoughts entire,
And Copied in my Heart remain,


Must I not know it?






And mark it well.




Had I no Aim
By any feature, whose it is
The matchless Beauty would proclaim.



What Bon-fires (HEART) wilt thou now make for Joy?
I would not have them less

Than my LOVE'S Flame, or those of TROY;
And monstrous, as to me, is Happiness.


A Lover is not glad,
Unless withall he's Mad:
Nor can my Gratitude expressed be
With any thing that's less than Lunacie.



I do not celebrate my Good

With so much splendour as I ought,
Nor its full worth have understood,
If this effect it have not wrought.




He's like a Man that talks t' a Spirit 




Beautiful and injur'd Shade,

More blame (I must confess) I merit,
Than past his Hour a LOVER who hath staid.




Shepherdess, who gave it thee?



Seeing the self-same Beauty ever,
I credit, what I tremble to assever.





Then, Persian, of a Countrey Lass


Through this blind Labyrinth to pass
My Pity giving thee a Clew.


I am the Woman thou didst see,
In several shapes, in Arabie;
And who from thee this Picture stole;
And whom, if that rare King (the Soul
And Martial Glory of the Chase)
Merit the Praise thou giv'st His GRACE,
Wish thee return to Persia faster
Than thou cam'st hither, and thy Master

(The Gen'rous FELISBRAVO) tell;
He shall to TARTARY do well
To come with wings, where (if he prove
As humble, and as much in love,

As great in Courage, and high-flown)
Queen ZELIDAURA is his own:
The most exempted Heart reserving
For the Person most deserving:
And say, thou heard'st it from one LAURA,
Who heard it in this place from ZELIDAURA.





Shall I think my Senses true?
ZELIDAURA 'tis I view.
No, no, it is not; 'Tis my Eye
Flatters my Wishes with so sweet a Lye.



Angel I go; and shall the King

Quickly to TARTARIA bring.



It is not FELISBRAVO, no;
For he his Mask now off would throw.
What have I done? My being kind
I will retract, unless I find
This Face, this Courage, and this Meen,

In a Kings Person, to deserve a QUEEN.

Compares her with the Picture, interchangeably regarding either.



That, of the Hand which made us all,

Picture, is thy Originall,

None, that before appeared such,
Did Face to Face avow so much.
An Egg is not more like an Egg,
Nor the Left to the Right Leg.
NATURE, that drain'd her Stores to do

One Face like this, despair'd of Two.


They descant to themselves upon ea•h other.


Is this a Servant?





I ne're was in a Maze till now.



Then art not FELISBRAVO, thou?



Art thou then, ZELIDAURA?




(His fear compels him to conceal,

My love shall prompt him to reveal,


Himself ) Sir Knight 





Thy divine commands express.



The Picture 's mine, I am not LAURA:
If thou art FELISBRAVO, follow
To the Temple of APOLLO:
I am relenting ZELIDAURA.




Suspend thy steps: With all my Heart

(Beauteous Queen) I follow thee:

(But that's already where thou art )







Valiant King, come back to me.







Whom hurlst thou fro thee?




Youth, for this ill turn beshrow thee.



Hear me, thou new Alcides.





Wouldst thou with me?














CLARIDIANA out of mind?



Me, that the Sea burneth, tell.



Look upon me, Stranger, well.




The Cloaths and smartness, thou put'st an,
Speak the bold language of a Man;
But that Complexion, and that Grace,

WOMAN write upon thy Face:


And one, whom I have elsewhere seen.





Ah! Wonder not, the most distrest

Of Women, seeks of Men the best:

Of ARABIA I am Queen,



On which the Gold, that therein is,
The Name of HAPPY did bestow,
And, of PERFUMED, from her Trees

The Aromatick Tears that flow.


My Father (through whose Magick Lore

The shook Earth groan'd, and on whose back,

As on strong Atlas'is of yore,
The Heaven was a Golden Pack)


  139Erected there th' inchanted Tow'r,
For curious and magnificent,

Proportioned to Regal Pow'r,
And Art's Divine Astonishment,


Th' intention was to thee made known,
Then, when thou couldst not keep by WIT
That, which by Valour thou didst git;
So many Monsters overthrown.


The Duel was abruptly done,
Abruptly was the War begun,
Feign'd to be here in TARTARY
By CLARIDORO'S Jealousy.


Certain Eyes were thy North-Stars,

Which directed thy Course hither:
If Ruth, or Love, or love of Wars,
The Cause, thou know'st; I know not whether.



I staid alone: My Subjects (broke
Loose from their Duty) They, require
T' an Idol I should offer smoke,

For whom my Altar had no Fire.



Up-sighing, to the Gods, Complaints;

Heav'ns sacred pity I implore;
The Sun, surpriz'd with darkness, faints;
The Thunder in the Ayre doth roar.



By her misfortunes to his Child)
Informs me how this Cabbin mean
Inshrines the Persian King serene.


Thou art the Man, thou FELISBRAVO art,

In Praise of whom Fame sings her well conn'd Part:


  140Two Worlds already with thy Name doth fill,
And makes both Poles hear plain her Trumphet shrill.

Thy Aid I crave, to thee my wrongs discover,
As thou art brave, not as thou art a Lover:

(For, tell not me of constant Lovers; such
I have heard much of, but believe not much.)
Restore CLARIDIANA to her Crown:

Thy Name will make the Loyal (who are down)
O'retop the rest. These, are the spoyls thou ow'st
To Fame's bright Temple; These, are deeds to boast

Thee, for their Author: Leave, fam'd Prince, soft thoughts,
Leave CUPID'S vain Caresses, and tame faults
Of Idleness; thy Damask Blade unsheath;
In Rest couch Ash; on which when North Winds breath
It bends (a Twig) but now (more stubborn W•od)

Shew's Beak of Steel, made drunk with Crimson Flood.
Arm'd, let the Field behold thee; and make blush
The shoulders of thy digg'd Bucephalus

With Foamed Spurs: In thee APOLLO bright
Be dy'd with Blood, Red Mars be guilt with Light.

My Truncheon weild with that victorious Hand:
Two Phoenixes shall then the ARABS Land

(As to immortal, as to glorious) have;
But (as to valiant) only FELISBRAVE.







LOVE, and HONOUR, pull two ways;
And I stand doubtful which to take:
To Arabia, Honour says,

Love says, no; thy stay here make,


HONOUR (like to lose the day)

Pity throws into her scale

LOVE, Gratitude in his doth lay;
Fearing else not to prevail.


  141Fair ZELIDAURA shall I flee,
Just now, when in her Grace I stand;
One of those happy Fools to be,
Who prize no bird that 's in the hand?



So (your less Fool) a Child too, cryes
For a rich Gem, which got, the Boy
Runs after something else he spies,
And leaves his Iewel for a toy.




Deaf then to loud Musick of MARS,
To his spread Flags let me be blind.
I'm summon'd here to higher Wars:

And those are cruel, these are kind.


To wrong'd Claridiana, than

Discourteous Coward shall I prove?
Knowing my Heart (as I do) can,
Dare I, to it, such baseness move?


Not, by Courtship, not on Do•n;
Is acquir'd sublime Renoun:


Scales Alpes and ploughs up Seas unstable.




How long he doth debate it in his Brest?
"Slow comes Relief, where little Love doth rest.




Pardon me, Zelidaure, this way I take
And (which is more) I leave thee for thy sake:
For, of thy Lover none deserves the Name,
Who will not succour a Distressed Dame.
Stand me, Arabia: If I gain the day
The Spoils at ZELIDAURA'S Feet I'll lay.






Leave FELISBRAVO, leave the vain Alarms

Of a false HONOUR, and LOVE'S vaines Charms.

These pull proud PONTUS on thy trembling Relm.

Ev'n Courage fears, the Pilot from the Helm:
Hast home: 'Tis brav'ry past my skill t' admire,
To quench another's house, thine own on fire.
Once let not appetite prevail, not still
The worst be chose, and Reason stoop to Will.


Waste not thy years in Love, or cruel Ruth,

And weed betimes ev'n Flow'rs that choak thy Youth.

Return to PERSIA, leave Romancing, leave

Disnerving Loves, and all that may deceive
The Harvest of so fair a Spring. "The Birth
"Of Kings is to be Patterns to the Earth,
"Not blotting-papers, but to write fair by;
"Nor pleasures Slaves, or tryumphs of an Eye.




This seems a trick. Heav'ns! That a Man should dare
To forfeit his good Manners to my Pray'r!



GEN'RAL, well urg'd: But first I'll pay two scores:
One here, another where my Soul adores 
To Her.
CLARIDIANA comfort thy soft Brest,

Heroick Minds are try'd when they are prest.

List me thy Captain, or thy Souldier: Come

Live thou, though I dye here, and lose at home.









The WORLD will hang the Temple of thy worth

With all the Vows OPPRESSION shall rack forth.
T' ARABIA then; thy look will conquer there,

And thy Fame strike the Pontick King with Fear.








Good Courtier, but ill Lover, now am I:

I know it, but I know no Remedy.





I carry thee, to War against my Land:

Against my Heart to War too, underhand.





'Tis not, the Persian FELISBRAVE;
He would have follow'd: And if FAME
With a true Mouth his Worth proclaim,
HE (if he lov'd) my Love might have.


For he that will my Hand deserve,
Must, in a constant Soul, comprize
The understanding of the Wise.

The diligence of those that serve,




Perfections of a KING discover,
And the tremblings of a Lover.









For the Queen now
To Court to call me is no pleasure

To one who wisely minds the Plow,

And rowls in Leisure.



Sweet Solitude! still Mirth, that fear'st no wrong,
Because thou doest none! Morning all day long!
Truth's Sanctuary! Innocency's Spring!
Invention's Limbeck! Contemplation's Wing!



Peace of my Soul, which I too late pursude!
That know'st not the Worlds vain Inquietude:

Where Friends (the Thieves of Time) let us alone

Whole days; and a Mans Hours are all his own.


  144Happy art thou, that, unsupplanted, plantest;
Nor seest in COURT (which to thy Harm thou hantest)
Th' undoing Truth of rigid Honesty;
The profitable Lye of Flattery;
The sweet Disease of Hope, the Potion,
And bitter Health of Undeception.





Madam, your pleasure (for, in haste,
A Servant call'd me, to wait on
Your Highness.)






As for haste else, there was none.
The wounded Stranger, is he gone?








(I ask'd that which I grieve to know)
Aside.
Went he Cur'd fully?








He stumbled o're his Health, because a Woman,
In a Mans Habilliment
(Invited by his Fame) did summon

Him, to some Action; and with Her he went.











Whose spriteliness, whose Beauty's Rays,
Whose every way perfection,
I never to the worth can praise:


And the valiant FELISBRAVE
(For so she call'd him) went with her,
So contented, brisk, and brave 






Peace: It is too much to hear.


Treason against Love, nay High-
Treason? Together did they go?









Now you lye, you lye 
But (ah!) 'tis true, because it grieves me so.

  145Bid them that Fellow hither bring
I caus'd be seiz'd on.





But Duty says, know not the thing,
Which hidden by thy Sov'raign is.





A Man denies to me his Name;
Leaves me, and for another Dame,
And have I yet so much good nature
As to complain of such a Creature?


Go, thou cruel Man to me;
Hope not, I'll my self deplore
Upon thy score:

For, to form Complaints of Thee,
Were to make my favours more.



If, the meer thinking thou wert lov'd,
To remove
Thee could move,
Well thou might'st have not remov'd,
For thou wert not yet belov'd.


If my Will inclin'd a little,

Well that deserv'd thy hope to swell▪



Well, thy Vanity to tickle;
But it not deserv'd thee fickle.



Thy thus for getting, doth confess
Thou held'st the victory, secure,
Thy Tryumph sure;
For (whil'st you live) a Happiness

Is Mother of Forgetfulness.



  146O, froward Stars! What I, betray'd?
How can I suffer such a strange
And sudden change?
That I, whom LOVE fear'd to invade,

Object should of SCORN be made!






Inconstant as the Wind!
If she thy Love requite,
In mid'st of Ioyes be sterv'd,
And let unhappiness be once deserv'd.


Art thou a PRINCE? Fame lies:
"Plain dealing is for Majesties.

"A Prince will falshood flye,
"If but because it argues fear, to Lye.


Seem only wise, in that
Thou be unfortunate;
Earn neither Brass, nor Pen,

To make thee live with Men;
And let thy Name (if it in FANES they kerve)
For scorn, for pity, nor for pattern, serve.


In thee just jealousie move
A thousand ways, Another

Less lovely, less a Lover.

So short let thy sweets prove,
That thy felicity
May be an inch to measure BEAUTY by.



This (who, thy Wife to be,
Seeks, by supplanting Me)
Maist thou love her, like those that foul ones chuse:
May she love thee, as courted fair ones use:
And, if she prove a Bane,

In being immortal, let it seem my pain.


If ye shall disagree,


If ye love, live a year;
An hour, if fondly dear;
But, do not live a jot;
And let a Faulchion cut your NUPTIAL Knot.








O that in fooling tune I were!
But, I am not in tune to fool.
By HERCULES, I have a fear,

Withall my strength, I cannot rule.


And, if Rewards for fear were set,
I those from all the World should get.


They say, 'tis ZELIDAURA'S Grace,

Whom I call'd Mad-cap to her face:
So now, must I expect the pay
Of those, who Truths to Great-Ones say.


Give me, Madam  (I recoil)

Offers to approach her, and dares not.

Thy Feet   No  





He, for that Lye, shall feel my Thunder 
But  If a King could lye, what wonder?



A Devil, Angeliz'd, is shee.

I tremble like an Aspine Tree:

Each joint's a leaf.



What makes this Rascal stay?
Sees him.
Oh! Is he there?



Give  Give me (I say.)



I'll give thee Death, Impostor. Traitor 

Lifts up her hand, as if to strike him.


Hold Thunderbolt of Lillies 




How is thy Master call'd?




And are not: Man's Life is a dream 







A Servant is all Ear, and sight 



I'll have his Name 




PERSIANO. (I'm not understood.)



Villain, His Name 



I say the same
DON PERSIANO is his Name.



Thou triflest with thy Life: Confess 
Offers at him with a Dagger.
Or 







His true Name express 




PER SI A NO  Angel, stay:
Playing with Hands, is the Clowns play.


In Cypher is his true Name writ:
And I have lost the Key of it.

Falls on his knees.

Weary not thy self, QUEEN mine:
Racks shall not force it from this Brest:

For, though to Iesting I incline;
I ne're thought Knavery a good Jest.




A Rogue on Honours points to stand!
In thee it is a sauciness:

('Tis well I knew it before hand:)
And yet, withal, I must confess,

  149This Servant, with the Soul he hath,
Might teach his Master to keep Faith.
What a foul shame 'tis!




Those Sages, who do boast such odds
Of all the World, shall find  We Fools
Are most considerable Tools.




The ill-deserved Name to ME
Of FELISBRAVE is known already:
Who, of Arabia, is gone to be
The petty King, and the Gallant unsteddy.



He Travail'd with CLARIDIANE.
Follow him thou (this Royal Hand
With servile Blood I scorn to stain)
And let thy Master understand;


Though he pretend t' invincible, that I

Will make him, for my trampled footstool, lye;
A Woman, in Revenge; a Soveraign,
In Courage; and a MISTRESSE, in Disdain.




With CLARIDIANE (by JOVE)
Did he go?



I think thou 'rt glad.




Have I not cause, if he can love
A pair of Queens, and make them both run Mad?


The Spanish fashion hath my Vote,

In Mistresses, though not in Diet:


One goes but dully down the Throte,

Six in a Dish the modern Riot.





If thy Doctrine, Knave, Men follow;
They had need of a great swallow.




Two at a clap! why, now he's somebody,

He 'as laid already the trunk-breeches by.

One, was the stint of old; our Fare now mends:
To thy Twin-Sister hast thou no Commends?



Away, like Light'ning; tell them their Fate comes:
SCORN clears the Ways, and ANGER beats my Drums.




This Queen knows how her Poast to chuse,
That sends a Fool with an ill News.













With its proud Tow'rs, at thy kiss'd Feet shall fall:
For so resolv'd (though slender) are thy Bands,

To Ammunition they will turn these Sands.




A flying Squadron meets us on the Border,

In a loose way, without all Martial Order:

It looks like Peace.





"In Traitors looks no signs of Peace are sure.







Thy warlike Preparations (QUEEN) suspend:
Gay Purple button, clasp not glitt'ring Steel;
Since now, the People neither Wall defend,
Nor with Usurping Grasp, the SCEPTER feel.



Thy little-spoil'd though much profan'd ABODES;
Chuse, where thou lik'st; and in calm Peace grow old:
"'Tis ill Rebelling against Kings, or Gods.


  151Not, to disturb it FLORANTEO came;
But, thy disturbed Kingdom, to recover:
To kiss thy hand, as of his Soveraign Dame;
Not, challenge it, as thy presumptuous Lover.





Rise, and be second to thy thankful Queen.



Wear this Gold-Crown first, wreath'd with Laurel-green,
And Olive, which thy Birth, and Virtue, give:

Live long our QUEEN!












Rare Post-horses! in less than half an hour
To bring me hither from TARTARIA?
My own Barbs (lay'd) would have conveigh'd me slower:
Nor could I have come sooner in a Play.



The Woman is a Harpie: O! that I
Were one of your Wind-mongers, that Cry News;
To relate mine, with strange Romancery:
But, I have no Alliance with those Iews.



Here are Soldiers  That, is hee!

Sir, your Foot; and take my Knee.




These Armes, my RIFALORO  Where hast been?


What hast thou done, since thou by me wert seen?




The Story's long: Some other tell it Thee,

Who hath no Wit to spoil his Memorie.



Rowse, Sir, with thicker Steel your Breast immure:
Nor FELISBRAVO, nor ARABIA now,
Nor the spectator World, can be secure
From ZELIDAURA; who, because that thou

Deny'st to her thy Name, and she 's alarm'd
With your joint-journey, comes with Terrours Arm'd.




Thou Slave (it seems) made of the coursest Clay,
A Secret so important didst betray.
But, I'm right serv'd 



This 'tis now, to know any


Secret, of one, who tells it unto many.




This 'tis, when Kings consort themselves with Grooms.



Help (Masters) or, if not, Might, Right o'recomes.




What is the matter?



Nothing, but the King
Pays Honesty her Wages: A fine thing
It is, to look on; a rare decking (sure)
For a Rich Man; but, 't will undo a poor;
And be suspected too. So counterfet
Seems the best Iewell when 'tis meanly set.

All, I have gain'd, by being true, was (There)
A Iayl, a Dagger at my Bosome; (Here)
This, which you see. 'Tis time to rest (say I)
And cast safe Anchor upon Knavery.




In what a leaking Butt

Have I my Secret put!
No (angry Fair One) No: Not, of thy Blade,

My Life; but, of thy Doubt, my Love 's afraid.




Thus, do good Actions shine? Is this, the Meed

To faithful silence is decreed?


This of being an honest Man,

Is a lean Office; with Fees none:
It will not keep a Gentleman,

Without some other good Means of his own.


The Foe, in Reason, cannot far off be;
For ZELIDAURA Marches furiouslie.





Come all TARTARIA with her; here she stands,
Will welcome Her, more Valiant, and less vain:

That barb'rous Warriouress shall, of these Hands,
The Trophy be, the scorn, and the disdain.




Our Self is General.







A trepidation of the Spheres it makes,
To hear that sound from thee; who, in these Wars,

Wilt Muster Flow'rs, and Lead an Host of Stars.




I'll view their Camp, and compt the Enemy.




Such a SPY is quickly spy'd:

I tear thy danger.




'Twas Wisdom put out POLYPHEMO'S Eye;
That Mountain of swoln Pride.
Come (RIFALORO) by thy Masters side.



I fear thy Anger:

Thou tell'st it in this AUDIENCE; would'st go hid:
Points to the Spectators.
They, tell it ZELIDAURA: Then I'm chid.



What AUDIENCE? The Man dreams  I go with thee.



Yes, Let my Fellow go; and I will be
Thy LEIDGER here



Sir, let me beg the Honour 



By no means (FLORANTEO:) Wait upon her
Fair Majesty. Fear is to me unknown:
And mine 's a Business best perform'd alone.




(I think no less, and hide my fear in vain
Under the silence of my Virgin shame)



'Tis Fear, makes Mortals peep through their disguise:

Unseen, we 'll thrid Our Person through their Eyes.





Not I, one of course Earth


Consort with KINGS? A Slave of Dunghil Birth?


  154I renounce Honesty, I pray your Grace

Chuse a new Fool, and tye that to the PLACE.



Less of the LOVER than the BRAVE it shows,
Thy self to such wild dangers to expose.
Let common Soldiers hazzard in this kind:
"VALOUR, within due bounds, should be confin'd.



If known, I would not fear an Hoast of Men;
Though Arm'd with Fire and Horrour: March on, then.

Dangers I court, and all that Dangers brings:
"For Bullets bear a Reverence to Kings.









Now, CLARIDORO, on Arabian Mould
We tread, and have the Enemy in view.




Since so much Beauty fights thy Cause, be bould
To write; I CAME, WAS SEEN, AND DID SUBDUE.



Not Love, but Honour, made me March thus far.
A Queen's it is, and not a Woman's War.
If I o'recome, I'll scorn them, as I live:
"Two Victories; to Conquer, and Forgive;

"On ground that's hard, 'tis easie ground to win:
"But feet, which tread upon the soft, sink in.




THE CAUSE I never ZELIDAURA scann'd,
It must be good which thou dost take in hand:
And, doubt the Conquest, where thou present art,
No more, than whether I should take thy part,
Whose Services are Debts to thee; and when
Thou lett'st me pay thee one; that one grows ten.


  155Thy heav'nly force is unto me so known,
That, though great MARS in SOL's bright Armour shone,
I' th' adverse Camp; I should not fear the day:

For BEAUTY stole one's Sword, the other's Ray.

But, for thy pardon  That, may spared be:
What greater Death, than to be scorn'd by thee?








Madam, This Clown, who seems a SPY,
I bring before thy Majesty:
That thou, from him, maist draw, and know,
The Strength, and Posture, of the FOE.




Whom see I? Is't not FELISBRAVE?
'Tis Anger, and not Love, did grave
His Visage here; and my Revenge's Eyes

Have pick'd him out of his obscure Disguise.




A SPY thou well might'st think him; feel,
He hath his Cassock lin'd with Steel.

A GENTLEMAN, at least, by this.




No, no, a Clown I'm sure he is.
Speak for thy self, art thou not one?



A Clown in my Attire alone.



In one thing more ('twixt me and you)
Thou sleep'st to One, and wak'st to Two.




Me, does your Worship know?




For there is a distance vast
Betwixt a CLOWN'S Tongue, and his Mind:

And his Faith is hard to find.





Dissembling words, and little faith,

Boast, they COURTLY Vices are:
"Nothing more CLOWNISH is, than wrath;
"And Revenge, that none will spare.


Wade not in doubts too far, th' effect
Of which, is bitterness, and rue:

"For (let me tell you) to suspect,
"Is, a kind of sleeping too.


Do not wake JEALOUS: For, indeed,
'Tis courteous baseness, and no other.
Nor borrow, of thy Clownish Weed,

The MALICE, that, is us'd to cover.


He never fled, who wheels about:

And He, who (born for higher Ends)
Did best, when he lay under doubt;
Gallantly his Faith defends.


And He, whose worth in ev'ry thing
(In this I will appeal to LAURA)
Proclaims him not a perfect King,
Deserves not to love ZELIDAURA.





CLOWN, or SPY, or what thou wilt,
Think not t' appease me thou art able:
For justifying a known Guilt,

With Women is impardonable.
Aloud.
Tell me (Lab'ring-Man) how strong
Is CLARIDIANA?









(Heavens! how it thunders Vengeance from her Tongue?
Yet still 'tis Musick to my Ear.)





ARABIA being reduc'd to her obedience,
She hath two Armys of old Soldiers,

Beat to the Trade of WAR; valiant, and disciplin'd;
In suff'ring, noble: and in acting, bold:
The GODDESSE-QUEEN (whose Beauty doth eclipse
The brightest lustre of the mid-day Sun)
Comes for the GENERAL; and in her alone is
NARCISSUS joyn'd with SOL; MARS with ADONIS.


From a Sphere, crown'd with plumes (like Summers Clouds

When the Day feels a Light'ning before Death,
Or Gardens in the Air)
Arm'd with a heav'nly Anger, she discovers
In THETIS Body great ACHILLES's Soul.

Her Sword cuts more than all those of her Army;
Her Beauty more victorious, then her Sword:

For where's the life so sure that Love can pick
No hole in it, which would not soon surrender

It self into her hands, without more strife,
To sue out a new grant to be a life?


With gallant grace she traverses the Field
Upon a Horse, that pays the vanity,
Infus'd into the Bruit by his fair Burthen,
With mettle, and with motion that keeps time:
His swiftness calls him DART, his striking fire

A THUNDER-BOLT, his colour and his gate

Majestick SWAN. Like a SHIP under sail,

Tossing the foam up, proudly he doth go,
With Plumes for Streamers, ARGOSIE of Snow.






With great LATONA'S Off spring do not brag,
Least thou be turn'd t' a weeping stone.

Say, 'tis a fine fore-handed Nag,
That hath his paces every one:


  158And lacks (to do a thousand pranks)
Only, to have been foal'd on BETIS Banks.



Here's trapping out a Horse withal my heart,
Why, 'twould make one his Bridle break:
SNOW, SHIP, SWAN, STREAMERS, THUNDERBOLT, and DART?
Troth, go but one step more, and make him speak.



A Description call'st thou this?
In blank Verse (of all four lame)
With equal Tropes, and Emphasis,

To Cry a Beast up, and a Dame?





Her BEAUTY then she brings along:
And that's ten thousand Graces strong.




Flat jealousie in my Face hurl'd?
(The greatest Clown'ry this i' th' World!)
If, that, I brought, I by did throw;
Shall I catch this he throws me? No,



With her, her BEAUTY, and her FELISBRAVE;
In ev'ry thing I'll her o'recome:
Ev'n in this too, that less of vain I'll have.


Back, FELISBRAVO; put into each Troop

As much of Courage, as I hope to quail:

To whom thy Fear, and not thy Love, shall stoop;
And I, by Force, not Beauty, will prevail.



Thou art my Pris'ner (foolish Man)

Conquer'd by putting this shape an.
But 'tis not thou shalt pay me: 'Tis my boast,
To pay my self, that which to me thou ow'st.



  159Fight well to day: Since thou dost love
CLARIDIANE;
Let not Twain




One Woman call thee Coward, t' other
Twit thee with perfidious LOVER.


But, this I'll say; had I lov'd thee,
Thou would'st not thus have used mee:
Nor durst have acted such a valiant Sin,

As unto Me UNGRATEFUL to have bin.





Madam, how high an obligation

This lays on me, and on my passion!

A Servant now, that takes no Wages of thee:
But LOVES THEE (why?) only to love thee.
In the hearing of the rest.
 Hear me, ZELIDAURA 





This Fellow back to his own Camp:
And (with my glitt'ring Bands) though these Woods burn,
Though, on these plains, my numbers strike a damp.


Tell FELISBRAVO; CLARIDORE, and I,

Without or MARS, or SOL, their Pow'rs defie.





Ev'n her Anger, O! how sweet!
I hope my self yet, at her Feet

To prostrate Victory  But no,
To Her.
Her Eyes will snatch it first  I go.
Set thy People in Array.




This, CLARIDORO, is thy day.




Where thou art, all things must go well.















Enter General with his Sword drawn.



Bloody perdition, tyrannizing yoake,

Grim War, that strewd'st with Carcases the way

To th' first Injustice, which free Mortals broke,
And Iron Scepter plac'd in hand of Clay:




Barbarous Trade, so murmur'd at in vain,
To spur the fiery Coursers of pale Death,

As if Time flagg'd, as if to be humane

Were not Disease enough to stop our Breath.


But, though thou (WAR) art dire, art full of dread;
There is a Feud more dire, more dreadful far,
When BEAUTY's bloody Flag (hang'd out and spread
In Virgins Cheeks) proclaims a scornful War.


Love, let me rather be a rough-hand's Prize,

Than the soft Captive of insulting Eyes.








They March to shock these Girls, some small Wit now
Would Lids of Marchpane call, Caesars of Snow.





Why, Rifaloro, Went'st not with Him, Thou?

'Tis not well done to fail thy Duty so.


To jest out faults is an uncomely thing.




Can I (that from the Trojan BRUTUS spring)
That vaunt great Blood, I have much Blood I spill,

Be wanting to the Huff, to the Punctil

Of Honour? Being of the Mountains too,
In which the HECULESSES always grew?



Art thou a BRITTON then?



So brags each one
That would write Gentleman, when he is none.

This day shall set the King high on my score;
For, such an honest Man is RIFALORE,
So faithful to his Master, that a Trim

Map of Misfortune might be made of him.

And (see the fate which still attends upon it!)
The scurvy Poet, giving each a SONNET,
Leaves only me without  But, by the faith

Of a MAHUMETAN, since thus he hath
Provok'd me to 't, upon his skirts I'll sit:
Damme all his Matter, 'cause in Verse 'tis writ:
And, in defiance of the TRIPLE THREE,
Promote a Law, importing, that, to bee,
Or not to be, a POET; shall suffice
To prove, past doubt, one is not, or is, wise.




Stand, RIFALORO, to thy Arms: The Drums
Do beat a Charge, and FELISBRAVO comes.




St. whom invoke they?




MARS, the God of Wars.



St. GEORGE for Vs, the Garter'd English MARS.







Valiant ARABIANS, let these barb'rous Troops
(Men built to serve) their bending Foreheads yield:
As, with a fierce South Wind, an Army stoops
Of drowsie Poppies in a barren field.



Food for your Steel brave Sons of Tartarie)
Let these so•t Peasants of Arabia be:
For, ill can brook the glitt'ring of a Sword,

A Countrey only famous for a Bird.





In our contention now, not Mars,

But CUPID is the God of Wars.

And (turn'd to tears) thy proud disdain

Puts Love in Arms, makes HEAV'N complain.



If thy coming be to wring
From me the famous Persian King;
Though I do love him, I esteem
From thee t' have got him, more than him.
For, 'mongst my Glories, I less prize

My Conquest, than thy HUE and CRYES.





To pull this fickle Prince from thee,
Is Honour, and not Love, in me:
For, with so false a Lover, know,
I'll part at all times to a Foe.



To give to him, no hand I bring;
But feet, on both your necks to print:

For, in my greatest Conquering,

And utmost of tryumphing in 't,


Having first punish'd his Inconstancie,

For more Revenge, I'll after give him Thee.



Offers to Charge and Felisbravo throws himself at her Feet.



ZELIDAURA, hold thy Hand:
Conquer not twice a Man unmann'd.

She needs not Weapons, that is fair:


He needs not Death, who hath despair.
Already, of thy generous Feet

I kiss the yoak. In the most sweet
And glorious Cause of LOVE, let my life owe
To me, the divine choice to lose it so.




Rise; hence; begone; I will not have thee dye
At thy Election, nor in Courtesie,
But, by my Fauchion: Not, like FELISBRAVE,
Not, my devoted, but my conquer'd Slave.




Stay, Traitor, where thou art: Reveng'd I'll be
Both on the proud, and on the humble: THEE
I'll conquer, and forget; and both your Hearts

(Transfixt with other, than with am'rous Darts)
Under my vext feet trample 





Mastiffs of Ivory! Dragons of Pearls.




I'll have no Battail.



The whole Earth a Lake





O how Sir Poll, my Grandsire would cry ('S Bears!)

Kings and Queens seen together by the Ears!
Well, there 's no flinching now; my strengths I summon:
To see the last Man born and the last Woman.





Sound, Sound a Charge.




Lock with the Foe.








Charge them home But, the Heav'ns (loe!)
Rash the Clouds open.





Throws (thund'ring) 'twixt them his steel Glove.



Sound Drums and Trumpets, and let Mars pass over the Stage in a Chariot drawn with Lyons, having in his hand a fiery Lance.




CLARIDIANA (second Phoenix of

Arabia) and thou Tartarian QUEEN
(In whom alone pride is not folly) I

Who (General of Heav'n, and Earths Protector

Suppress'd the proud Rebellion of the Gyants

In Pilegra's Plains: I, who in burning TROY
(Supplying the bold Greeks with fire and sword)
Saw frighted Xanthus scud 'twixt •••ks of Cyndar••


  164I, who (through Romes revenging fury) saw
Of the great Carthage scarce one stone remaining
For a dumb witness that she once had been:

I, who upon Iberian Walls beheld
Turbants for Battlements, and Barb'ry Mares

Turn'd loose into the Andalusian Corn:


Now (a PEACE-MAKER) bring, not signs of Wars,

But Leagues confirm'd with Characters of Stars.


The Gods (who call you by a hid impulse

To people the grave Temple, and wast Grove

Of the most chast best Goddess) know, the WORLD
Has not a Prince deserves so high perfections:
For Heav'n is stuck all o're with injur'd Beauties.

Thou, gallant CLARIDORO, Rule (as King)

Great Tartary; and FLORANTEO, thou

Reign in the famous and the fair Arabia.

For the most Valiant Knight, and perfect Lover
(Though ZELIDAURA know not this, or will not)
Let the Great KING of Persia be Crown'd.

Queens lay down Arms; for (to make War on Beasts)
From painted Quivers, at your shoulders hung,
Of Shafts a flying Squadron will suffice.


DIANA'S Nuns are coming to receive you,
Their Heads with Olive, Flowers, and Laurel bound.
This, in the rolling chambers of the Spheres,

The glorious Heptarchie of Heav'n ordains
By a Law always just, always inviolable.






Hold, MARS divine; for thou (both Judge and Party)
Envy'st my Flame, whose object doth as far
Outshine thy Mistress, as the Sun a Star!





Stay, Soveraign MARS, I'd rather be, than have

The whole Worlds Empire, ZELIDAURA's Slave.




I, from this sentence, to those Gods appeal,
Who feel more love, or more compassion feel.




Princes, resist not Heav'n; for still ye may

Love, without hope; and that's the noblest way.



I reverence it, and adore its Laws.



A foolish ending! Were 't not just

(Into a Cloyster if they must)

Heav'n for these Virgins, did reserve
Some portions, that they may not sterve
When they repent them? And, must not,
After their Dames the Damsels trot?



The Damsels stay, for visible Example

To a bad World, in which they are a TEMPLE
And CLOYSTER to themselves, meaning to live
Not less austere, though less contemplative.




I always lov'd thee only, for Love's Cause
And Joy, a glimpse of Hope once blest mine Eyes
Which on his Altar I may sacrifice.





Thou, ZELIDAURA, shalt still guide the Helm:

Whilst I am still the Defender of thy Relm.





And thou shalt be ARABIA'S Queen, and mine.




"Virtues are Kingdoms at DIANA'S Shrine.
If so, then their Possessions greatest call
Who dispossess themselves of All.










ARABIA: Live Crown'd with Blisses.
















The TEMPLE opes, the Air rejoices,
Gay Nymphs present sweet Flow'rs and Voices.
They sing within.
Live, Fair Ones, for your Selves, whilst the Men do
Think it enough, if They may Dye for You.


The Queens enter the Temple from whence many Nymphs come forth to receive them, and therein let Diana appear.




I, born was, for my Self alone.



The Altar now shall be my Throne.






My Love doth no reward pretend.



My torment ne're will have an end.



"TO LOVE ONLY TO LOVE, is Love,

"Like that w' are lov'd with from above:

"He that hopes, no Love doth bear.




Then what should he, that hopes not, fear?




It remains now 







That the Magnifick POET give
Some Thirty Mannours all with large Demains

Amongst the Actors upon which to live;
And do in any Case declare
That All our Worships Cosen Germans are.



What a Conceipt of a stale date!



SIR (for now Men say not, STATE)
Here endeth the PLAY
Of for Ever and Aye;
Tiring Female and Male,

Without a Marriage in the Tayle;
And this it doth git
By being Penn'd without Wit.




