




Lord Flint, Mr. Davies,

Sir Luke Tremor, Mr. Quick,

Mr. Twineall, Mr. Lewis,

Mr. Haswell, Mr. Pope,



Mr. Meanright, Mr. Macready,



First Keeper, Mr. Thompson,

Second Keeper, Mr. Cubitt,

First Prisoner, Mr. Helme,

Second Prisoner, Mr. Gardener.







Lady Tremor, Mrs. Mattocks,



Female Prisoner, Mrs. Pope.

Time of Representation, Twelve Hours.
  SUCH THINGS ARE. A PLAY. IN FIVE ACTS.








I TELL you, Madam, you are two and thirty.



I tell you, Sir, you are mistaken.



Why, did not you come over from England exactly sixteen years ago?







Have not we been married the tenth of next April sixteen years?



Not so long. 



Did you not come over the year of the great Eclipse? answer me that.



I don't remember it.



But I do and shall remember it as long as I live the first time I saw you, was in the garden of the Dutch Envoy; you were looking through a glass at the sun I immediately began to make love to you, and the whole affair was
  2settled while the eclipse lasted just one hour eleven minutes, and three seconds.



But what is all this to my age?



Because I know you were at that time near seventeen and without one qualification except your youth and not being a Mullatto.



Sir Luke, Sir Luke, this is not to be borne 



Oh! yes I forgot you had two letters of recommendation, from two great families in England.







Yes; your character that, you know, is all the fortune we poor Englishmen, situated in India, expect with a wife who crosses the sea at the hazard of her life, to make us happy.



And what but our characters would you have us bring? Do you suppose any lady ever came to India, who brought along with her, friends, or fortune?



No, my dear and what is worse she seldom leaves them behind, either.



No matter, Sir Luke but if I delivered to you a good character 



Yes, my dear you did and if you were to ask me for it again, I can't say I could give it you.



How uncivil! how unlike are your manners to the manners of my Lord Flint.



Ay you are never so happy as when you have an opportunity of expressing your admiration of him a disagreeable, nay, a very dangerous man one is never sure of one's self in his presence he carries every thing he hears to the ministers of our suspicious Sultan and I feel my head shake whenever I am in his company.



How different does his Lordship appear to me to me he is all politesse.



Politesse! how shou'd you underderstand what is real politesse? You know your education was very much confined. 



And if it was confined  I beg, Sir Luke, you will one time or other cease these reflections you know they are what I can't bear!  pray, does not his Lordship continually assure me, I might be taken for a Countess, were it not for a certain little groveling toss I have caught with my head and a certain little confined hitch in my walk? both which I learnt of you learnt by looking so much at you. 



And now if you don't take care, by looking so much at his Lordship, you may catch some of his defects.



I know of very few he has.



I know of many besides those he assumes. 







Yes; do you suppose he is as forgetful as he pretends to be? no, no but because he is a favourite with the Sultan, and all our great men at court, he thinks it genteel or convenient to have no memory and yet I'll answer for it, he has one of the best in the universe.



I don't believe your charge.



Why, though he forgets his appointments with his tradesmen, did you ever hear of his forgetting to go to court when a place was to be disposed of? Did he ever make a blunder, and send a bribe to a man out of power? Did he ever forget to kneel before the Prince of this Island or to look in his highness's presence like the statue of Patient-resignation in humble expectation? 



Dear, Sir Luke  



Sent from his own country in his very infancy, and brought up in the different
  4courts of petty, arbitrary Princes here in Asia; he is the slave of every great man, and the tyrant of every poor one. 



"Petty Princes!" 'tis well his highness our Sultan does not hear you.



'Tis well he does not don't you repeat what I say but you know how all this fine country is harrassed and laid waste by a set of Princes, Sultans, as they style themselves, and I know not what who are for ever calling out to each other "that's mine," and "that's mine;" and "you have no business here" and "you have no business there" and "I have business every where;"  then "give me this," and "give me that;" and "take this, and take that."




A very elegant description truly.



Why, you know 'tis all matter of fact and Lord Flint, brought up from his youth amongst these people, has not one trait of an Englishman about him he has imbibed all this country's cruelty, and I dare say wou'd mind no more seeing me hung up by my thumbs or made to dance upon a red-hot gridiron  



That is one of the tortures I never heard of! O! I shou'd like to see that of all things!



Yes by keeping this man's company, you'll soon be as cruel as he is he will teach you every vice a consequential grave dull and yet with that degree of levity, that dares to pay his addresses to a woman, even before her husband's face.



Did not you say, this minute, his Lordship had not a trait of his own country about him? 



Well, well as you say, that last is a trait of his own country.










My Lord, I am extremely glad to see you we were just mentioning your name. 



Were you, indeed, Madam? You do me great honour.



No, my Lord no great honour.



Pardon me, Sir Luke.



But, I assure you, my Lord, what I said, did myself a great deal of honour.



Yes, my Lord, and I'll acquaint your Lordship what it was.




Why, you wou'd not inform against me sure! Do you know what would be the consequence? My head must answer it.




Nay, Sir Luke, I insist upon knowing.



Hush hush  no, my Lord, pray excuse me your Lordship perhaps may think what I said did not come trom my heart; and I assure you, upon my honour, it did.



O, yes that I am sure it did.



I am extremely obliged to you.




O, no, my Lord, not at all not at all.   I'll be extremely obliged to you, if you will hold your tongue Pray, my Lord, are you engaged out to dinner to-day? for her Ladyship and I dine out.



Yes, my Lord, and we should be happy to find your Lordship of the party.



"Engaged out to dinner"? egad very likely very likely but if I am I have positively forgotten where.



We are going to 



No I think (now you put me in mind
  6of it) I think I have company to dine with me I am either going out to dinner, or have company to dine with me; but I really can't tell which however, my people know  but I can't call to mind. 



Perhaps your Lordship has dined; can you recollect that?



No, no I have not dined  what's o'clock?



Perhaps, my Lord, you have not breakfasted.



O, yes, I've breakfasted I think so but upon my word these things are very hard to remember.



They are indeed, my Lord and I wish all my family wou'd entirely forget them.



What did your Ladyship say was o'clock?



Exactly twelve, my Lord.



Bless me! I ought to have been some where else then an absolute engagement. I have broke my word a positive appointment.



Shall I send a servant?



No, no, no, no by no means it can't be helped now and they know my unfortunate failing besides, I'll beg their pardon, and I trust that will be ample satistaction.



You are very good, my Lord, not to leave us.



I cou'd not think of leaving you so soon, Madam the happiness I enjoy here is such 



And very likely were your Lordship to go away now, you might never recollect to come again.





A Gentleman, Sir, just come from on board an English vessel, says, he has letters to present to you.



Shew him in  He has brought his character too, I suppose and left it behind, too, I suppose.






Sir Luke, I have the honour of presenting to you,  one from my Lord Cleland one from Sir Thomas Shoestring one from Colonel Fril.



Who in the name of wonder have my friends recommended?   No as I live, he is a gentleman, and the son of a Lord   My dear, that is a gentleman, notwithstanding his appearance don't laugh but let me introduce you to him.



A gentleman! certainly I did not look at him before but now I can perceive it.



Mr. Twineall, give me leave to introduce Lady Tremor to you, and my Lord Flint this, my Lord, is the Honourable Mr. Twineall from England, who will do me the favour to remain in my house, till he is settled to his mind in some post here.  I beg your pardon, Sir, for the somewhat cool reception Lady Tremor and I gave you at first but I dare say her Ladyship was under the same mistake as myself and I must own I took you at first fight for something very different from the person you prove to be for really no English ships have arrived in this harbour for
  8these five years past, and the dress of us English gentlemen is so much altered fince that time 



But, I hope, Sir Luke, if it is, the alteration meets with your approbation.



O! to be sure it is extremely elegant and becoming.



Yes, my dear, I don't doubt but you think so; for I remember you used to make your favourite monkey wear just such a jacket, when he went out a visiting.



Was he your favourite, Madam? Sir, you are very obliging.




My Lord, if it were possible for your Lordship to call to your remembrance such a trifle 



Dear Sir Luke 




Egad, I believe I do call to my remembrance   Not, I assure you, Sir, that I perceive any great resemblance or, if it was so I dare say it is merely in the dress  which I must own strikes me as most ridiculous very ridiculous indeed.  







I beg pardon, if I have said any thing that  Lady Tremor, what did I say?  make my apology, if I have said any thing improper you know my unhappy failing.




Sir, his Lordship has made a mistake in the word "ridiculous," which I am sure he did not mean to say but he is apt to make use of one word for another his Lordship has been so long out of England, that he may be said in some measure to have forgotten his native language.




And you have perfectly explained, Madam indeed I ought to have been convinced,
  9without your explanation, that if his Lordship made use of the word ridiculous (even intentionally) that the word had now changed its former sense, and was become a mode to express satisfaction or his Lordship wou'd not have made use of it in the very forcible manner he did, to a perfect stranger.



What, Mr. Twineall, have you new modes, new fashions for words too in England, as well as for dresses? and are you equally extravagant in their adoption?



I never heard, Sir Luke, but that the fashion of words varied, as well as the fashion of every thing else.



But what is most extraordinary we have now a fashion in England, of speaking without any words at all.



Pray, Sir, how is that?



Ay, do, Mr. Twineall, teach my wife, and I shall be very much obliged to you it will be a great accomplishment. Even you, my Lord, ought to be attentive to this fashion.



Why, Madam, for instance, when a gentleman is asked a question which is either troublesome or improper to answer, you don't say you won't answer it, even though you speak to an inferior  but you say  "really it appears to me e-e-e-e-e   that is mo-mo-mo-mo-mo   if you see the thing for my part  te-te-te-te  and that's all I can tell about it at persent.



And you have told nothing!







But mayn't one guess what you mean?



O, yes perfectly at liberty to guess.



Well, I'll be shot if I could guess.



And again when an impertinent pedant
  10asks you a question that you know nothing about, and it may not be convenient to say so you answer boldly, "why really, Sir, my opinion is, that the Greek poet he-he-he-he   we-we-we-we you see if his idea was and if the Latin translator mis-mis-mis-mis    that I shou'd think in my humble opinion but the Doctor may know better than I."  



The Doctor must know very little else.



Or in case of a duel, where one does not care to say who was right, or who was wrong you answer "This, Sir, is the state of the matter Mr. F came first te-te-te-te on that be-be-be-be if the other in short   whis-whis-whis-whis" 







There, now you have it there 'tis but don't say a word about it or, if you do don't say it come from me." 



Why, you have not told a word of the story!



But that your auditor must not say to you that's not the fashion he never tells you that  he may say "You have not made yourself perfectly clear;" or he may say " He must have the matter more particularly pointed out somewhere else;" but that is all the auditor can say with good breeding.



A very pretty method indeed to satisfy one's curiosity!









This is a countryman of ours, Mr. Twineall, and a very good man I assure you.





Mr. Haswell, how do you do?




Sir Luke, I am glad to see you.  Lady Tremor, how do you do?




O, Mr. Haswell, I am extremely glad you are come here is a young adventurer just arrived from England, who has been giving us such a strange account of all that's going on there.








Do, Mr. Haswell, talk to him he can give you great information.



I am glad of it I shall then hear many things I am impatient to become acquainted with.  Mr. Twineall, I have the honour of knowing his Lordship, your father, extremely well he holds his seat in Parliament still, I presume?







And your uncle, Sir Charles?



Both, Sir both in Parliament still.



Pray, Sir, has any act in behalf of the poor clergy taken place yet?











Nay, that's not good breeding you must ask no more questions.







Because we-we-we-we   he knows nothing about it.



What, Sir not know?



Yes, Sir, perfectly acquainted with every thing that passes in the house but I assure you, that when they come to be reported  but, Sir Luke, now permit me, in my turn, to make a few inquiries concerning the state of this country.




Why, one does not like to speak much about the country one lives in but, Mr. Haswell, you have been visiting our encampments; you may tell us what is going on there.



Pray, Mr. Haswell, is it true that the Sultan cut off the head of one of his wives the other day because she said "I won't?"



Do, my dear, be silent.







O, that the Sultan had you instead of me!



And with my head off, I suppose?



No, my dear; in that state, I shou'd have no objection to you myself.



Now, I'll frighten you ten times more. But, Mr. Haswell, I am told there are many persons suspected of disaffection to the present Sultan, who have been lately, by his orders, arrested, and sold to slavery, notwithstanding there was no proof against them produced.



Proof!  in a State such as this, the charge is quite sufficient.




Well, my Lord, and how does your Lordship find yourself this afternoon? this morning, I mean Bless my soul! why I begin to be as forgetful as your Lordship.




How I pity the poor creatures!



Take care what you say before that tool of state look at him, and tremble for your head.



Look at him, and tremble for yours and so, Mr. Haswell, all this is true? and some people, of consequence too, I am told, dragged from their homes, and sent to slavery merely on suspicion?



Yet, less do I pity those, than some, whom prisons and dungeons crammed before, are yet prepared to receive.



Mr. Haswell, such is the Sultan's pleasure.



Will your Lordship take a turn in the garden? it looks from this door very pleasant; does not it?



But pray, Mr. Haswell, has not the Sultan sent for you to attend at his palace this morning?







There! I heard he had, but Sir Luke said not. I am told he thinks himself under the greatest obligations to you.



The report has flattered me but if his highness shou'd think himself under obligations, I can readily point a way, by which he may acquit himself of them.



In the mean time, I am sure, you feel for those poor sufferers.



Sir Luke, good morning to you I call'd upon some trifling business, but I have out-staid my time, and therefore
  14fore I'll call again in a couple of hours Lady Tremor, good morning my Lord Mr. Twine-all 




Sir Luke, your garden does look so divinely beautiful 



Come, my Lord, will you take a turn in it? Come Mr. Twineall come my dear   I can't think what business Mr. Haswell has to speak to me upon for my part, I am quite a plain man and busy myself about no one's affairs, except my own but I dare say your Lordship has forgot all we have been talking about.



If you permit me, Sir Luke, I'll hand the Lady.



Certainly, my Lord, if you please come, Mr. Twineall, and I'll conduct you.














MY dear friend, after so long a separation, how gland I am to meet you! but how devilish unlucky that you shou'd, on the very day of my arrival, be going to set sail for another part of the world! yet before you go, I must beg a favour of you you know Sir Luke and his family perfectly well, I dare say?



I think so I have been in his house near six years.



The very person on earth I wanted! Sir Luke has power here, I suppose? a word from him might do a man some service perhaps?




Why, yes; I don't know a man that has more influence at a certain place.



And her Ladyship seems a very clever gentlewoman?







And I have a notion they think me very clever.



I dare say they do.



Yes but I mean very clever.







But, my dear friend, you must help me to make them think better of me still and when
  16my fortune is made, I'll make yours for when I once become acquainted with people's dispositions, their little weaknesses, foibles and faults, I can wind, twist, twine, and get into the corner of every one's heart, and lie so snug, they can't know I'm there, till they want to pull me out, and find 'tis impossible.







Is not it? and now, my dear friend, do you inform me of the secret dispositions, and propensities of every one in this family, and of all their connections. What Lady values herself upon one qualification, and what Lady upon another? What Gentleman will like to be told of his accomplishments? or his daughter's? or of his horses? or of his dogs? now, my dear Ned, acquaint me with all this and within a fortnight I will become the most necessary rascal  not a creature shall know how to exist without me.



Why such a man as you ought to have made your fortune in England.



No my father, and my three uncles monopolized all the great men themselves; and wou'd never introduce me where I was likely to become their rival This this is the very spot for me to display my genius But then I must penetrate the people first and you will kindly save me that trouble. Come, give me all their characters all short, all I am to praise and all I am to avoid praising, in order to endear myself to them.  Come begin with Sir Luke.



Sir Luke values himself more upon personal bravery, than upon any thing else.



Thank you, my dear friend thank you.  Was he ever in the army?



Oh yes besieged a capital fortress, a few years ago and now, the very name of a battle or a great general tickles his vanity, and he takes all the praises you can lavish upon the subject as compliments to himself.



Thank you thank you a thousand times   I'll mention a battle very soon.







O, no let me alone for time and place go on, my friend go on her Ladyship 



Descended from the ancient kings of Scotland.



You don't say so!



And though she is so nicely scrupulous as never to mention the word genealogy, yet I have seen her agitation so great, when the advantages of high birth have been extoll'd, she could scarcely withhold her sentiments of triumph; which in order to disguise, she has assumed a disdain for all "vain titles empty sounds and idle pomp."



Thank you thank you this is a most excellent trait of the Lady's   "Pedigree of the kings of Scotland?" O, I have her at once.



Yet do it nicely oblique touches, rather than open explanations.



Let me alone for that.



She has, I know, in her possession but I dare say she wou'd not show it you, nay, on the contrary, would even affect to be highly offended, if you were to mention it and yet it certainly would flatter her, to know you were acquainted with her having it.



What what what is it?



A large old-fashioned wig which Malcolm
  18the third or fourth, her great ancestor, wore when he was crowned at Scone, in the year  











O, let me alone for the manner



She'll pretend to be angry.



That I am prepared for. Pray who is my Lord Flint?



A deep man and a great favourite at court.



Indeed! how am I to please him?



By insinuations against the present Sultan.







With all his pretended attachment, his heart  



Are you sure of it?



Sure: he blinds Sir Luke, (who by the bye is no great politician) but I know his Lordship and if he thought he was sure of his ground (and he thinks he shall be sure of it soon) then 



I'll insinuate myself and join his party but, in the mean time, preserve good terms with Sir Luke, in case any thing shou'd fall in my way there. Who is Mr. Haswell?



He pretends to be a man of principle and sentiment flatter him on that.



The easieft thing in the world no people like flattery better than such as he. They will bear even to hear their vices praised. I will myself undertake to praise the vices of a man of sentiment till he shall think them so many virtues. You have mentioned no Ladies, but the Lady of the house yet.



There is no other Lady, except a pretty girl who came over from England, about two years ago, for a husband, and not succeeding in another
  19part of the country, is now recommended to this house and has been here three or four months.



Let me alone, to please her.



Let me alone, to please her.



Yes I believe you are skilled.



For the art of flattery, no one more.



But damn it it is not a liberal art.



It is a great science, notwithstanding and studied, at present, by all the connoisseurs. Zounds! I have staid a long time I can't attend to any more characters at present Sir Luke and his Lady will think me inattentive, if I don't join them Shall I see you again? if not I wish you a pleasant voyage I'll make the most of what you have told me you'll hear I'm a great man God bless you! good bye! you'll hear I'm a great man.




And, if I am not mistaken, I shall hear you are turned out of the house before to-morrow morning. O, Twineall! exactly the reverse of every character have you now before you the greatest misfortune in the •ife of Sir Luke has been, flying from his army in the midst of an engagement, and a most humiliating degradation in consequence, which makes him so feelingly alive on the subject of a battle, that nothing but his want of courage can secure my friend Twineall's life for venturing to name the subject then Lord Flint, firmly attached to the interest of the Sultan, will be all on fire, when he hears of open disaffection but most of all her Ladyship! whose father was a grocer, and uncle, a noted advertising "Periwig-maker on a new construction." She will run mad to hear of births, titles, and long pedigrees. Poor Twineall! little dost thou think what is prepared for thee. There is Mr. Haswell too but to him have I sent you to be reclaimed to him, who, free from faults, or even foibles,
  20of his own, has yet more potently the blessing given, of tenderness for ours.






Several Prisoners dispersed in different situations.





This way, Sir the prisons this way are more extensive still you seem to feel for these unthinking men but they are a set of unruly people, whom no severity can make such as they ought to be.



And wou'd not gentleness, or mercy, do you think, reclaim them?



That I can't say we never try those means in this part of the world that man yonder, suspected of disaffection, is sentenced to be here for life, unless his friends can lay down a large sum by way of penalty, which he finds they cannot do, and he is turned melancholy.








He has been try'd for heading an insurrection, and acquitted.



What keeps him here?



Fees due to the Court a debt contracted while he proved his innocence.



Lead on, my friend let us go to some other part.




In this ward, we are going to, are the prisoners, who by some small reserve some little secreted stock when they arrived or by the bounty of some friend who visit them  or such-like fortunate circumstance, are in a less dismal place.







But stop put on this cloak, for, before we arrive at the place I mention, we must pass a damp vault, which to those who are not used to it   or will you postpone your visit?







Alas! who wou'd suppose you had been used to see such places! you look concerned vext to see the people suffer I wonder you shou'd come, when you seem to think so much about them.



Oh! that, that is the very reason.



Two Prisoners walk slowly down the Stage.


Who is this man?



From Britain I have seen him once before.



He looks pale he has no heart.



I believe, a pretty large one.





Brother, a word with you.  as the stranger and our keeper passed by the passage, a noxious vapour put out the light, and as they groped along I purloined this from the stranger  see it contains two notes will pay our ransom.




A treasure our certain ransom!



Liberty! our wives, our children, and our friends, will these papers purchase.



What a bribe! our keeper may rejoice too.



And then the pleasure it will be to hear the stranger fret, and complain for his loss! O, how my heart loves to see forrow! Misery such as I have known, on men who spurn me who treat me as if (in my own Island) I had no friends that loved me no servants that paid me honour no children that revered me who forget I am a husband a father nay, a man. 



Conceal your thoughts conceal your treature too or the Briton's complaint 



Will be in vain our keeper will conclude the bribe must come to him, at laft and therefore make no great search for it here, in the corner of my belt  twill be secure Come this way, and let us indulge our pleasant prospect.







A kind of sopha with an old man sleeping upon it Elvirus sitting attentively by him.





That young man, you see there, watching his aged father as he sleeps, by the help of fees gains his admission and he never quits the place, except to go and purchase cordials for the old man, who, (though healthy and strong when he first became a prisoner) is now become ill and languid.



Are they from Europe?



No but descended from Europeans see how the youth holds his father's hand! I have sometimes caught him bathing it with tears.



I'll speak to the young man.




He will speak as soon as he sees me he has sent a petition to the Sultan about his father,
  23and never fails to inquire if a reply is come.





Sir, do you come from the Court? has the Sultan received my humble supplication? Can you tell? softly let not my father hear you speak.



I come but as a stranger, to see the prisoh.



No answer yet, keeper?



No I told you it was in vain to write they never read petitions sent from prisons their hearts are hardened to such worn-out tales of sorrow.





Pardon me, Sir but what is the request you are thus denied?



Behold my father! but three months has he been confined here; and yet unless he breathes a purer air O, if you have influence at Court, Sir, pray represent what passes in this dreary prison what passes in my heart.  My supplication is to remain a prisoner here, while my father, released, shall be permitted to retire to humble life; and never more take arms in a cause the Sultan may suspect which engagement broken, my life shall be the forfeit. Or if the Sultan wou'd allow me to serve him as a soldier. 



You would fight against the party your father fought for?



No but in the forests or on the desert sands amongst those slaves who are sent to battle with the wild Indians there I wou'd go and earn the boon I ask  or in the mines 



Give me your name I will, at least, present your suit and, perhaps 



Sir! do you think it is likely? Joyful hearing!



Nay, be not too hasty in your hopes I
  24cannot answer for my success Your father humbly implores to be released from prison and, in his stead, you take his chains or, for the Sultan's service, fight as a slave, or dig in his mines?



Exactly, Sir that is the petition I thank you, Sir.



You don't know, young man, what it is to dig in mines or fight against foes, who make their prisoners die by unheard-of tortures.



You do not know, Sir, what it is to see a parent suffer.















The same one who followed agriculture in the fields of Symria but, induced by the call of freedom 



How? have a care.



No his son, by the call of nature, supplicates his freedom.



The rebel, you find, breaks out.



Silence silence! he forgives it don't remind him of it don't undo my hopes.



I will serve you if I can.



And I will merit it indeed I will you shall not complain of me I will be 



Retire I trust you.
Elvirus bows lowly, and retires.]



Yonder cell contains a female prisoner.







Without a friend or comforter, she has existed there these many years nearly fifteen.







Wou'd you wish to see her?



If it won't give her pain.



At least, she'll not resent it for she seldom complains, except in moans to herself   Lady, here is one come to vist all the prisoners please to appear before him.



I thank you you speak with reverence and respect to her.



She has been of some note, though now so totally unfriended at least, we think she has, from her gentle manners; and our governor is in the daily expectation of some liberal ransom for her, which makes her imprisonment without a hope of release, till that day arrives   Lend me your hand you are weak.




I fear you are not in health, Lady?








No not very well.




Where are your friends? When do you expect your ransom?







She persists to say so; thinking by that declaration, we shall release her without a ransom.



Is that your motive?



I know no motive for a falsehood.



I was to blame pardon me.



Your answers are somewhat prouder than usual.




They are.   Forgive me I am mild with all of these but from a countenance like yours I could not bear reproach.







Alas! Sir, and what have I to hope from such a meaness? You do not come to ransom me.







Oh! do not say so unless unless I am not to be deceived pardon in your turn this suspicion but when I have so much to hope for when the sun, the air, fields, woods, and all that wonderous world, wherein I have been so happy, is in prospect; forgive me, if the vast hope makes me fear.



Unless your ransom is fixed at something beyond my power to give, I will release you.







How shall I mark you down in my petition?  what name?



'Tis almost blotted from my memory.




It is of little note a female prisoner, taken with the rebel party, and in these cells confined for fisteen years.



Daring which time I have demeaned myself with all humility to my governors neither have I distracted my fellow prisoners with a complaint that might recall to their memory their own unhappy fate I have been obedient, patient; and cherished hope to chear me with vain dreams, while despair possess'd my reason.



Retire I will present the picture you have given.



Succeed too or, never let me see you more 








Or, if you shou'd miscarry in your views  I will not reproach you even to myself  no nor will I suffer much from the disappointment merely that you may not have, what I suffer, to account for.








In this cell 




No take me away I have enough to do I dare not see more at present. 










They are coming I'll stand here in his sight, that, shou'd he miss what I have taken, he'll not suspect me, but suppose it is one who has hid himself.






What makes you here? still moping by yourself, and lamenting for your family?   that man, the most ferocious I ever met with laments, sometimes even with tears, the separation from his wife and children.



I am sorry for you, friend;  I pity you.



Yes he had a pleasant hamlet on the neighbouring island plenty of fruits clear springs and wholesome roots and now complains bitterly of his repasts sour rice, and muddy water.




Poor man! bear your sorrows nobly and as we are alone no miserable eye to grudge the favour   take this trifle   it will at least make your meals better for a few short weeks till Heaven may please to favour you with a less sharp remembrance of the happiness you have lost Farewell.









I meant to gain my liberty with it but I will not vex you.



How came you by it?



Stole it and wou'd have stabb'd you too, had you been alone but I am glad I did not Oh! I am glad I did not.



You like me then?



'Tis something that I never felt before it makes me like not only you, but all the world besides the love of my family was confined to them alone; but this makes me feel I could love even my enemies.



Oh, nature! grateful! mild! gentle! and forgiving! worst of tyrants they who, by hard usage, drive you to be cruel!





The lights are ready, Sir, through the dark passage   Go to your fellows.




Farewell we will meet again.















WHY, then Aurelia, (though I never mention'd it to my Lady Tremor) my friend wrote me word, he had reason to suppose your affections were improperly fixed upon a young gentleman in that neighbourhood; and this was his reason for wishing you to leave that place to come hither and this continual dejection convinces me my friend was not mistaken answer me can you say he was?



Why, then, Sir Luke, candidly to confess 



Nay, no tears why in tears? for a husband? be comforted we'll get you one ere long, I warrant.



Dear, Sir Luke, how can you imagine I am in tears because I have not a husband, while you see Lady Tremor every day in tears for the very opposite cause?



No matter women like a husband through pride and I have known a woman marry from that very motive, even a man she has been ashamed of.



Why, then I dare say, poor Lady Tremor married from pride.



Yes; and I'll let her know pride is painful.



But, Sir, her Ladyship's philosophy 



She has no philosophy.





Where is his Lordship? What have you done with him?



He's speaking a word to Mr. Meanright about his passport to England. Did you mean me, Sir Luke, that had no philosophy? I protest, I have a great deal.



When? where did you shew it?



Why, when the servant at my Lady Grissei's threw a whole urn of boiling water upon your legs, did I give any proofs of female weakness? did I faint, scream, or even shed a tear?



No no very true and while I lay sprawling on the carnet, I could see you fanning and holding the smelling bottle to the Lady of the house, begging her not to make herself uneasy, for that the accident was of no manner of consequence.



Dear Sir, don't be angry; I am sure her Ladyship spoke as she thought.



I suppose she did, Miss.



I mean she thought the accident might be easily got the better of She thought you might be easily recovered.



No, indeed, I did not but I thought Sir Luke had frequently charged me with the want of patience; and that moment, the very thing in the world I cou'd have wished, happened on purpose to give me an opportunity to prove his accusation false.



Very well, Madam but did not the
  31whole company cry shame on your behaviour? did not they say, it was not the conduct of a wife?



Only our particular acquaintance cou'd say so for the rest of the company, I am sure, did not take me to be your wife thank Heaven, our appearances never betray that secret do you think we look like the same flesh and blood?



That day, in particular, we did not for I remember you had been no less than three hours at your toilet.



And, indeed, Sir Luke, if you were to use milk of roses, and several other little things of that kind, you can't think how much more like a fine gentleman you wou'd look. Such things as those make, almost, all the difference there is between you and such a gentleman as Mr. Twineall.



No, pardon me, Madam a face like mine may use those things but in Sir Luke's, they wou'd entirely destroy that fine martial appearance   which women as well as men admire for, as valour is the first ornament of our sex 



What are you saying, Mr. Twineall?  I'll keep him on this subject if I can.



I was going to observe, Madam that the reputation of a General which puts me in mind, Sir Luke, of an account I read of a battle 




Well, Sir go on go on you were going to introduce 



A battle, Madam but, Sir Luke is gone!



Never mind that, Sir he generally runs away on these occasions.



What were you saying, Aurelia, about a husband?



She did not speak.



To be sure, Ladies in India do get husbands very quick.



Not always I am told, Sir Luke Women of family,  indeed, may soon enter into the matrimonial state but the rich men in India, we are told in England, are grown lately very particular with whom they marry, and there is not a man of any repute that will now look upon a woman as a wife, unless she is descended from a good family.





I am very sorry very sorry to say, Mr. Twineall, that has not been always the case.



Then I am very sorry too, Sir Luke; for it is as much impossible that a woman, who is not born of a good family, can be 





That is just what I say they cannot be 



Sir Luke, let me tell you 



It does not signify telling, my dear, you have proved it.




Sir, let me tell you 



O! O! my dear Madam, 'tis all in vain there is no such thing it can't be there is no pleading against conviction a person of low birth must, in every particular, be a terrible creature.



A terrible creature! a terrible creature!



Here comes my Lord Flint I'll appeal to him.





My Lord, I was saying, as proof that our great Sultan, who now fills this throne, is no impostor, (as the rebel party wou'd insinuate) no low born man, but of the Royal Stock; his conduct palpably evinces for, had he not been nobly born, we shou'd have beheld the Plebeian bursting forth upon all occasions  and then, Heaven help all those who had had any dealings with him!








Sir Luke, is there a doubt of the Emperor's birth and title? he is the real Sultan, depend upon it it surprises me to hear you talk with the smallest uncertainty.



O, Sir Luke, I wonder at it too,  and yet, damn me, my Lord, if I have not my doubts.





I, my Lord? far be it from me! I was only saying what other people said; for my part I never harboured a doubt of the kind.   My head begins to nod, only for that word pray Heaven, I may die with it on! I shou'd not like to lose my head nor shou'd I like to die by a bullet nor by a small sword and a cannon ball wou'd be as disagreeable, as any thing, I know it is very odd but I never yet could make up my mind, in what manner I shou'd. like to go out of the world.





Your temerity astonishes me!



I must own, my Lord, I feel somewhat aukward in saying it to your Lordship but my own heart my own conscience my own sentiments they are my own and they are dear to
  34me. And so it is the Sultan does not appear to be  that great man some people think him.



Sir, you astonish me pray what is your name? I have forgotten it.



Twineall, my Lord the honourable Henry Twineall your Lordship does me great honour to ask arrived this morning from England, as your Lordship may remember in the ship Mercury, my Lord and all the officers on board speaking with the highest admiration and warmest terms of your Lordship's official character.



Why, then, Mr. Twineall, I am very sorry 



And so am I, my Lord, that your sentiments and mine shou'd so far disagree, as I know they do. I am not unacquainted with your firm adherence to the Emperor but I am unused to disguise my thoughts I cou'd not, if I wou'd I have no little views no sinister motives no plots no intrigues no schemes of preferment, and I verily believe that if a large scymitar was now directed at my head or a large pension directed to my pocket (in the first case at least) I shou'd speak my mind.



A dangerous young man this! and I may make something of the discovery.



It tickles him to the soul, I find. My Lord, now I begin to be warm on the subject, I feel myself quite agitated and, from the intelligence which I have heard, even when I was in England, there is every reason to suppose  exm exm exm  
















Why, then, there is every reason to suppose some people are not what they shou'd be pardon my thoughts, if they are wrong.



I do pardon your thoughts, with all my heart but your words, young man, must be answer'd for  Lady Tremor, good morning.



He is going to ruminate on my sentiments, I dare say.



Shall we have your Lordship's company towards the evening? Mr. Haswell will be here; if your Lordship has no objection?



How do you know Mr. Haswell will be here?



Because he has just called, in his way to the Palace, and said so and he has been telling us some very interesting stories too.



Of his moring visits, I suppose I heard Meanright say he saw him very busy.



Sir Luke and I dine out, my Lord; but we shall return early in the evening.



I will be here, without fail. Sir Luke, aword with you if you please   Mr. Twineall has taken some very improper liberties with the Sultan's name, and I must insist on making him answer for it.



My Lord, you are extremely welcome  to do whatever your Lordship pleases with any one belonging to me, or to my house but I hope your Lordship will pay some regard to the master of it.



O! great regard to the master and to the mistress also. But for that gentleman 



Do what your Lordship pleases.



I will and I will make him 



If your Lordship does not forget it.



I shan't forget it, Sir Luke I have a very good memory, when I please.



I don't, in the least, doubt it, my Lord I never did doubt it.



And I can be very severe too, Sir Luke, when I please.



I don't, in the least, doubt it, my Lord I never did doubt it.



You may depend upon seeing me here in the evening and then you shall find I have not threatened more than I mean to perform good morning!



Good morning, my Lord I don't in the least doubt it.





For Heaven's sake, Mr. Twineall, what has birth to do with 



It has to do with every thing, Madam even with beauty and I wish I may suffer death, if a woman, with all the mental and personal accomplishments of the finest creature in Europe, wou'd to me be of that value,  if lowly born.



And I sincerely wish every man who visits me was of the same opinion.



For shame, Mr. Twineall! persons of mean birth ought not to be despised for what it was not in their power to prevent and if it is a misfortune, you shou'd consider them only as objects of pity.



And so I do pity them and so I do most sincerely poor creatures.




Aye, now he has mended it finely.



Mr. Twineall, let me tell you 



My dear Lady Tremor   let him alone let him go on there is something preparing for him he little expects so let the poor man say and do what he pleases, for the present it won't last long for he has offended
  37my Lord Flint, and, I dare say his Lordship will be able, upon some account or another, to get him imprisoned for life.



Imprisoned! Why not take off his head at once?



Well, my dear I am sure I have no objection and I dare say my Lord will have it done, to oblige you. Egad, I must make friends with her to keep mine safe.




Do you mean to take him out to dinner with us?



Yes, my dear, if you approve of it not else.



You are grown extremely polite.



Yes, my dear, his Lordship has taught me how to be polite. Mr. Twineall, Lady Tremor and I are going to prepare for our visit, and I will send a servant to shew you to your apartment, in order to dress, for you will favour us with your company, I hope?



Certainly, Sir Luke, I shall do myself the honour.



Come this way, Aurelia, I can't bear to look at him.




Nor I to think of him.




If I have not settled my business in this family, I am mistaken they seem to have but one mind about me. Devilish clever fellow, egad! I am the man to send into the world such a volatile, good-looking scoundrel too! No one suspects me  to be sure I am under some few obligations to my friend for letting me into the different characters of the family and yet I don't know whether I am obliged to him or not for if he had not made me acquainted with them I shou'd soon have had the skill to find them out myshelf. No; I will not think myshelf under any
  38obligation to him it is devilish inconvenient for a gentleman to be under an obligation.






Haswell is conducted in by an officer.



Sir you are summoned to receive our thanks, for the troops restored to health by your kind prescriptions. Ask a reward adequate to your services.



Sultan the reward I ask, is to preserve more of your people still.



How more? my subjects are in health no contagion reigns amongst them.



The prisoner is your subject there misery more contagious than disease, preys on the lives of hundreds sentenced but to confinement, their doom is death. Immured in damp and dreary vaults, they daily perish and who can tell but that amongst the many hapless sufferers, there may be hearts, bent down with penitence to Heaven and you, for every slight offence there may be some amongst the wretched multitude, even innocent victims. Let me seek them out let me save them, and you.



Amazement! retract your application curb this weak pity; and receive our thanks.



Curb my pity? and what can I receive in recompence for that soft bond, which links me to the wretched? and while it sooths their sorrow repays me more, than all the gifts or homage of an empire.  But if repugnant to your plan of government not in the name of pity but of justtice.







The justice which forbids all but the worst of criminals to be denied that wholesome air the very brute creation freely takes; at least allow them that.



Consider, Sir, for whom you plead for men, (if not base culprits) yet so misled, so depraved, they are offensive to our state, and deserve none of its blessings.



If not upon the undeserving, if not upon the hapless wanderer from the paths of rectitude, where shall the sun diffuse his light, or the clouds distil their dew? Where shall spring breathe fragrance, or autumn pour its plenty?



Sir, your sentiments, but much more your character, excite my curiosity. They tell me, in our camps, you visited each sick man's bed, administered yourself the healing draught, encouraged our savages with the hope of life, or pointed out their better hope in death. The widow speaks your charities the orphan lisps your bounties and the rough Indian melts in tears to bless you. I wish to ask why you have done all this? What is it prompts you thus to befriend the wretched and forlorn?



In vain for me to explain the time it wou'd take to tell you why I act thus 



Send it in writing then.



Nay, if you will read, I'll send a book, in which is already written why I act thus.



What book? What is it called?



"The Christian Doctrine."  There you will find all I have done was but my duty.



Retire, and leave me alone with the stranger.




Your words recall reflections that distract
  40me; nor can I bear the pressure on my mind without confessing I am a Christian.



A Christian! What makes you thus assume the apostate?







What made you a Christian?



My Arabella, a lovely European, sent hither in her youth, by her mercenary parents, to sell herself to the prince of all these territories. But 'twas my happy lot, in humble life, to win her love, snatch her from his expecting arms, and bear her far away where, in peaceful solitude we lived, till, in the heat of the rebellion against the late Sultan, I was forced from my happy home to bear a part. I chose the imputed rebels side, and fought for the young aspirer. An arrow, in the midst of the engagement, pierced his heart; and his officers, alarmed at the terror this stroke of fate might cause amongst their troops, urged me (as I bore his likeness) to counterfeit it farther, and shew myself to the soldiers as their king recovered. I yielded to their suit, because it gave me ample power to avenge the loss of my Arabella, who had been taken from her home by the merciless foe, and barbarously murdered.







I learnt so and my fruitless search to find her since has consirmed the intelligence. Frantic for her loss, I joyfully embraced a scheme which promised vengeance on the enemy it prospered, and I revenged my wrongs and her's, with such unsparing justice on the foe, that even the men who made me what I was, trembled to reveal their imposition; and they find it still their interest to continue it.







Nay, they fill my prisons every day with wretches, that dare whisper I am not the real Sultan, but a stranger. The secret, therefore, I myself safely relate in private: the danger is to him who speaks it again; and, with this caution, I trust, it is safe with you.



It was, without that caution. Now hear me. Involved in deeds, in cruelties, which your better thoughts revolt at, the meanest wretch your camps or prisons hold, claims not half the compassion you have excited. Permit me, then, to be your comforter, as I have been theirs.







In the most fatal symptoms I have undertaken the body's cure. The mind's disease, perhaps, I'm not less a stranger to Oh! trust the noble patient to my care.



How will you begin?



Lead you to behold the wretched in their misery, and then shew you yourself in their deliverer. I have your promise for a boon 'tis this. Give me the liberty of fix that I shall name, now in confinement, and be yourself a witness of their enlargement. See joy lighted in the countenance where sorrow still has left its rough remains. Behold the tear of rapture chase away that of anguish hear the faultering voice, long used to lamentation, in broken accents, utter thanks and blessings. Behold this scene, and if you find the medicine ineffectual, dishonour your physician.



I will behold it.



Come, then, to the governor's house this very night into that council room so often perverted to the use of the torture; and there, unknown to them as their king, you shall be witness
  40me; nor can I bear the pressure on my mind without confessing I am a Christian.



A Christian! What makes you thus assume the apostate?







What made you a Christian?



My Arabella, a lovely European, sent hither in her youth, by her mercenary parents, to sell herself to the prince of all these territories. But 'twas my happy lot, in humble life, to win her love, snatch her from his expecting arms, and bear her far away where, in peaceful solitude we lived, till, in the heat of the rebellion against the late Sultan, I was forced from my happy home to bear a part. I chose the imputed rebels side, and fought for the young aspirer. An arrow, in the midst of the engagement, pierced his heart; and his officers, alarmed at the terror this stroke of fate might cause amongst their troops, urged me (as I bore his likeness) to counterfeit it farther, and shew myself to the soldiers as their king recovered. I yielded to their suit, because it gave me ample power to avenge the loss of my Arabella, who had been taken from her home by the merciless foe, and barbarously murdered.







I learnt so and my fruitless search to find her since has confirmed the intelligence. Frantic for her loss, I joyfully embraced a scheme which promised vengeance on the enemy it prospered, and I revenged my wrongs and her's, with such unsparing justice on the foe, that even the men who made me what I was, trembled to reveal their imposition; and they find it still their interest to continue it.







Nay, they fill my prisons every day with wretches, that dare whisper I am not the real Sultan, but a stranger. The secret, therefore, I myself safely relate in private: the danger is to him who speaks it again; and, with this caution, I trust, it is safe with you.



It was, without that caution. Now hear me. Involved in deeds, in cruelties, which your better thoughts revolt at, the meanest wretch your camps or prisons hold, claims not half the compassion you have excited. Permit me, then, to be your comforter, as I have been theirs.







In the most fatal symptoms I have undertaken the body's cure. The mind's disease, perhaps, I'm not less a stranger to Oh! trust the noble patient to my care.



How will you begin?



Lead you to behold the wretched in their misery, and then shew you yourself in their deliverer. I have your promise for a boon 'tis this. Give me the liberty of six that I shall name, now in confinement, and be yourself a witness of their enlargement. See joy lighted in the countenance where sorrow still has left its rough remains. Behold the tear of rapture chase away that of anguish hear the faultering voice, long used to lamentation, in broken accents, utter thanks and blessings. Behold this scene, and if you find the medicine ineffectual, dishonour your physician.



I will behold it.



Come, then, to the governor's house this very night into that council room so often perverted to the use of the torture; and there, unknown to them as their king, you shall be witness
  42to all the grateful heart can dictate, and enjoy all that benevolence can taste.



I will meet you there.







At ten precisely. Guards, conduct the stranger from the palace.




Thus far advanced, what changes may not be hoped for?













OH my Aurelia! since the time I first saw you since you left the pleasant spot, where I first beheld you; what distress, what anguish have we known?







Yes and that caused the silence which I hope you have lamented. I could not wound you with the recital of our misfortunes and now, only with the sad idea that I shall never see you more, I am come to take my leave.



Is there a chance that we may never meet again?



There is and I hope it too sincerely hope and request it to see you again, wou'd be again to behold my father pining in misery.



Explain   that is, Sir Luke, and Lady Tremor what shall I say, shou'd they come hither? they suspect I correspond with some person in the country who shall I say you are? upon what business can I say you are come?



To avoid all suspicion of my real situation, and to be sure to gain admittance, I put on this habit, and told the servant, when I inquired for you, I was just arrived from England   nay, it was but necessary I should conceal who I
  44was in this suspicious place, or I might plunge a whose family in the imputed guilt of mine.







I feared, besides, there was no other means; no likelihood to gain admission and what, what wou'd I not have sacrificed, rather than left you for ever without a last farewell? think on these weighty causes, and pardon the deception.



But if they should ask me 



Say, as I have done my stay must be so short, it is impossible they shou'd detect me for I must be back 







No matter where I must be back before the evening and would almost wish never to see you more I love you, Aurelia O, how truly! and yet there is a love more dear, more sacred still.



You torture me with suspense Sir Luke is coming this way what name shall I say, if he asks me?



Glanmore I announced that name to the servant.







The imposition hurts me and I feel as if I dreaded a detection, though 'tis scarce possible Sorrows have made a coward of me even the servant, I thought, looked at me with suspicion and I was both confounded and enraged.



Go into this apartment; I'll follow you there we may be safe and do not hide the smallest circumstance which I may have to apprehend.





Abominable! provokin•▪ impertinent! not to be borne!



Thank Heaven, Sir Luke is so perplexed with some affairs of his own, he may not think of mine. 






I am out of all patience and all temper did you ever hear of such a compleat impertinent coxcomb? Talk, talk, talk, coutinually! and referring to me on all occasions! Such a man was a brave General another a great Admiral, and then he must tell a long story about a siege, and ask me if it did not make my bosom glow!



It had not that effect upon your face, for you were as white as ashes.



Aye, you did not see yourself, while he was talking of grandfathers and great grandfathers if you had 



I was not white, I protest.



No but you were as red as scarlet.



And you ought to have resented the insult, if you saw me affected by it Oh! some men wou'd have given him such a dressing 



Yes, my dear, if your uncle the frisseur had been alive, he wou'd have given him a dressing, I dare say.



Sir Luke, none of your impertinence; you know I can't nor won't bear it neither will I wait for Lord Flint's resentment on Mr. Twineall No, I desire you will tell him to quit this roof immediately.



No, my dear no, no you must excuse me I can't think of quarrelling with a gentleman in my own house.



Was it your own house to day at dinner when he insulted us? and would quarrel then?



No that was a friend's house and I make it a rule never to quarrel in my own house a friend's house in a tavern or in the streets.



Well, then, I would quarrel in my own
  46house a friend's house a tavern or in the streets if any one offended me.



O, my dear, I have no doubt of it no doubt, in the least.



But, at present, it shall be in my own house, and I will tell the gentleman to quit it immediately.



Very well, my dear pray do.



I suppose, however, I may tell him I have your authority to bid him go?



Tell him I have no authority none in the world over you but that you will do as you like.



I can't tell him so he won't believe it.



Why not? you often tell me so, and make me believe it too.



Here the gentleman comes go away for a moment.



With all my heart, my dear.




I'll give him a few hints, that he must either change his mode of behaviour, or leave us.



That's right but don't be too warm or if he should be very impertinent, or insolent (i hear Aurelia's voice in the next room) call her, and I dare say she'll come and take your part.






I positively could pass a whole day upon that stair-case those reverend faces! I presume they are the portraits of some of your Ladyship's illustrious ancestors.



Sir! Mr. Twineall give me leave to tell you 




The word illustrious, I find, displeases you pardon me I did not mean to make use of so forcible an epithet I know the delicacy of sentiment, which cannot bear the reflection that a few centuries only shou'd reduce from royalty, one, whose dignified deportment seems to have been formed for that resplendent station.



The man is certainly mad!  Mr. Twineall 



Pardon me, Madam I own I am an enthusiast on these occasions the dignity of blood 



You have too much, I am sure do, have a little taken from you.



Gladly wou'd I lose every drop that fills these plebeian veins, to be enobled by the smallest  



Pray, Sir, take up your abode in some other place.








Your behaviour, Sir 



If my friend had not given me the hint, damn me if I shou'd not think her down right angry.




I can scarce contain my rage at being so laugh'd at.




Perhaps you may resent it, Madam but there is a favour 



A favour, Sir! is this a time to ask a favour?



To an admirer of antiquity, as I am.







I beg pardon  but  a wig, Ma'am 














  48down, and going into fits.] a direct, plain, palpable, and unequivocal attack upon my family without evasion or palliative. I can't bear it any longer. Oh! oh! 




Bless my soul, what shall I do? what's the matter?



Maids! maids! go to your mistress that good-for-nothing fellow is doing her a mischief.





Dear Madam, what is the matter?











How do you do now, my dear?



Upon my word, Sir Luke 



O, Sir, no apology it does not signify never mind it I beg you won't put yourself to the trouble of an apology it is of no kind of consequence.



What do you mean, Sir Luke?




To shew proper philosophy, my dear, under the affliction I feel for your distress.




Take Twineall out of the room.



Mr. Twineall, her Ladyship begs you'll leave the room, till she is a little recovered.








I thought what you wou'd get by quarrelling fits and tears.



And you know, Sir Luke, if you had quarrelled, you wou'd have been in the same situation.  But, Sir Luke, my
  49dear, Sir Luke, show yourself a man of courage but on this occasion. 



My dear, I wou'd do as much for you as I wou'd for my own life but damn me if I think I could fight to save that.





Lady Tremor, did the servant say you were very well, or very ill?



Oh, my Lord, that insolent coxcomb, the honourable Mr. Twineall 



Oh, I am very glad you put me in mind of it I dare say I shou'd have forgot it else, notwithstanding I came on purpose.







A little piece of paper here,  but it will do a great deal has he offended you?







I am glad of it, because it gives double pleasure to my vengeance he is a disaffected person, Madam boldly told me he doubted the Sultan's right to the throne I have informed against him, and his punishment is at my option I may have him imprisoned; shot; sent to the gallies; or his head cut off but which does your Ladyship chuse? Which ever you please is at your service.




O, they are all alike to me; which ever you please, my Lord.



What a deal of ceremony! how cool they are about it.



And why not cool, Sir; why not cool?



O, very true I am sure it has froze me.



I will go instantly, for fear it shou'd
  80slip my memory, and put this paper into the hands of proper officers in the mean time, Sir Luke, if you can talk with your visitor, Mr. Twineall, do inquire his opinion of the Sultan's rights ask his thoughts, as if you were commissioned by me and, while he is revealing them to you, the officers shall be in ambush, surprise him in the midst of his sentiments, and bear him away to 





May I presume to inquire how your Ladyship does?



O, yes and pray walk in I am quite recovered.



Lady Tremor, I bid you good day for the present.



Your Lordship won't forget?



No depend upon it, I shall remember.



Yes and make some other people remember too.




Is his Lordship gone? I am very sorry.



No don't be uneasy, he'll soon be back.





Mr. Haswell, I am glad to see you?



I told her Ladyship I would call in the evening, Sir Luke; and so I have kept my word I wanted too to speak with my Lord Flint, but he was in such a hurry as he passed me, he wou'd hardly let me ask him how he did. I hope your Ladyship is well this afternoon.




Pardon me, Mr. Haswell, but I almost suspect you heard of her Ladyship's indisposition,
  51and therefore paid this visit; for I am not to learn your care and attention to all under affliction.



Has your Ladyship been indisposed then?



A little but I am much better.



Surely, of all virtues, charity is the first! it so protects our neighbour!



Do not you think, Sir, patience frequently protects him as much?



Dear Sir pity for the poor miserable 



Is oftener excited than the poor and miserable are aware of.





Nay, Sir, I beg you will walk into this apartment Aurelia, introduce the gentleman to Lady Tremor.



Who has she with her?



Aurelia! O! I have not seen her I know not when and besides my acquaintance with her relations in England, there is a frank simplicity about her that 





You shou'd have introduced the gentleman before I assure you, Sir,  I did not know, nor shou'd I have known, if I had not accidently come into the room.

Haswell starts, on seeing Elvirus.



A relation of Aurelia's a Mr. Glanmore, my dear, just arrived from England; who call'd to pass a few minutes with us, before he sets off to the part of India he is to reside in.





I hope, Sir, your stay with us will not be so short as Sir Luke has mentioned?



Pardon me, Madam, it must the caravan, with which I travel, goes off this evening, and I must accompany it.



I doubted before; but the voice confirms me.




Why, you only arrived this morning, did you, Mr. Glanmore? you came passenger in the same ship, then, with Mr. Twineall?



No, Madam Sir, I am very sorry we had not the pleasure of your company on board of us.




You had: Mr. Glanmore came over in the Mercury did not you tell me so, Sir?





Bless my soul, Sir! I beg your pardon but surely that cannot be I got acquainted with every soul on board of us every creature all their connections and I can scarcely suppose you were of the number.



How impertinent he is to this gentleman too! O! that I had but courage to knock him down.








Yes, I dare say, that was the case.



What was the case, Madam?



Wha wha wha   that is not good breeding.



Why do you blush, Aurelia?



Because  this gentleman  came over in the same ship with Mr. Twineall.



And I cant't say I wonder at your biushing.



Why then positively, Sir, I thought I had known every passenger and surely 



Mr. Twineall, your behaviour puts me out of all patience did you not hear the gentleman
  53man say he came in the same vessel; and is not that sufficient?



Perfectly, Madam perfectly but I thought there might be some mistake.



And there is, Sir you find you are mistaken.



I thought so,  




And you did come in the same vessel?



Sir, do you doubt it?







Dare not doubt it. 








No, Sir, dare not.









Come, my dear, you and I will get out of the way.




O, dear! for heaven's sake! Mr. Twineall, this is your doing.



Me, Madam!  



I beg the company's pardon but  a single word with you, Sir, if you please.



Dear Mr. Haswell  



Trust my prudence and forbearance, Madam I will but speak a word in private to this gentleman. 





Are you, or are you not, an impostor?



I am I am but do not you repeat my words Do not you say it.




What am I to fear?



Fear me I cannot lie with fortitude; but I can  Beware of me.



I will beware of you, and so shall all my friends.



Insolent, insulting man. 



Lady Tremor and the rest come down.



Come, come, gentlemen, I hope you are now perfectly satisfied about this little nonsense. Let us change the subject. Mr. Haswell, have you been successful before the Sultan for any of those poor prisoners you visited this morning?



Ave; Meanright told me he saw you coming from them with your long cloak; and said he shou'd not have known you, if somebody had not said it was you.




But what success with the Sultan?



He has granted me the pardon and freedom of any six I shall present as objects of his mercy.



I sincerely rejoice. Then the youth and his father, whom you felt so much for, I am sure, will be in the number of those who share your clemency.




Sir Mr. Haswell O, heavens!



Come, Mr. Haswell, this young man seems sorry he has offended you forgive him.



Aye, do, Mr. Haswell are you sorry, Sir?



O! wounded to the heart and, without his pardon, see nothing but despair.







Sir Luke, my Lord Flint told me he was coming back directly pray inform him I had business elsewhere, and cou'd wait no longer.








Follow him, if you have any thing to say?



I dare not I feel the terror of his just reproach.



Did you know him in England?



Dear Madam, will you suffer me to speak a few words  




Aye; leave her and her relation together, and let us take a turn in the garden with Mr. Twineall. I'm afraid his Lordship will be back before we have drawn him to say more on the subject, for which he will be arrested.







Mr. Twineall, will you walk this way? That young lady and gentleman wish to have a little conversation.




 I am extremely sorry, Sir, you kept your bed during the voyage: I shou'd else have been most prodigiously happy in such good company.




Why are you thus agitated? It was wrong to be so impetuous but such regret as this  



Hear the secret I refused before my father is a prisoner for life.



Oh, heavens! then Mr. Haswell was the only man  



And he had promised me promised me, with benevolence, his patronage but the disguise he wore when I first saw him, led me to mistake him now made me expose my falsehood, my infamy, and treat his honour'd person with abuse.



Aye; let his virtues make you thus repent;
  56but let them also make you hope forgiveness.



Nay, he is just, as well as compassionate and for detected falsehood 



You make me tremble.



Yet he shall hear my story I'll follow him, and obtain his pity, if not his pardon.



Nay, supplicate for that too and you need not blush, or feel yourself degraded, to kneel to HIM, for he wou'd scorn the pride that triumphs over the humbled.










Why, really, Sir Luke, as my Lord has given you charge to sound my prineiples, I must own they are just such as I delivered to him.



Well, Mr. Twineall, I only wish you to be a little more clear we will suppose the present Sultan no impostor yet what pretensions do you think the other family 



That I'll make clear to you at once or if my reasons are not very clear, they are at least very positive, and that you know is the same thing. This family no that family the family that reigned before this this came after that they came before. Now every one agrees that this family was always so and so   and that the other was always so and so   in short, every body knows that one of them had always a very suspicious you know what  







Pshaw pshaw every body conjectures what and though it was never said in so many
  57words, yet it was always supposed and though there never has been any proof, yet there have been things much more strong and for that very reason, Sir William (Sir Luke, I mean I beg your pardon) for that very reason (I can't think what made me call you Sir William) for that very reason (Oh, I was thinking of Sir William Tiffany) for that very reason, say people what they will that, that must be their opinion but then where is the man who will speak his thoughts freely as I have done?




Bless my soul, gentlemen, you made my heart jump to my very lips.




Sir, you are our prisoner, and must go with us.



Gentlemen, you are mistaken I had all my clothes made in England, and 'tis impossible the bill can have followed me already.



Your charge, is something against the state.



Against the state? You are mistaken it cannot be me.



No there is no mistake.   You are here called Henry Twineall.



But if they have left out honourable, it can't be me  I am the Honourable Henry Twineall.



Aye, that you are to prove before your judges.



Yes, Sir and we are witnesses of the long speech you have just now been making.



And pray, gentlemen, did you know what I meant by it?







Why, then, upon my soul, it was more than I did I wish I may be sacrificed  



Well, well, you are going to be sacrificed Don't be impatient.



But, gentlemen Sir Luke!




Dear Mr. Twineall, I am afraid you will have occasion for the dignity of all my ancestors to support you under this trial.



And have occasion for all my courage too.



But, Sir but, gentlemen  



Oh! I wou'd not be in your coat, fashionable as it is, for all the Sultan's dominions.











Haswell and the female Prisoner discovered.



RATHER remain in this loathsome prison! refuse the blessing offered you! the blessing your pleased fancy formed so precious you durst not even trust its reality!



No while my pleased fancy only saw the prospect, I own it was delightful; but now reason beholds it within my reach, the view is changed and what, in the gay dream of fond delirium, seemed a blessing, in my waking hours of sad reflection would prove the most severe of punishments.



Explain what is the cause that makes you think thus?



A cause that has alone for fourteen years made me resigned to a fate like this. When you first mentioned my release from this drear place, my wild ideas included, with the light, all that had ever made the light a blessing 'twas not the sun I saw in my mad transport, but a lost husband filled my roving fancy 'twas his idea that gave the colours of the world their beauty, and made me fondly hope to grasp its sweets.







But the world that I was wont to enjoy
  60with him to see again without him every wellknown object would wound my mind with dear remembrances for ever lost, and make my freedom torture.







Oh! on my knees a thousand times I have thanked Heaven that he partook not of this dire abode that he shared not with me my hard usage! a greater blessing I possess'd from that, than all his loved society cou'd have given but in a happy world, where smiling nature pours her boundless gifts! oh! there his loss wou'd be unsufferable.



Do you lament him dead?



Yes or, like me, a prisoner else he wou'd have sought me out have sought his Arabella!   Why do you start?



Are you a Christian? an European?







The name made me suppose it. I am shocked that the Christian's sufferings   but were you made a prisoner in the present Sultan's reign?



Yes, or I had been set free on his ascent to the throne; for he gave pardon to all the enemies of the slain monarch: but I was taken in a vessel, where I was hurried in the heat of the battle with a party of the late Emperor's friends and all the prisoners were by the officers of the present Sultan sent to slavery, or confined, as I have been, in hopes of ransom from their friends.



And did never intelligence or inquiry reach you from your husband?











I once was informed of a large reward for the discovery of a female Christian, and, with
  61boundless hopes, asked an interview with the messenger; but found, on inquiry, I could not answer his description, as he secretly informed me it was the Sultan who made the search for one he himself had known and dearly loved.



Good Heaven!   You then conclude your husband dead?



I do; or, like me, by some mischance, taken with the other party, and having no friend to plead his cause before the Emperor, whom he served 



I'll plead it should I ever chance to find him but, ere we can hope for other kindness, you must appear before the Sultan thank him for the favour which you now decline, and tell the cause why you cannot accept it.



Alas! almost worn out with sorrow an object of affliction as I am in pity, excuse me present my thanks my humble gratitude but pardon my attendance.



Nay, you must go it is necessary I will accompany you to him. Retire a moment; but when I send, be ready.










Nay, reproach me I can bear your anger, but do not let me meet your eye Oh! it is more awful, now I know who you are, than if you had kingdoms to disperse, or could deal instant death.   I do not plead for my father now. Since what has passed, I only ask forgiveness.



Do you forgive yourself?









One of our prisoners, who, in his cell, makes the most pitious moans, has sent to entreat that Mr. Haswell will not leave this place till he has heard his complaints and supplications.



Bring me to him.




Nay, leave me not thus perhaps never to see you more! 



You shall see me again in the mean time, reflect on what you merit.




And what is that? Confusion! and yet, he says, I am to see him again speak with him. Oh! there's a blessing to the most abandoned, a divine propenfity (they know not why) to commune with the virtuous!











Where is the poor unfortunate?







Am I to behold greater misery still? a still greater object of compassion?





What have we here?



Don't you know me, Mr. Haswell?



I beg your pardon, Sir I beg your pardon but is it? is it? 



Why, Mr. Haswell if you don't know me, or won't know me, I shall certainly lose my senses.



O, I know you know you very well.



What, notwithstanding the alteration in my dress? there was a hard thing!



O, I'll procure you that again and, for all things else, I'm sure you will have patience.



O, no, I can't upon my soul I can't. I want a little lavender water My hair is in such a trim too! No powder no brushes 



I will provide you with them all.



But who will you provide to look at me, when I am dress'd?



I'll bring all your acquaintance.



I had rather you wou'd take me to see them.







Dear Mr. Haswell! Dear Sir! Dear friend! What shall I call you? Only say what title you like best, and I'll call you by it directly I always did love to please every body and I am sure at this time I stand more in need of a friend than ever I did in my life.



What has brought you here?



Typing to get a place.







Yes; and you see I have got one and a poor place it is! in short, Sir, my crime is said to be an offence against the state; and they tell me no friend on earth but you can get that remitted.



Upon my word, the pardons I have obtained are for so few persons and those already promised 



O, I know I am no favourite of yours you think me an impertinent, silly, troublesome fellow, and that my conduct in life will be neither of use to my country nor of benefit to society.



You mistake me, Sir I think such glaring imperfections as yours are, will not be of so much disadvantage to society as those of a lessfaulty man. In beholding your conduct, thousands shall turn from the paths of folly, to which fashion, custom, nature, (or call it what you will) impels them; therefore, Mr. Twineall, if not pity for your faults, yet a concern for the good effect they may have upon the world (shou'd you be admitted there again) will urge me to solicit your return to it.



Sir, you have such powers of oratory what a prodigious capital quality! and I doubt not but you are admired by the world equally for that 





Sir, the Sultan is arrived in the council chamber, and has sent me.




I come. Mr. Twineall, farewell for the present.




Now, what was that whisper about? Oh, heavens! perhaps my death in agitation. I have brought myself into a fine situation! done it by wheedling too!



Come, your business with Mr. Haswell being ended, return to your cell.




Certainly, Sir certainly! O, yes! How happy is this prison in having such a keeper as you! so mild, so gentle there is something about you, I said, and I thought the moment I had the happiness of meeting you here, Dear me! what wou'd one give for such a gentleman as him in England! You wou'd be of infinite service to some of our young bucks, Sir.



Go to your cell go to your cell.




This world wou'd be nothing without elegant manners, and elegant people in all stations of life.   Another whisper!




No; come this way. The judge is now stting in the hall, and you must come before him.



Before the judge, Sir O, dear Sir! what, in this deshabille? in this coat? Dear me! but to be sure one must conform to customs to the custom of the country where one is.   I beg your pardon, Sir wou'd not you chufe to go first?


















Sultan, I have out-run your bountry in my promises; and one poor, unhappy female  



No you named yourself the number to release, and it is fixed I'll not increase it.



A poor, miserable female  



Am I less miserable than she is? And who shall release me from my sorrows?



Then let me tell you, Sultan, she is above your power to oblige, or to punish. Ten years, nay more, confinement in a drear cell has been no greater punishment to her, than had she lived in a pleasant world without the man she loved.







And freedom offered she rejects with scorn, because he is not included in the blessing.



You talk of prodigies!   and yet I once knew a heart equal to this description.



Nay, will you see her? Witness yourself the fact?



Why do I tremble? My busy fancy presents an image  








Hah! have a care what tortures are you preparing for me? My mind shrinks at the idea.



Your wife you will behold whom you have kept in want, in wretchedness, in a damp dungeon, for these fourteen years, because you wou'd not listen to the voice of piry.  Dread her look her frown not for herself alone, but for hundreds of her fellow sufferers and while your selfish fancy was searching, with wild anxiety, for her you loved, unpitying, you forgot others might love like you.



O! do not bring me to a trial which I have not courage to support.



She attends without I sent for her to thank you for the favour she declines. Nay, be composed she knows you not cannot, thus disguised as the Sultan.




Oh! my Arabella! could I have thought that your approach wou'd ever impress my mind with horror! or that, instead of flying to your arms with all the love I bear you, terror and dread shou'd fix me a statue of remorse.





Here kneel, and return your thanks.



My Arabella! worn with grief and anguish!






  67you wou'd bestow, I own, and humbly thank you for.








But as I am now accustomed to confinement, and the idea of all the world can give, cannot inspire a wish that warms my heart to the enjoyment I supplicate permission to transfer the blessing you have offered, to one of those who may have friends to welcome their return from bondage, and so make freedom precious. I have none to rejoice at my release none to lament my destiny while a prisoner. And were I free, in this vast world (forlorn and friendless) 'tis but a prison still.



What have I done? 




Speak to him again. He repents of the severity with which he has caused his fellow creatures to be used. Tell him you forgive him.



Believe me, Emperor, I forgive all who have ever wronged me all who have ever caused my sufferings. Pardon you! Alas! I have pardoned even those who tore me from my husband! Oh, Sultan! all the tortures you have made me suffer, compared to such a pang as that did I say I had forgiven it? Oh! I am afraid afraid I have not yet.



Forgive it now, then, for he is restored.   Behold him in the Sultan, and once more seal his pardon.   Nay, pronounce it quickly, or my remorse for what you have undergone, will make my present tortures greater than any my cruelties have ever yet inflicted.



Is this the light you promised?   Dear precious light! Is this my freedom? to which I bind myself a
  68flave for ever.   Was I your captive? Sweet captivity! more precious than an age of liberty!



Oh, my Arabella! through the amazing changes of my fate, (which I will soon disclose) think not but I have searched for thee with unceasing care; but the blessing to behold you once again was left for my kind monitor alone to bestow.  Oh, Haswell! had I, like you, made others' miseries my concern, like you sought out the wretched, how many days of sorrow had I spared myself as well as others for I long since had found my Arabella.



Oh, Heaven! that weighest our sufferings with our joys, and as our lives decline seest in the balance thy blessings far more ponderous than thy judgements be witness, I complain no more of what I have endured, but find an ample recompence this moment.



I told you, Sir, how you might be happy.



 Take your reward (to a heart like yours, more valuable than treasure from my coffers) this signet, with power to redress the wrongs of all who suffer.



Valuable indeed!  




Oh, virtuous man! to reward thee are we made happy to give thy pitying bosom the joy to see us so, has Heaven remitted its intended punishment of continued separation.



Come, my beloved wife! come to my palace there, equally, my dearest blessing, as when the cottage gave its fewer joys and in him  we not only find our present happiness, but dwell securely on our future hopes for here, I vow, before he leaves our shores, I will adopt every measure he shall point out and that period of my life whereon he shall lay his censure,
  69that will I fix apart for penitence. 







An English prisoner, just now condemned to lose his head, one Henry Twineall, humbly begs permission to speak a few short sentences, his last dying words, to Mr. Haswell.



Condemned to lose his head? Lead me to him.



O, Sir, you need not hurry yourself it is off by this time, I dare say.







Yes, Sir we don't stand long about these things in this country I dare say it is off.



Lead me to him instantly.



O! 'tis of consequence, is it, Sir? if that is the case  









One more verse, gentlemen, if you please.



The time is expired.



One more, gentlemen, if you please.



The time is expired.





Oh! my dear Mr. Haswell!




What, in tears at parting with me? This is a compliment indeed!



I hope you take it as such I am sure I mean it as such. It kills me to leave you it breaks my heart; and I once flattered myself such a charitable, good, feeling, humane heart as you possess 



Hold! Hold! This, Mr. Twineall, is the vice which has driven you to the fatal precipice whereon you are and in death will you not relinquish it?



What vice, Sir, do you mean?



Flattery! a vice that renders you not only despicable, but odious.



But how has flattery been the cause?



Your English friend, before he left the island, told me what information you had asked from him, and that he had given you the direct opposite of every person's character, as a just punishment for your mean premeditation and designs.



I never imagined that amiable friend had sense enough to impose upon any body!



Yet I presume, he could not suppose fate would have carried their resentment to a length like this.



Oh! cou'd fate be arrested in its course!



You wou'd reform your conduct?



I wou'd I wou'd never say another civil thing to any body never never make myself agreeable again.



Release him here is the Sultan's signet.




Oh! my dear Mr. Haswell! never was compassion! never benevolence! never such a heart as yours! 



Sieze him he bas broken his contract already.



No, Sir No, Sir I protest you are an illnatured, surly, crabbed fellow. I always thought so, upon my word, whatever I have said.



And, I'll forgive that meaning, sooner than the other utter any thing but flattery Oh! never let the honest, plain, blunt English name, become a proverb for so base a vice. 



Where is the poor creature?





Oh! if his head is off, pray let me look at it? 



No, Madam, it is on and I am very happy to be able to tell you so. 



Dear Heaven! I expected to have seen it off! but no matter as it is on I am come that it may be kept on and have brought my Lord Flint, and Sir Luke, as witnesses.





Well, Madam, and what have they to say?



Who are we to tell our story to? There does not seem to be any one sitting in judgement. 



Tell it to me, Sir I will report it.



Why then, Mr. Haswell, as Ghosts sometimes walk and as one's conscience is sometimes troublesome I think Mr. Twineall has done nothing to merit death, and the charge which his Lordship sent in against him, we begin to think too severe but, if there was any false statement 



It was the fault of my not charging my
  72memory any error I have been guilty of, must be laid to the fault of my total want of memory.



And what do you hope from this confesfion?



To remit the prisoner's punishment of death to something less, if the Sultan will please to annul the sentence



Yes and grant ten or twelve years imprisonment or the Gallies for fourteen years or 



Ay, ay, something in that way.



For shame for shame Gentlement! the extreme rigour you shew in punishing a dissension from your opinion, or a satire upon your folly, proves to conviction, what reward you had bestowed upon the skilful flatterer.



Gentlemen and Ladies, pray why wou'd you wish me requited with such extreme severity, merely for my humble endeavours to make myself agreeable? Lady Tremor, upon my honour I was credibly informed, your ancestors were Kings of Scotland.



Impossible! you might as well say that you heard Sir Luke had distinguished himself at the battle of 



And, I did hear so



And he did distinguish himself; for he was the only one that ran away.







Yes, Sir, it did happen.



And go you, Mr. Twineall, into a field of battle, and I think it is very likely to happen again.



If Mr. Haswell has obtained your pardon, Sir, it is all very well but let me advise you to keep your sentiments on politics to yourself,
  73for the future as you value that pretty head of yours.



I thank you, Sir I do value it.





Aurelia, in this letter to me, has explained your story with so much compassion, that, for her sake, I must pity it too. With freedom to your father, and youself, the Sultan restores his forfeited lands and might I plead, Sir Luke, for your interest with Aureila's friends, this young man's filial love, shou'd be repaid by conjugal affection.



As for that, Mr. Haswell, you have so much interest at court, that your taking the young man under you protection besides, as Aurelia was sent hither merely to get a husband I don't see 



True, Sir Luke and I am afraid my father and mother will begin to be uneasy that I have not got one yet and I shou'd be very sorry to disobligethem.



No say rather, sorry to make me wretched. 






My Indian friend, have you received your freedom?



Yes and come to bid you farewell which I wou'd never do, had I not a family in wretchedness till my return for you shou'd be my master, and I wou'd be your slave. 



I thank you may you meet at home every comfort!



May you may you what shall I say?
  74 May you once in your life be a prisoner then released to feel such joy, as I feel now! 



I thank you for a wish, that tells me most emphatically, how much you think I have served you.



And, my dear Lord, I sincerely wish you may once in your life, have your head chopped off just to know what I shou'd have felt, in that fituation. 




Are all his countrymen as good as he?



No-no no-no not all but the worst of them are good enough to admire him.



Pray Mr. Haswell, will you suffer all these encomiums?



He must suffer them there are virtues, which praise cannot taint such are Mr. Haswell's for they are the offspring of a mind, superior even to the love of fame neither can they, through malice, suffer by applause, since they are too sacred to incite envy, and must conciliate the respect, the love, and the admiration of all.



