






GOOD Husband stay with me to Night and make
an end of the Holiday at home.



Peace, peace, and go Spin, for if I want
any Thread for my stitching, I will punish you by virtue of my
Sovereign Authority.



I warrant you: But you'l go to the Ale-house, spend your
Money, and get drunk, and come home like Old Nick, and use
one like a Dog.



How now Brazen-Face do you speak ill of the Govern∣ment?
I am King in my own House, and this is Treason against
my Majesty.



I don't understand your stuff, but prithee don't go to the
Ale-house.



Well then, I will not go to the Ale-house, I have made
an appointment with Sir Richard Lovemore's Butler, and am to be
Princely drunk in Punch at the Hall Place; we shall have a Bowl
big enough to swim in.



O Lord Husband, the new Lady they say will not suffer a
Stranger to come into her House, she grudges a draught of Small
Beer, and several of this Town have come Home with broken
Heads from her Ladiships own hands for but smelling Strong Beer
in her House.



A Pox on her for a Fanatick Jade, she has almost dis∣tracted
the good Knight, but she's abroad feasting with her Relati∣ons,
and will scarce come home to night, and we are to have
much Drink, a Fiddle and Gambals.



But her Fanatick Parson will disturb you.



If he does we will toss the Hypocrite in a Blanket, or
kick the sanctified Coxcomb to a Jelly.



O dear Husband let me go with you, wee'l be as merry as
the night's long.



Why how now you bold Bettress, what wou'd you be
carried to a company of Smooth-faced, Eating, Drinking, Lazy Ser∣vingmen;
Rogues whose nourishment runs all into Lechery? No,
you Jade, I will be no Cuckold.



I'm sure they wou'd make me welcom, you promised me I
shou'd see the House: Sir Richard and the Family have not been
there since you married and brought me to Town.



Why thou most audacious Strumpet, darst thou Dispute
with me? go home and Spin, or else my Strap will wind about
thy Ribs.




He that has the best Wife,
She's the Burthen of his Life,
But for her that will Scold and will Quarrel;
Let him cut her short
Of her Meat and her Sport,
And ten times a day hoop her Barrel.



We poor Women must be Slaves and never have any joy,
but you men run and ramble and take your swing.



Why you most Pestilent Baggage will you be hoopt? be
gone.



Well I must go.



Here now I think of it, here's six pence for you, get
Ale and Apples, stretch and puff thy self up with Lambs Wool, re∣joyce
and revel by thy self, be drunk and wallow in thy own Stye
like a Sow as thou art.




He that has a Wife, &c.





and other Women Servants.


I wou'd our blind Minstrel and our dancing Neighbours
were here that we may rejoyce a little while, our Termagant Lady
is abroad, I have made a most Sovereign Bowl of Punch, and I have
a good hoard of Wine and March Beer.



We had need rejoyce sometimes, but our devilish new La∣dy
will never suffer it when she knows it.



I will maintain it there's more mirth in a Gally than in
our Family, our Master Sir Richard is the worthiest Gentleman,
nothing but Goodness, Sweetness and Liberality.



But here's a House turn'd topsie turvy, from Heaven
to Hell since her coming hither.



We are all alike, none of us can scape her rage and fury.



His former Lady is a Saint in Heaven, and liv'd so on
Earth, all Mildness and Gentleness.



Ay, Rest her Soul, she was, but this is inspired with a
Legion of Devils, and one plaguy Non-Con Parson worse than all,
that makes her lay about her like a Fury.



I'm sure I always feel her in my Bones, she has an Instru∣ment
of Correction made of Whale-bone, and for fear I shou'd
forget her good usage, she refreshes my Memory every quarter of
an hour: if her Complexion don't please her, or she look yellow
in a morning, I'm sure to be laid on and look black and blue for't.



Pox on her, when I carry up her Breakfast I dare not come
within reach of her: I have some six broken Heads already. A Lady  4
quoth a! a Shee-Bear is a civiller Animal: she has robb'd me of
my Cunny-Skins, my Kitchin-Stuff, and all my Vails; and brought
a damn'd eating godly Fellow with her, that scarce will be content
with five Meals a day.



None of you have been used as I have.



That's because none of us had a Spade-Beard of a Foot
long.



I that have lived five and forty year in the House, and
had for twenty years preserv'd a reverent Beard, which made me
noted for Wisedom and Discretion through all the Countrey, and
she to demolish this poor Beard in an instant.



I beseech you, by what means did she depopulate and
waste your Fruitfull Chin?



Why it was ruin'd by Fire, with her own cursed hands
she sing'd it off; she said it always smelt of Brewis, and was a
Spunge that soak'd up more March Beer in a month than any six the
ablest Drunkards in the Hundred cou'd in a year: I sav'd nothing
but this same one Sprig that grew upon a Wart, and that by my
Naile.



What pity 'twas to lose such an emblem of Gravity and
Wisdome.



Ay, I am become a shame to my Neighbours and dare
not show my Chin before 'em: Oh that Beard, that poor Beard,
what Authority it had amongst 'em! I had e'ne as live she had
gelt me.



I believe thou had'st, thy Beard was of as much use
as any Implement about thee.



Methoughts he look'd like one of the old Patriarchs, in
the Arras I have seen an old Eastern King, in a Mortlack hanging
very much resembling his Phisnomy.



Oh Mrs. Iane you do my poor Beard too much honour,
but farewell dear Beard, I shall never see the like of Thee.



No, a man may as well hope to have two crops of Oak
Timber from the same place, as two such Beards from one Chin
in an Age.



Pish, what hurt does the loss of a Beard doe? I was ma∣king
a Shift for her, and she did not like my Lacing it down; she
turns the wrong end of her Fan, strikes me on the Mouth so hard,
that she beat out 2 of my Butter Teeth: A shame on her light Fin∣gers.



She makes the Coachman chain the Footmen to Posts,
whip 'em with Dog-whips, and stands by to see the Execution.



Heaven have mercy upon my poor Master, this devilish
Termagant Scolding Religious Woman will be the death of him,
I never saw a man so alter'd all the days of my Life.



There's a Perpetual motion in that Tongue of hers, and a
damn'd shrill Pipe enough to break the Drum of a man's Ear, I
wonder my Master does not kick her and her Parson out of doors.



Her Parson, her Weaver; I believe he never had any
Orders, but an inward motion from his Stomach, which inclines
him to eat more than a Wolf, and this motion is an inward Call.



(within.) Why, Cook Iohn, Cook, where art thou?



I'm here, this is his outward Call; now is he almost fa∣misht
for his second Afternoons Luncheon.



Why, Iohn, why dost thou neglect me? my Spirits are
exhaled, evaporated in Study and Labour; I feel as it were a
strange kind of emptifulness, I have not eat this two hours,



A Pox on him, set him fast by the Teeth or else hee'l
disturb us.



I have a couple of cold Chickens, some Westphalia Bacon,
and Christmas Pyes.



For your Christmas Pyes I defie them, they are abominable
Scandalous, and Idolatrous, they savour of Rome, they are so ma∣ny
Fortifications wherein the Whore of Babylon intrenches her self,
I will down with them, I will beat them down, my zeal will not
suffer such Popery in this House; ye are my Flock, I will see that
that Wolf the Whore does not prey upon you and devour you:
down, down I say with all her Outworks and High-places, her
Superstitious and Idolatrous Structures and Buildings, whether in
Minc'd Pyes or otherwise: Your Christmas is an Idol, a very Idol
truly, have I not seen him in a Profane Mask, in the Habit of an
old Man with a long Spade-beard, and the deluded Rout have
worshipped and fallen down before him? your Bagpipes are as Pa∣gan
Organs, and your Wassalers lewd and filthy Choristers unto
Satan, I may not bear these Rags of the Smock of that Scarlet
Whore, my Spirit rises, my Zeal boileth and bubbleth up as it
were within me, I am transported with a holy Fury: But do you
hear Iohn Cook send up those Chickens.







Yea both with some Westphalia Bacon, and do you hear,
Iohn? a Tart; and you Mr. Chipp let me have a Bottle of Sack, a
Bottle of Ale and a Bottle of March Beer, by help of this refresh∣ment
I shall be able to hold out till Supper. Fare ye well till that
time.




What shall we do with this base sniveling Hypocrite? he'll
spoil our merry meeting.



'Ill warrant you 'tis but putting out the Candles and
we'll make him weary of his Canting, when e're he comes a∣mong
us.





So his Provision's gone up.



He's fast by the teeth for one hour.





O welcome, welcome, here's to our wish, the Minstrel
and our Neighbour! Oh old Acquaintance, Goodman Iobson, how
dost thou?



By my troth I am sharp set towards the Punch, and
am now come with a firm Resolution though a Poor Cobler to be
as drunk as a Lord, I am a true English heart, and look upon
Drunkenness as the best part of the Liberty of the Subject.



Why did you not bring your Wife with you?



Because here are Waggs, young Rogues, and a Man
may be a Cuckold before the King's Health can go round.



Iobson we'll have a Catch, strike up Blind Will: Ah
Iobson I have heard thee outsing the Lark or Nightingal, thou art
heard above all the Church, let there be never so many Voices,
thine will still be predominant.



Ay and he holds out the Note of one Verse till the Clark
begins to sing the next, he has a pure Wind.



Ay I'm pretty good at a Psalm, I have some reason for it,
I have stich'd Soles this thirty years to those Psalms you spake of.



Come, let us fetch out our Bowl of Punch in solemn
Procession. Now let us have a Catch in honour of Punch.

They bring out the Bowl of Punch singing a Catch, and dan∣cing
about it, after which they sit down and drink.
I.While you Court a damn'd Vintner for such nasty Liquor,
As worse was ne're swallow'd by dull Countrey Vicar,
And the insolent Rascal will draw what he pleases,
While Boys you may kick 'em when Masters y'intreat 'em,
And from Drawers you up into Aldermen beat 'em;
But they get your Money and you get Diseases.

II.Stumme Brimstone, Lime, Arsnick, fond Drunkards bewitch,
While the villanous Host not content to be rich,
By Brewing and Poyson sells that by false measure,
No Liquor like Punch gives delight to the Soul,
When we drown all our Cares ith' bottom' oth' Bowl,
Sincere are our Ioys and immortal our pleasure.

III.We brew for our selves and we know each ingredient,
As well for our health as our mirth is expedient,
And who ever drinks Punch shall live merry and long,
It spurs up Iade nature and quickens the blood,
Which if it finds bad it ne're fails to leave good;
And while we drink Punch we shall ever be young.



And after that I'le bring up the Rear with a swinging Tur∣key-pye,
and a mighty Gammon, besides much Pyes and other
Appurtenances belonging to our Office.



Here's our Master's Health in a Bumper. Huzzah.



Our Ladies Confusion in another. Huzzah.


Enter Noddy, knawing the Legg of a Chicken.



What meaneth this Lewd, Profane, and Babylonish noise,
ye Popish Locusts, ye Idolatrous Vipers, this sanctified Place is be∣come
a Denn of Wicked ones. Thou Blind misleader of the blind,
with thy Lewd Anti-Christian Squeaks, avant, avant, I say Belze∣bub,
avant.

He kicks and beats the blind Fidler. They put out the Can∣dles
and toss Noddy one from another and beat him.
Hold, hold, what do ye mean?
Ye Sons of Darkness I defy you,
I can suffer for the truth, I am a witness.


Blind him and gagg him.



Bind him hand and foot.



I will flee away from farther Persecution, Vipers my
Lady will come, she will to your Confusion.



And as you like this do you come again.



A Pox on him; to our Business now he is gone. The
King and all the Royal Family in a Bumper. Huzzah.




Are you ready for your Collation?



No, no, we'll have a bout at Blindmans-buff and a Dance
first.



Ay, ay, come I'm old Dogg at that, blind me, perhaps
I'm as great a Master at Blindmans-Buff as any one in Europe, no
dispraise to any man.





O Heaven and Earth! what's here within my House! is
Hell broke loose! what Troops of Friends is here, sirrha you im∣pudent
Rascal?




My dear be patient 'tis Christmas, a time of Mirth,
of Jollity, it has always been the Custome of my House to give
my Servants Liberty in this Season, and all my Country Neigh∣bours
  9
used to meet, and with their innocent Sports divert themselves.



Prithee hold thy prating, meddle with your own mat∣ters,
can't I tell how to govern my own house without your put∣ting
in an Oar? shall I ask you leave to correct my own Servants?




Good Lady, I thought this had been my House, and
those my Servants, and those my Tennants.



Did I bring a Fortune to be thus abused, and snub'd be∣fore
my Servants, do you call my Authority in Question you inhu∣mane
Monster? Look you to your Doggs, your Kites and filthy
Cattel, your Faulconers, Huntsmen, and your nasty Grooms a∣broad,
I'll make you know 'tis my Province to govern here, nor
will I be controul'd by e're a Hunting, Hauking, unthinking Knight
in Christendome.




A Pox upon all Fools that shall marry for money, I
am married to a continual Tempest, Strife and Noise, Canting and
Hypocrysie are the daily Portion I have with her; but I'll not bear
this long, if I by force oppose her, she falls into fits, and raves
worse than any one Bedlam.



You stinking Scoundrels, and you filthy Jades, I'll teach
you to Junkit thus and steal my Provision, I shall be devoured by
you.



I thought Madam we might be merry once upon a
Holyday.



Holyday, you Popish Curr, is one Day more Holy than
another? and if it be you'l be drunk upon't, you Rogue, that by
your late Demolish'd Beard, thought your self an Example to the
Family, is this your Example?


Come you Minx, you impudent Flurt are you gigging after an a∣bominable
Fiddle? all Dancing is whorish, Huswife.



O Murder, murder, she has pull'd off both my Ears.




Madam, for shame, remember your Sex and Quality.



Remember your own fools head, shall you instruct me?





Madam, I rejoyce that your Ladyship is return'd.



Oh good and holy man, how came my Family in my ab∣sence
thus Debauch'd, Drunken, Profane and Superstitious?



When my Ears were first offended with these Lewd
Noises, I came down grieved in Spirit, and rebuked them, com∣manding
them to surcease from these Superstitious and Idolatrous
Rites, which they Sacrifice to that Idol, that beastly Idol, old
Father Christmas, and while my Spirit was full of Godly Cha∣stisement,
they did extinguish the Lights, surrounded and
hemm'd me in, and these Instruments of Satan did buffet me even
unto great anguish, and I am sore bruised in Body.



Alack good man! Oh ye Spawn of Belial the Fry of the
bottomless Pitt, how now sirrah, who, are you in the Bumble you
Buzzard?


She takes the Parson's Cane and beats all the
Company, Jobson is stealing by.



I am an honest Psalm-singing Cobler, Madam; if your
Ladyship wou'd go to Church, you wou'd hear me above 'em all
there.



I'll try thy Voice now.




Nounz what a Pox, what a Devil ails you?



O Prosane Wretch, wicked Varlet.



Thou Son of the old Serpent, avant thou Frog of the
Lake of Darkness.



Avant thou Coxcombly Son of a Whore of the new
Light.



Be gone, Avant, Be gone from within these Walls.




What will you wrestle a Fall with me? Come on. Take
that Lusty Lug you Rogue of a Saint, with a pound of Ear of each
side.


Jobson gives Noddy a Fall,
and lugs him by the Ears.


Impudent Villain, has he not hurt the Good man?



He hath very much disorder'd my two Ears, and bruised
me exceedingly.




You deserve it for a medling Coxcomb, go to your
Book you ignorant Fop and roade, and rely more upon good Sense,
and less upon your new Light.



Oh wicked vile wretch, was ever poor Lady so miserable
so horridly miserable in a Brute to her Husband as I am, I that am
so Pious, so Good and Religious a Woman?



She is an holy, a sanctified Vessel truly.





He that has the best Wife,
She's the Burthen of, &c.


And some ten times a day hoop her Barrel.


O Rogue, Scoundrel, Villain.








Are you gone, Sirrah? I'll rout the rest of you: I'll spoil
your squeaking Trebble.

She lays about her, they all run, she breaks the blind
Fidler's Fiddle about his Head.


O Murder, murder, I am a dark man, which way shall
I get hence? Oh Heaven! She has broken my Fiddle, and undone
me, my Wife and Children.




Here Poor Fellow come this way, take your Staff,
there, there's money to buy two such Fiddles; go, there's your
way.



Heaven preserve your Worship, bless you sweet Master,
here's a Change indeed, little did I think to live to find such Do∣ings
at this Hall-Place.


Two Wassalers come to the Door singing a Wassal Song.


You are very Liberal, must my Estate maintain you in
your Profuseness?




Go up to your Closet, Pray and compose your mind.



Oh wicked Fellow to bid me pray.




A Man cannot be compleatly curs'd without a
Wedding, but there is such a thing as separate maintenance and a
Joynter-House, which she to morrow shall try, by the help of Hea∣ven,
I will no longer bear this nusance in my House. Here, where
  12
are my Servants, what must they be frighted from me? within
there, Chipp, come here and see who knocks there.




Within there, where are my Sluts, ye Drabs, ye Queans:
Lights there.






Sir it is a Doctour that lives ten mile off with his man,
he practises Physick, and is an Astronomer and a Cunning-man,
your Worship knows him, he can make Almanacks, and help men
to their Goods again.




Sir I am benighted, 'tis so dark I cannot see my hand, I
cannot possibly reach home, and therefore knowing the Bounty of
your Worships Hospitality, I desire the favour to be harbour'd un∣der
your Roof this night.



Out of my house you lewd Conjurer, you Witch, you Ma∣gician.



Avant thou Instrument of Satan, I defie thee and all
thy Works, thou wicked Sorcerer avant.



If you stay in my house, you shall be worse used here,
than your Predecessour Dr. Lamb was in the City.



Here's a turn, here's a change, which if I have any Art
she shall smart for.




You see Friend the Case is alter'd with me, I am
not Master of my House, but e're to morrow this time I'll be Mo∣narch
here: go down the Lane friend, and about half a Quarter
of a mile off, you'l see a Coblers house, stay there some little time,
and I'll send my Man that shall conduct you to a Tennants house,
who shall take care of you.



Thanks good Sir, I'm your humble Servant, but you
Noncon with your surious She Disciple there, shall have some proofs
of my Magick Art this Night.





Come Lady you and I must have some Conference.



Yes I will have Conference and Reformation too in this
house, or else I'll turn thee inside outwards.




My mind misgiveth me, these Varlets have left some
good thing in the Bowl there, but hold, is it not a Wassaling Super∣stitious
Spice-Bowl, let me see, hah! it is very comfortable and
edifieth, there's a huge Island of Tost, Nutmeg and Sugar, I will
attack it, it is Chearing, I have a Paper with some Parmazan in
my Pocket, which will eat very well with it, this is also a pleasing
Liquor, I will drink plentifully of it and eat Tost exceedingly: ah
my Spirits are cheared as it were, and are excited unto Joy and
Gladness.





Oh that sweet tooth'd Lickerish Hypocrite who is always
eating, and looks as if he had never eaten.



His meat does himself no more good than his Doctrine
does others, stand close, you'l see him devour that Punch-Tost,
hee'l never be contented without all in the Bowl.



It will disguise him most wickedly, and make him as
drunk as one of the Profane.



It doth begin to invade my upper Region, my Pericra∣nium
doth seem to be somewhat inclined unto Giddiness, hah the
Room appeareth to turn round.








'Tis a very seasonable time, I'm just going to knock to
Supper, and my Lady won't eat without his Grace.



Go quickly, he's in a sweet Pickle for a Grace of a
quarter of an hour long as he used to make 'em.




Where am I? am I in the Buttery or my own Closet, a
most excellent Spice I'll promise you.





Where are you Mr. Noddy? Supper is on the Table, and
my Lady stays for your Grace.



Is it Supper time say you, now I think of it I begin to
be hungry.



Pray Sir make hast my Lady stays for you?



What is the matter with me? I think my Feet are asleep,
I cannot use them, my Eyes are somewhat dim too, which is the
way?



Ay the Rogue hears my Master intends to turn over a
new Leaf, and he has a mind to wind about, but this shan't serve
his turn, he's a Fanatick Rogue still.






Pray Sir mend your Draught if you please, you are very
welcome Sir.



Thank you heartily good Woman, come I'll give you
some requital, I'll tell you your fortune?



Oh! Pray do Sir, I never had my Fortune told me in my
Life.



Let me behold the Lines of your Face?



I'm afraid 'tis none of the cleanest Sir, I have been about
dirty work Sir all this day.



Come, 'tis a good Face be not asham'd of it, you shall
show it in greater Places suddenly.



Oh dear, I Sir? I shall be asham'd mightily, I want Da∣city
when I come before great Folks.



You must be confident I charge you, and fear nothing,
there is much happiness attends you.



Oh me, this is a rare man Heaven be thanked.



To morrow before Sun Rise you shall be the happiest
Woman in this County.



How, by to morrow? Alack a day, how can this be?



No more shall you be troubled with a Surly Husband, that
shall Rail, call you names and strap you.



Lord how came he to know that? he has a Familiar: in∣deed
my Husband is somewhat rugged, and in his Cupps will beat
me but it is not much, He's an honest painfull Man and I let him
have his way, pray Sir take the tother Cup of Ale.



Thank you, to morrow you shall be the richest Woman
in the Hundred, and ride in your own Coach.



O Father now you jeer me.



By Heaven I do not, but mark my words, be confident
and bear all out, or worse will follow.





Where is this Queane, here Nell, what a Pox are you
drunk with your Lambs-wool?



Oh Husband! here's the rarest man, he has told me my
Fortune.



Pox on you, and has planted my Fortune too, a Lusty
pair of horns upon my head, has he?



Thy Wife's a vertuous Woman, and thoul't be happy.



Come out ye hang Doggs, ye Juglers, ye cheating Vil∣layns,
must I be Cuckolded by such Rogues as you are, Mackma∣ticians
and Almnack-makers?



Prithee peace Husband, we shall be rich, and have a Coach
of our own.



A Coach! a Cart, a Wheele-Barrow you Jade, by 'th
mackin She's drunk, bloody drunk, get you to bed you Strumpet.




Oh mercy on us, is this a taste of my good Fortune?



You had better not have touch'd her you surly Rogue.



Out of my House you Rogues, or I'll run my Nall up to
the handle in your Buttocks?



Farewell you Paltry Slave?



Get you out you Rogues?





What? Hoh my Spirits, Nadir and Abishog, hoh!









Praesto, all my Charms attend:
'Ere this Night shall have an End,
You shall this Cobler's Wife transform,
And to the Knights the like perform;
This bed the Cobler's Wife I ll charm,
The Knight's into the Cobler's Arm;
Let the Delusion be so strong,
That none shall know the Right from wrong.
The Non-con Parson so affright,
That he may ever Rue this Night;
Scare him from his Little Wits,
And his Hypocritick Fits.



All this, this Night we will perform,
In a Whirl-wind, in a Storm.
In Lightning and in Thunder fly,



And muster all the Clouds i'th Sky;
Attend me till the Dawn of Day,
And then you may go sport and play.
Hold, here comes Sir Richard's Man: he'll guide us to our Lod∣ging,
let us meet him to Horse.


Richard, Mr. Rowland, Mr. Longmore.





Well my dear Friends, though you have found my
House in some disorder, I cannot but rejoyce to see you, the sight
of Friends will lighten great afflictions.



Some years have past, since we have been merry toge∣ther.



We have not met these five years: Marriage, Travel, Busi∣ness,
and your Retirement, Sir Richard, have thus separated us.




Us that for several years, of pleasant Frolique
Youth were ne're asunder.



I call methinks a pleasant Season back, here's a brimmer to
our old Acquaintance.








But now 'tis late, we keep you out of Bed from your new
Wife.




A Wife! Oh Friends take warning, marry not, I
say, do not marry.



Why? you have a handsome Lady and a rich one.




Oh Gentlemen, I would be glad to have the Witch
of Endor, were she alive instead of her; I am link'd to an Amo∣zonian
Devil, such a Thalestris, such a perpetual Fixen, and a
Shrew, such a Tongue, that 'twould be a Blessing to be lodged in
London, with a Silver-Smith under me, a Brazier over head, a
Trunk-maker and a Peuterer on either side of me, and all of 'em
Industrious Rogues to boot; a Blessing I say in Comparison of her
continual Clamour, all those Noises in consort are soft and gentle
Harmony to her one single Voice.



Methought she looked somewhat proudly, her Counte∣nance
between Scorn and Anger.




She wish'd crooked Pins in every bit of meat you
eat, and Poyson in every Glass of Wine you swallow'd.



Say you so, 'tis time for us to leave you then.




No, fear not, this Night is the last of her short Reign,
I have sent for her Father to dine with me to morrow, and after
dinner I will pack her away with her separate maintenance, and
then we'll spend the Christmas in Freedom, Mirth and Jollity,
and I am overjoy'd you are here to be Witnesses of my Procee∣dings.





Sir, my Lady commanded me to tell you, She'l rout you
and your Lewd Companions, if you come not away presently, I
hope you'l pardon me.





Tell her I come, I am sent for. But here's the o∣ther
Brimmer to my Deliverance.








I lay my whole misfortune now before you, I have
not onely married an Indefatigable Scold, but a Phanatick into
bargain; nay, I have married her Chaplain too, who was, I take
a Weaver, and ordain'd himself by virtue of outward Grace and
inward Knavery, have a care I warn you of a Bigot or Zealous  18
Woman, for be she never so wicked, she will be always so full of
spiritual Pride, She'll think you a Limb of Satan.



'Tis a just observation.



And for a Chaplain, I would as soon have a Russian in my
House, for he must Govern or the Wife will Rage.




Right, Then, my Friends, I conjure ye have a care
of separate maintenance, a damn'd invention to make Whores and
cursed Wives as bad, I wou'd not marry the Queen of Sheba were
she alive, upon those Conditions.



All this daily Experience tells us.




A Curse of an Owle that must try and would not
trust Experience; but at his own cost another Point is, for I am
bound in Charity to warn you, have a care of an ill born or ill
bred Woman, there is as much in the Straine, as in Horses or
Doggs, we all take after our kind.



You are in the Right of it, I have not heard a better
Preaching.




And for breeding, though almost all Women are
Fools, yet those that are well bred, by the help of that will behave
themselves with some Discretion and Good manners at least, and
now in what a Case am I, that am under all these Curses which I
warn you from? how irksome must it be to me, who with my
first dear Wife, that St. in Heaven, had all the happiness that man
on Earth was capable of?



'Tis hard, but like to be as short.




One more to the memory of my former Wife, a
Brimmer to help to dround my sorrow for this.



Let it go round: we knew her.



She deserv'd all honour.




Now shame upon you and your filthy Companions, I'll
make your Glasses and your Bottles fly, and that Lewd Minister of
your Debauchery, your Butler I'll rout him, for not bringing me
the Key of the Cellar a Rascal.






Your Pardon, we are going.



Going? yes, to make one another drunk and sott all Night
about it, ye may be ashamed ye Beasts, why do I call you Beasts,
Beasts, I scorn to be drunk like you.




This Gentlemen is my sweet Lady.



Gentlemen! your fellow Scotts, your guzling Drunkards,
get you to bed ye Spunges?




Light the Gentlemen, your Fires are ready, you
see I am under Correction sweet Princess.

If you in one, would summe up every Curse,
Take such a Spowse for better and for worse.
The End of the first Act.




Butler, Cook, Servingman. Disguis'd.


WEE have had a hard Tug to give these Gentle∣men's
men their Belly's full.



But at last we have left 'em quickly up tosome Tune.



I am Bouzy and right for mischief; let's execute our
design upon Non-con.



Have at him, are your Jack-chanes and humming Tops
ready?



They are, I have 'em here, he must be drunk with
a Pox to him, and cou'd not say Grace.



A Curse on him, he stagger'd against my Side-Table,
and brake twenty shillings worth of flint Glasses. And though we
all deposed against his Drunkenness, our Pious Lady call'd us per∣jur'd
Rogues, and said he had eaten some thing that did not agree
with him.



And when we cou'd not get him to himself, my
Lady said it was an Apoplexy.



Ay, and made me heat a Frying-Pan red hot, to hold o∣ver
his Pate; from which she had made the hair be shav'd off.



Nay She has imploy'd all her skill in Physick upon him,
She has laid a huge Caustick-Plaister between his Neck and Shoul∣ders
to raise blisters, which will make him roar before morning.



His Head's all raw with the singeing, if he had not begun
to roar, I belive She would have Carbonado'd him, for his Apo∣plectick
Drunkenness.



What Sport it will be when he wakes! he'll wonder
what the Devil they have done to him, he'll be plauguy sore.



Now he has almost slept out his first sleep, he'll wake half
sober, devilish sick, and in paine, and 'twill be a fit time to begin
our Persecution upon him.



I am afraid we shall make him distracted with the Fright.



If we make him mad he may get some wit by the bargain,
he's now so dull a Rogue that any alteration wou'd be for the best.



Come put on the shapes.



Here, the Dogs will fit me, Iohn Cook shall be the
Bear, and you shall represent great Belzebub himself.



Agreed, hang on your Chains, list how the Rogue
sports like a Sackbut, let's withdraw into our Tyring-Room, and
then Enter.




Mr. Chip, why Butler Chip, I say some small Beer, give
me an Ocean of small Beer, I will swim in small Beer.



He's between sleeping and waking, now to our Work.



Mercy on me where have I been? I am all on Fire, and
my head all burnt, is the Bed or the Room on Fire? fire, fire, fire,
hah Heaven what Noise is that! hah it is Satan verily, what Friends
are those in Chains? Oh Faith, Faith! where
art thou? I am frail, frail, even as one of the They set the hum∣ming Tops a going, then rattle their Chains.
wicked. Oh! mercy, mercy, how, I dissolve,
who are ye, in the Name of Heaven? speak,
what will they do? will they fetch me from
hence? Oh Satan! sweet Satan, dear Satan,
spare me, thou mistakest me, tempt me not, I am not Righteous,
I am wicked, yea even as one of the Profane.
I am an Hypocrite truly, a zealous Hypocrite
verily: Oh spare me, oh! oh! sweet Satan,
dear Satan spare me.
They pull all the
Clothes off the Bed.





This is enough in the dark, now let him behold ye?



Oh, oh, I conceive there is a Light now
in the Room, let me see if I dare open my Eyes:He brings in a Light.
Oh Heaven what Friend is this comes to me? it is
like a Dog, oh! oh! I conjure thee, Friend! say The Serving Man in his Dogs shape creeps to the Bed.
what thou art; in the Name of Heaven, if thou
beest a Dog speak, oh, oh, what's here a Bear?
avant, avant, O Good Satan forbear, oh what's
  22
here the Chief Devil! I dare not see any more, oh sweet Belzebub,
spare me, mercy good Satan.

The Cook lyes down on the Bed like a Beare, Noddy roares yet lowder, and shrinks under the Clothes and speaks.


Art thou a true sear'd Hypocrite?



Yea I am, I am.



Falsely zealous, and truly seditious?



Oh, oh, I, I am Sir.



Most immoderately given to thy Gut?



Yes, yes, my great delight is in Creature comforts.



The chief motive to thy Zeal, those Creature comforts,
thou get'st by thy Hypocroisie.



Oh, oh! yes verily.



By this thou hast committed Carnality with Elders
Wives and Daughters; and hast been much given to Concupiscence.



'Tis true, most exceedingly.



You use not Copulation with the wicked, for fear of
Scandal?



No, I engender onely with the Righteous: Good Sir,
have done, I am half dissolv'd.



By this thou get'st thy self made Executor and Trustee.



Oh yes, it is the chief end of my Profession to prey on
Orphans.



Oh Rogue! ha what a dreadfull Thunder-Clap was that.




What a storm is this arising?




Gods body what a Clap was there, it shook the House.



Come let us be gone, we have tormented him e∣nough.



No, no, this storm will help us better to affright him.



The Rogue shall no longer rail at auricular Confession,
who, has confessed as he thinks to the Devil.


Nadir rises with a great Thunder-Clap and Appear∣eth
to them.


Oh! I am almost dead, sure the Fiends are gone, and
have carried this end of the Building with them at that last Clap.




Come, come 'tother bout.









Hah Tom! what's this? we are four now.



Why Ned? we were but three, ha! one, two, three,
four?



Ha Iohn! what's the meaning of this? who is this?



Nay, what a Pox know I? I am sure we were but three,
we are increased one in Number.



Foh, what a stink of Brimstone's here.
The Spirit is placing a Toad upon a plate, the Spirit goes to Noddy, he eats a Toad, and on his Fork presents Noddy with another.



Let me see, what is he a doing?



There is silence, now let me peep out. Oh Heaven!



Here Parson eat this Toad, here will you eat this Toad?



Oh Heaven what's this! my Hair begins to stand on End.



Eat this Toad I say.



Oh, no good Satan, I hate a Toad, it is too like Fish,
and I cou'd never endure Fish, because the Papists eat so much.



Who will eat a Toad?

Nadir turns him to the Company, and Fire flashes about him


Butler. Cook. Serv. Man.
Oh the Devil, the Devil, oh! oh!


Cook, Butler, Serv. Man Re-enter.






The Devil, the Devil.



If ever I fright any Body again, may I suffer the
Strappado.





What noises are these? here are Thieves in my House;
what, ho where are my Servants?



Here Sir, we are got up, there have been most horrible
Disturbances in the Parson's Chamber, he roars like a furious Bull
with the Dog about him, listen.



The Devil, the Devil: Murder, help, help.




Hang him the Rogue's drunk still, is it he that has
disturb'd the House?


Noddy comes running in roaring with a Blanket about him.


Oh the Devil, the Devil, avoid thou Tempter.




What is the matter here?



Oh Sir Richard, we have been so disturb'd with Noises,
we thought some Rogues had got into your House, and were com∣mitting
a Robbery.




It's nothing but a Drunken Zealot, that has been
troublesome in his Cupps, and he has disturb'd the House.



Drunk! I defy thee and all thy works.



Ha, what Apparition is that?








I shall soon make your Apparition vanish.



I have seen a Vision this Night.




What of Malt and Hops, Punch and Stratsbury
Brandy, or a Fools-head in a Looking-glass? take him and lock
him into his Chambers.



Oh for Heaven's sake! 'tis haunted with Devils, I have
been tormented all Night: They have laid a Plaister of melted
Btimstone upon my Shoulders, and singed my Head with sulphu∣rous
Flames, oh the Devil, the Devil!





You shall disturb the House no more to Night: Gen∣tlemen,
I am sorry that this Phanatick Preacher should disturb
you, he was drunk last Night and fancies he's haunted with Devils,
he's nothing but frighted with the Thunder and Lightning, at this
time of the Winter.



Which has been the strangest I ever heard, I thought the
House had fallen down, or at least part of it.



Such Thunder in this Winter Season is prodigious, me∣thinks
it shou'd fright the Women out of their Wits.




I cou'd not wake my sweet Lady, She lay as if She
were dead, I believe it is her property to be silent in a storm, and
ever tempestuous in a Calm.




See what's a Clock by the Pendulum.




'Tis within less than half an hour of five.



'Tis almost time to think of hunting: you told us we
should see your Harriers run.




Let's to our Chambers and rest an hour or two;
we have Game just by.



With all our Hearts.




Bid the Grooms be ready, Butler, Do you call us;
and Cook be ready with a Breakfast, come Gentlemen our way is
the same.






Well met, 'tis time we now be gone,
Already all our Work is done;
The Transformation's wrought so sure,
The Doctour's time it shall endure.
The Lady's in the Cobler's Hutt,
The Cobler's Wife to'th Knight is put;
And we defie the sharpest Sight,
E're to distinguish which is Right.



Stall, his Bed in sight of it.


What has the Devil been abroad to Night? I never heard
such Thunder-Claps and such a Storm, I thought my little House
wou'd have flown away. But now all is clear, and 'tis a fine Star-light
Morning. Come I'll to work: Winters Thunder is Summers
wonder.


  26In Bath a wanton Wife did dwell,
As Chaucer be did write;
Who wantonly did spend her Days
In many a fond Delight.
Vpon a time sore Sick she was,
And at the length did Dye:
Her Soul at last at Heavens Gate
Did knock most mightily.


Then down came Adam to the Gate,
Who knocketh there quoth he?
I am the Wife of Bath she said,
Who fain wou'd come to thee.
Thou art a Sinner Adam said,
And here no place can'st have:
Alack for you good Sir she said,
Go Gipp you doating Knave.



How now? what impudent Ballad-singing Rogue's that,
that dare wake me out of my sleep? I'll have thee flead thou
Rascall.



Why? what a Pox, does this Jade talk in her sleep, or is
she drunk still.



I will come In in spite, she said,
Of all such Churls as thee:
Thou art the cause of all our Pain,
Our Woe and Misery.


  27Thou first brokest the Commandements,
In pleasure of thy Wife.
When Adam heard her tell this Tale,
He ran away for Life.



Why Villain, Rascall, Screech-Owle; a worse Noise than a
Dog hung in the Pales, or a Hog in a great Wind. Here where are
my Servants? come and hamstring the Rogue.




Why, how now you saucy Jade, you confounded Quean,
you must be drunk with Conjurers, you shall have mony for
Lambs-wool, you whoreson Drab.



Death! what Dog is this? where's my Bell? I can't find
it to ring, where's my Servants? I'll toss the Dog in a Blanket.



She is asleep sure, and all this is a Dream; the Conjurer
told her she shou'd keep a Coach, and she is dreaming of her Equi∣page,
ha! ha!




Why Husband, Sir Richard do you hear this Insolence?



Husband! Sir Richard! what a Pox has she Knighted
me? my Name is Zekel too, here's a jest indeed!



Hah he's gone, he's not i'th Bed, Oh Heaven! where am
I? foh, what favour is this in my Nostrils! here are stinking Le∣ther
Breeches, and a Lether Apron, here are Canvas Sheets and fil∣thy
ragged Curtins, a Beastly Rug and Flock-Bed: am I awake?
or is all this Dream? what Rogue is that? Sirrah! where am I?
who brought me hither? Rogue! what Rascall are you?



This is most amazing, I never heard such words from
her, so God save me, if I take my strap, I'll make you know your
Husband, and teach you a little better manners, you saucy Drab.



Oh astonishing impudence! you my Husband! I'll have
you hang'd you Rogue, I'm a Lady sirrah, let me know who gave
me a sleeping Potion, and convey'd me hither.



A Sleeping Potion, a Pox on you, you drunken Jade, you
had a sleeping Potion, has not your Lambs-wool done working
yet?



Where am I? where has my damn'd villanous Husband
put me? why, Iane, Lettis, where are my Queans?



Ha, ha, ha, what does she call her Maids? the Conjurers
have not onely made her drunk, but mad too.



He talks of Conjurers, sure I am bewitch'd, ha! what
Cloaths are here? here's a Linsey-woolsey Gown, a Callicoe Hood,
and a Red-Bays Petticoat, and Shoes with Hobnails, I'm remov'd
out of my own House by Witchcraft, what shall I do, or what
will become of me?



Heark the Hunters and the merry Horns abroad, why
Nell you lazy Jade! 'tis Break of Day, come to work, come, come
and spin you Drab, or I'll swinge your lazy Hide for you; Pox on
you must I be working two hours before you in a Morning?



Why Sirrah, you impudent Villain, do you know me?



Know you, yes, and will make you know me before I
have done with you.



I am Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, how came I here?



Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, no not so bad yet, She's
a damn'd stingy Phanatick Whore, and plagues every one that
comes near her, the whole Country curses her.




Nay then I'll hold no longer, you Rogue, you insolent
Villain have at you.



This is more than e're I saw by her, She's mad sure, I
never had an ill word from her before, come Strap I'll try your
mettle; I'll fetch you out of your Drunken Fitts you maukin,
come, come on Huswife.




Oh murder, murder! I'll pull you throat out, I'll tear
your Eyes out, I'm a Lady sirrah, Sir Richard Lovemore will
hang you for this.





Why Neighbour Iobson, what is the matter? I was
going to fodder my Cattle, and hear murder cry'd here.



Oh Fellow, do you know Sir Richard Lovemore?



Ay marry do I well enough, he's my Landlord, he's
as honest a Gentleman as any is in fourty mile o'his head.



Prithee Neighbour don't mind her, She was drunk yes∣terday
with Conjurers, She's mad still, and I can't get her up to her
Spinning-work.



Oh help me, I'm Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, convey'd
hither I know not how, to be tormented and lamed by this out∣ragious
Villain.



Did not I tell you she was mad, come out you Jade, I'll
fetch you to your Spindle.



Hold you Neighbour, this is a pretty Whirlegig? I
know my Lady right well and Goody Iobson too, ah Goody Iobson I'm sorry to see this, you are mad indeed, my Lady Quo she.




What a Pox, do you think I don't know my own Wife?
that mole under her left Eye?



A Lady? no Neighbour Iobson, thou'rt ten times a bet∣ter
Woman no Dispraise to her, She's the hearteats Jade that e're
came i'th Parish, the whole Country curses her.



Oh he has bruised me, and larned me, and I am almost
dead with the stench of this filthy place, either I am removed by
Enchantment, or they have given me Opium, and in a dead sleep
they have brought me hither, are you in earnest? look on me, do
you not know my Lady Lovemore? I'll give you a hundred pound
and carry me home.




Why you mad Beast, you my Lady Lovemore? A Pox
on her, I know her well enough, she gave me three or four damn'd
Blows of the Pate last Night, in her own House.



I did so, I remember you now, I did give you those
Blows on the pate, in my House last Night.





Why Goody Iobson, why do you think I'm blind? I
do not know my Lady? a plaguy Quean, why all the Countrey
rings of her.

She falls upon the Countrey Fellow, and beats him out of Doors, he runs out crying help, help.


This is a Conspiracy of Rogues.



Help, help, if She be not my Lady, she has learnt of
my Lady.




Is this the Rogue my Husbands revenge upon me? here's
Clothes, here's filthy Rags; ob foh! oh miserable Woman! I shall
be deliver'd and make 'em rue for it.




Come, come you Quean, I'll make you leave your fool∣ing,
come to your Spindle, or else I'll lamb your Hide, you were
ne're lamb'd so since you were an Inch long. Take it up you Jade.




Hold, hold, what shall I do? I can't spin.



Oh! I thought I should bring you to your self to work,
I'll into my Stall, 'tis broad day now, why, when you awkard
Jade? I think her Brains are turn'd, She has forgot to spin.




I know this place, I'll try my Feet, I'll run into the
Town, some body will succour me there sure.




What does the Jade run for't? I'll after her.




What Heavenly dreams I have had this Night? me∣thought
I was in Paradise, upon a Bed of Roses, and of Violets,
and the sweetest Husband by my side; sure it was a Dream, Ha!
where am I now? bless us! what sweets are these about me? no
Garden in the Spring can equal them, not Buds of Roses with the
Dew upon them, am I upon a Bed? the Sheets are Sarcenet
sure; no Linnen ever was so fine, what a gay silken Robe have I
gotten? Oh Heaven I dream! I dream nothing but Point and Lace,
and Gold, and Fringe. Oh let me never wake! nothing but Gold,
fine Works and Carving: oh Father what a Glass is there! there's
a sumptuous Carpet upon the Table and silver Plate, sure I dy'd
to night in my sleep, and am gone to Heaven and this is it!





Now must I go to be call'd Whore or Jade, and fifty o∣ther
Names, I must wake an alarm that will not lye still till Mid∣night
at the soonest, Madam. Madam.




Lord who this, what sayst thou sweet Heart?



Sweet heart, O Lord Sweet heart! the best Names I have
had these twelve Months from her, have been Whore or Jade: Ma∣dam,
what Gown and what Ruffles, will your Ladyship please to
weare to Day?



Oh Lord what does she mean? Ladyship, Gown and Ruffles,
sure I am awake now, I remember the Cunningman!







The same I did yesterday Child.



Mercy upon me! Child! here's a Miracle!
Enter Maid sneeking.



Is my Lady awake, and have you had e'rea slipper or a
shoe flung at your Head yet?



Oh no, I am overjoy'd, she's in the kindest humour, no∣thing
but Love and Sweetness, go to the Bed and speak to her now,
now is your time.



You laugh at me, now is your time says she, what to
have an Eye beaten out or another Tooth? Madam.




What say'st thou Girl? Father, what wou'd she have?



What work will your Ladyship have me do to day? shall
I work Plain-work, or go on my Parchment?



Work say'st thou, why? 'tis holiday Child, no work to
Day.



Oh mercy, am I or she awake! or do we both dream?



Did not I tell you?



Here's a blest Change!



If it continues we are all made, we shall be a happy Fa∣mily.







Enter Footboy with Billets.


Now shall I be condemn'd to the Dog-whip, instead of
a Breakfast.



Some Billets for your Ladiships fire?



That's a good Boy.



O Lord! O Lord, is that my Lady?




Go Sir, she's in rare humour.



Prithee Sweetheart give me my things, I'll rise, I can't a∣bide
to lie in Bed.



Have I my sences or not, Good Lack?



This Cunning-man is a rare Man: he said I must bear it
out, I'm amazed? I know not what to doe.




Here's your Ladiships Morning Gown.



Where are my Eyes? they are Dazled, this is a Robe fit
for an Angel to wear. Bless me, I shall not know my self.
(Aside.)




Your Ladiships Chocolate's ready.



Mercy on me what's that? 'tis some Garment sure! well
put it on then Sweetheart.



Put it on Madam, I have taken it off, 'tis ready to Drink.



Drink say's she, I mean, put it by, I don't care for Drinking.




Now go I like a Beare to the stake, to know what her
Scurvy Ladiship will have for Breakfast, how many Rascally
names shall I be call'd!



You are mistaken, there never was such a change, she's
nothing but Goodness, you'l be overjoy'd to hear her.



You arch Dog! I'll lug you by the Ears Sirrah, if you
play the Rogue with me.




Oh! Iohn Cook you'l be out of your wits to see this
change, oh! she's the sweetest Lady.



What the Devil are they all mad!



Madam, here's the Cook come to know what your La∣diship
will please to have for Breakfast.



Oh Lord there's a fine Cook: He looks like one of your
Gentlefolks. (Aside.) I am very hungry indeed, honest Man,
pray get me a Rashar upon the Coals and a peice of one Milk
Cheese, and some White-bread.



Here's Humility! what a Conversion's here?



Hey what's to doe here! what the Devil's the matter! my
Head turns round: where am I? honest Man! I look'd for Rogue
or Rascal at the best.



Oh Madam that will lye heavy upon your Ladiship's Sto∣mach:
hee'l get you some rare dainty Dish immediately.



Doe then e'ne what twoo't good Mr. Cook.




And by my troth I will Madam presently. I'm overjoy'd! methinks
I cou'd leap out of my Skin.

Chip, kiss me, prithee kiss me I say: I'm out of my Wits. We have
the rarest Lady, the sweetest Lady that ever Men serv'd: go and
be astonisht as I am.



You shamming Rogue, I think you are out of your
Wits indeed; what the Devil do's he mean? the Maid looks mer∣rily
too.



Chip the Butler is come Madam to know what your La∣diship
will please to drink: Come near Mr. Chip. You'l be amazed.




Good Mr. Chip, let me have some good Small Beer when
my Breakfast comes up.



Mr. Chip! Mr. Chip! I shall be turn'd into a Stone
with amazement. Madam, wou'd not your Ladiship please to
have a Glass of Frontinuque or Lachrimoe?



Oh me, what hard Names are these! I must not betray
my self.  Yes if you will Mr. Butler.



Heaven and Earth, I'm amaz'd! here will be Joy! go
get you in and be happy as I am. Joy, Joy.





The Cook has been bantring I do know not how long
Do the Butler banter too?



Madam the Coachman is at the Door.




Come in good Coachman.



Will your Ladyship please to take the Air to day? if so,
which will you have the Coach or the Chariot?



Thank you, which you think convenient.



O Heaven! the Sky will fall, what's this?




Sure I cannot be awake, how overjoy'd they all seem to
wait on me, Oh notable Cunning man, I'm the happiest Woman,
I grow giddy with my happiness, I'll retire and give Heaven thanks
for this, (aside.) where is the Common-prayer Book?



Common-Prayer Book! here's a turn, what will Non-con
say? your Ladyship has none, but here's my Master's.




Thank you Sweet heart.





How do you like this Gentlemen? we have had a
smart turn or two.




I never follow'd fleeter Dogs that had any Noses.



I hate your meer fleet Hounds, that kill presently in view,
it is as bad as coursing.




Methinks there's Pleasure to see 'em hit it off at a
fault, as well as there is in a hard riding.



And to see the Doubles, and Shifts an old Hare will make
for her Life, faith beyond a Fox.




I spare my Horses to day which made me come home
so soon, but to morrow you shall try my Fox-hounds, and then
Gentlemen I will lead you a dance.



Sir, here's the rarest News.



There never was the like, Sir you'l be overjoy'd and a∣mazed.




What are ye mad? what's the matter with you?



Enter the Coachman, and three or four Servants
more jumping in.


How now? what's the matter? here's a new Face in
my Family, what all joy and mirth, what does it mean, or is it a
Christmass Gambal?



Oh Sir the Family is turn'd topsie turvy, we are almost
distracted, we are the happiest People.



I cannot contain my self, my self, my Lady, Sir my Lady.




what is she dead?



Dead! no Heaven forfend, she's the best Lady, the swe∣test
Lady.



Oh the dearest, kindest Lady, you are the happiest man
Sir living.



Never was such a change, such a miracle, why, all the
House will lay down their Lives for her.



She has oblig'd us all the kindliest and the sweetliest, we'll
live and dye with her.




Ay, all, all of us, long live her Ladyship,
God bless her Ladyship.



Oh She's the best Lady in the World, I cou'd kiss the
Ground she goes on.



I cou'd lick the Dirt of her Shoes, she's the sweetest, gent∣liest
natur'd Lady breathing.




Why? give me Breath a little, what do you mean?



'Tis true, 'tis true Sir, go into her your self, and be
witness of her strange change, none but Heaven cou'd work such a
miracle.




This is most astonishing, Gentlemen you see how I
am surprized, if you please to dress, I'll in and see the meaning of
this Wonder, I'm impatient till I go in.



Sir you may put off your Boots and dress first, She's at
Prayers with the Common-Prayer Book in her Closet, and will be
private for half an hour.




How, Common-Prayer Book? new Prodygies! what
miraculous Power has been here at work? my Friends, if this be
true I shall rejoyce indeed.



True, ay 'tis true enough, long live Sir Richard and his
Lady, Heaven bless 'em both, Huzah, Huzah.









I well remember the Cunning-man warned me to bear
all out with Confidence, or worse he said wou'd follow, I am
ashamed and know not what to doe with all this Ceremony; I am
amazed, and out of my Senses, I look'd i'th Glass, and saw a gay
fine thing I knew not, methought my Face was not at all like that
I have seen at Home, in a peice of a Looking Glass fastned upon
the Cupboard. But great Ladies they say have flattering Glasses,
that show them far unlike themselves, whilst Poor-folks Glasses
show e'm as they are.





Oh Madam, Here's my Master now return'd from Hun∣ting.



Oh Heaven! this goodly Gentleman my Husband?




My Dear; I am extreamly pleased to see my Fa∣mily
thus transform'd to all the joy imaginable, which as they tell
me, you have created in them.



Sir I shall be always overjoy'd, at what gives you delight,
and shall be ever glad, if I can please your Family.




Oh Divine Softness! this Gentleness of thine tran∣sports
me.



Alas Sir what am I? I am ashamed of my own meanness, I
shall be glad to be a Fellow Servant here, you are Lord of all Sir.




Dear Creature, if thou continuest thus, I had ra∣ther
be Lord of thee than of the Indies.



You make me Blush Sir; I hope I shall have Grace never
to be otherwise.




I am astonish'd, can this be Real?




All that's good above can witness for me: I am in earnest.




Rise sweetest Creature, what has wrought this ad∣mirable
change?



Alas! I never did offend you nor any of them.




 What does she mean? I have not known a
Calm within my House these six Weeks: but Yesternight you
triumph'd over me, and all my Family, was not that offence?



It was not I; I sure was not my self then, indeed, I find
my self so much changed, I scarce know who I am?




It is a blessed change.



It is so, I have that pleasure in my mind; that every thing
I see ravishes me with joy, such a sweet House, such brave Furni∣ture,
such ready loving Servants, and so noble, so sweet a Lord and
Master: Oh Father! I know not where I am methinks!




Heaven be thanked for this: I wou'd not lose this
Dear, this Blessed Creature, for all the Wealth and Power that
King's can boast off.



'Tis sure Heaven's doing: and I can never have another
mind, 'tis wondrous that I ever had methinks.




And I am confirm'd: Joy! Joy! Oh heart make
room for Joy! it will overwhelm you else, upon my knees I kiss
this dear, dear hand: Thou art so rare a Creature, I shall worship
thee.



Nay hold Sir! pray Sir! what doe you doe? Indeed you
make me cry, I am so ashamed, oh Father! so brave a Gentleman
to kneel to me? 'tis My duty to doe that.




Hold heart, I say contain thy self, where are my
Friends, my Servants, call e'm all, and let e'm be witnesses of my
happiness.



O Lord! how shall I behave my self before these Gentle∣folks.




And wilt thou never childe, nor quarrel with me
more, and show thy fury amongst my Servants?



I'll cut my Tongue out first, oh Lord I chidel.




I have one thing more, wilt thou go to Church
with me, and leave the sniveling Conventicle?



Yes surely Sir, I'll do what e're you please, I'll have no∣thing
to doe with Fanaticks, they are a Melancholy ill condi∣tion'd
People.




Sure t'was an Angel spoke in thee, thou art the
best of all thy Sex, I hope thou art convinc'd that the Phanatick
Chaplain was drunk last night; woud'st thou let me discard him,
there wants nothing then to compleat my happiness.



Yes, Heaven forbid else: what shall I disobey my Lord
and Master?




Let me embrace my Dear, my Love, and prithee
seal this promise with a kiss.



Oh rare sweet man! he smells all over like a Nosegay,
Heaven preserve my wits.
(Aside.)





Gentlemen, behold this day, here stands the hap∣stiest
man that the sun shines on, I am transported beyond my sen∣ses:
I hear proclaim a Jubile to all my Family these three months:
Summon in all the Countrey, I'll keep open house, send for my
Fidlers, Hoboys, Trumpets, and all Instruments of joy: let all the
Bells in the Hundred Ring, let the Seeples Rock, and let the Ring∣ers
Drink enough: here stands the best of Women and of Wives,
the kindest and the gentlest Mistress to her Servants: and she that
has given me all this happiness.



Lord Sir, you put me out of countenance, I blush, I'm
sorry that I ever angred any of you, indeed i'll do you all the good
I can, I shou'd be to blame else.


All the Ser∣vants cry.
God bless my Lady, long live her Ladiship, we'll
live and dye with her.




My Dear you did affront these Gentlemen last night,
speak to e'm.



Indeed, I was not my self, i'm sorry that I was uncivil,
I hope in time to mend.



We are your Ladiships humble Servants, and largely
must partake of the great joy, which now possesses all the Family.



Joy, Joy, to both the Bridegroom and the Bride; 'tis
a new Wedding.




'Tis true; some three months since, I did espouse
her Body, this day I'm married to her mind, this is a perfect Wed∣ding:
go send for all my Tenants, there shall be nought but Feasts
and Revels here.



This will be a brave time, how I shall joy to see it.




Your Fidlers were going by, having heard that my
Lady wou'd not allow of Musick, but I call'd e'm in.




You did well; my Dear, do you not love Musick?



Oh! I love nothing better.



That's my joy, my life; call in my Musick: Gen∣tlemen,
i'll make e'm sing a very unfashionable song to you, in the
praise of marriage, a peice of my own Poetry in my last Wives time.


Let the vain Spark consume his store,
In keeping an expensive Whore,
For others to employ.
For all those snares, and baits he pays,
Which she for other Gallants lays,
And he must least enjoy.


Keep Whores then as perfumes you wear;
Of which your selves have the least share:
Of other's claps partake.
Your Bodies bring to'th Surgeons hands,
And to the Scriveners all your Lands:
And give her your last Stake.


While with reason we bless the Fate,
That brings us to the Marriage State,
The only happy Life.
The chief enjoyment in a King,
No Wealth, no Power, such joy can bring;
As does a Wife, a tender Wife.


There can be no true Friend beside,
So oft does interest divide;
But they are so conjoyn'd.
By this most Sacred Rite are grown,
That they are not one flesh alone,
But they are both one Mind.




Sir, here are some Countrey Neighbours hearing of
the happy conversion, desire to dance before you.




Let them come in.





What meaneth this lewd noise; this most prophane a∣bominable
Jigging? Lady I must rebuke thee, in pure zeal, I must
rebuke thee, I cannot bear it.




Thou insolent fool be silent, I will have no Phana∣ticks,
no Law-Breakers within my Walls, especially no Hypocrites,
you were drunk last night you Swine.



I defie thy words, it was a fit, I was taken with a fit, a
greivous fit: Lady, what say you, are you become like one of the
wicked ones?



I will obey my Lord and Master, his will is mine.




Retire to your Chamber, you shall not be seen this
day, to morrow I will tell you more of my mind.



What's this, she is not as she was; Iampridem mulieri
ne credas ne mortuoe quidem; I may not go, I will not retire, my
Zeal telleth me, I must rebuke thee, and I will thunder in thine
Ears.








I may not go, I say I will not retire, my Zeal transpor∣teth
me, I am become furious.






Father you are welcome, doubly welcome; I sent
for you upon another occasion than I now find: Heaven has or∣dered
things another way, we are all transported with excess of
joy, my Dear salute your Father.



Good Heaven! my Father; what means this sure? I shall
be distracted, but I must bear it out.
(Aside.)

She kneels to ask Blessing.


What meaneth this, 'tis superstitious, and favours of I∣dolatry?




'Tis nothing but her great Humility.



I like it not.




I shall endeavour then to please you Sir.



'Tis well, I am glad to see you and my Son-in-Law
well; but what's the cause of this unwonted joy of this transport?




The Cook has knocked to Dinner: let's in, you
there shall have a full account, and be a joyfull witness of our Hap∣piness.





Was ever Woman yet so miserable? I cannot make one
in the Village yet acknowledge me, they sure are all of the Con∣spiracy,
this wicked Husband of mine has laid a Develish Plot a∣gainst
me, I for the present must submit that I may get an oppor∣tunity
into my hands for my Design, here comes a Rogue I will
have strangled, but now I yield.





Come on Nell, art come to thy self yet?



Ay I thank you, I wonder what I ailed, this Cunning∣man
put Powder in my Drink most certainly.



Powder! the Brewer put good store of powder of malt
in it that's all, Powder Quo' she, ha, ha, ha!



I never was so days of my Life.



Was so, no, nor I hope ner'e will be so again, to put me
to the trouble of strapping you so Devilishly.



I'll have that Right hand cut off, for that you were un∣mercifull to bruise me so.
(aside.)



Why? Faith I'm sorry for it, but it did you a great deal
of good tho, why? you wou'd have been mad and call'd your self
my Lady Lovemore till this time else, why come, why don't you
Spin?



I can't you have bruised my Arms so, when they are well
I'll work hard.



That's my good Girl, I'll buy some Plums to make thee
a minc'd Pye, come let's be friends, faith kiss and friends.



Oh cursed impudent Rascal, what does he say?




Nay, prithee now, faith I won't strap thee so no more.



I must stay till this be well, before I forget it.



Ounz if you go to that, I will kiss you.




Oh soh, how the Beast stinks of Cheese, Leather-apron,
Pitch, Greace, foul Linnen and old Shoes.
(aside.)





Why Neighbour Iobson? Why don't you put on your
Bond, and go to the Hall-place?



Why, what's the matter?



Matter! why? there's such a change, they are all out
of their Wits, there's open House to be kept there till Candlemas,
all the Tennants are sent for, why you'l loose your Dinner.



What do I hear? here's fine work indeed.
(Aside.)



What the Devil is to do there? is that Damn'd Jade my
Lady dead?



Nay I know not, we shall hear when I go, the Bells
ring, do you not hear 'em? and there's order given for all the Pa∣rishes
hereabouts to ring, Barrels of Beer, Flaggons of Brandy and
Money for the Ringers, and Alms to all the Poor are ordered.



Death what's this? Here's a rout when I am gone, did
they pack me away for this, I shall have all my Estate run out.



Come, come, make hast.



Husband, shan't I go with you?



Why, what all'st thou? Did not I tell thee I wou'd strap
thee yesterday for desiring to go, art thou at it again?



What does this Villain mean by strapping, and yesterday?



What a Pox, I have been married but six weeks, and
you long to make me a Cuckold already, stay at home there's good
cold Pye in the Cupboard. But I'll trust you no more with strong
Beer Huzwife.



Well, you will have your way, I must do what you bid me.



That's a good Wench, God be with you, come on
Neighbours.




And I'll be there not long after you, sure I shall meet some
there that are not of the Conspiracy.








Son-in-Law Sir Richard I long to see Mr. Noddy, me∣thinks
I did not eat the meat with Appetite since he did not bless
the Creature.




Sir to tell you the truth he is very sick, he was
drunk last night, I am sorry to say it to you.



Son-in-Law, I know you are a Lukewarm Formalist of
the Episcopal way, and you are glad to say it, but I believe it not.




Pardon me Sir, I do not use to lye, the whole Fa∣mily
are witnesses of it.



I fear me they are all too much of the same Batch, will
my Daughter affirm this?



I must needs say what Sir Richard says.



Come Gentlemen, perhaps he might e're he was aware
be overtaken with the Creature, he might be transported perhaps
with Zeal and so the sooner overtaken, and so 'tis not a sin, but a
frailty in him that is Righteous: I must see him.




But 'tis a sin in us: very good Doctrine.
Though Zeal stand Sentry at the Gate of Sin,
Yet all that have the Word pass freely In.





I am sorry to see you ill Mr. Noddy.







Now we have dined let him give Thanks.





Here's a Riot and a Rout, you sirrah, Butler, Rogue.



Why how now? what a Pox is to do with you? who
are you?



Impudent Varlet! don't you know your Lady?



Why how now you Quean? here, turn this Madwoman
out of Doors.




S' Life you Rascal take that sirrah, why sirrah? don't you
know your Lady? my Lady Lovemore, hands off, I am she you
Rogue.

She flings the Glass in his Face which he had in his
hands, and Servingman lays hold on her.


Why you faucy Jade? Huzwife have a care here's a good
pump, we'll cool your Courage for you.



Why Iane? Huzwife, sure you do not forget me?



Forget thee Woman! why? I never remembeed thee, I
ne're saw thee in my Life.



Oh wicked Slut! I'll give thee cause to remember me.




Oh murder! murder! help, help!




How now, what Uproar's there?



You Jade, Lettice! what won't you know me neither?
I'll make you know your Lady.









What's to do there?



Why? here's a Madwoman falls a beating and lugging us,
and calls her self my Lady.




Some Christmas frolick, some Neighbour has a mind
to be merry.



I warrant it is a Bess of Bedlam.



Oh here's my Chaplain, sure he is not of the Conspiracy
against me! Mr. Noddy! Thou art an holy man.



I am so Woman, what would'st thou have with me?



What are you blind? do you not know me because I have
these filthy Clothes on? look on my Face, I am the most injur'd,
the most abused Lady that ever yet drew Breath.



Lady! Woman, art thou not mad in truth?



Why sirrah, are not you my Chaplain? You base Villain,
did not I lay on the Plaister to your shoulders, and a red hot Pan
to your Head last Night, and sav'd your Life?



Oh Heaven! this is the Sorceress that bewitch'd me this
Night, lay hold on her she is a Witch.



Why Master Noddy? art not thou troubled in Spirit?
it is surely a Trick, a Gambal.



My Father here! I am so distracted with my grieff and
sufferings I did not see you, but now I must embrace you, and ne∣ver
leave you till you succour and revenge me, for the most Barba∣rous
usage that ever Lady suffer'd: speak, will you not speak to
me, Honoured Father?



I know thee not, I fear thou art some lewd woman;
be gone, hands off.



Nay, then I am desperately miserable.



She a is Witch and did confess it to me, I will have her
burnt.




Stand by, there must be something more than or∣dinary
in this Business.




What the Devil can this mean?



What shou'd it mean? some poor Madwoman is got loose.




Why? I never saw thee, thou my Wife? poor
Creature I pity thee.



Nay 'tis in vain to hope for Redress from thee, thou
wicked Contriver of all my Misery.



How I am amazed! is that I there in my Clothes, that
have made this disturbance? oh Father! I am here in these fine
Clothes, how can this be? and yet to my thinking I am there, I
am so confounded and affrighted, that I shall begin to wish I were
with Zekell Iobson again.



To whom shall I apply my self? or whither shall I flie?
oh Heaven what do I see! Is not that I there in my Gown and
Petticoat I wore yesterday? how can it be when I am here? I can
not be in two places at once.



Surely no, unless thou wer't a Bird, but come Sir let's
be deaf to these vile Gambals and retire.




Poor Creature she's stark mad.



What in the Devil's Name, was I here before I came hi∣ther?
that I shou'd come hither, and find that I was here before I
came is the strangest thing to me, let me look in this Glass, Oh
Heaven I am confounded, I know not my self, if that be I that's
represented in the Glass, I never saw my self before.




What incoherent madness is this?






 There, there's the Devil in my likeness, that has
robb'd me of my Countenance, S' Life is he here.



Ay that must be the Devil that's in your Likeness, re∣member
my strap you Quean.



How inevitably wretched am I?



O Lord, I am afraid my Husband will beat me that am
on yonder side?



Gallants pray pardon her, she was drinking with a Con∣jurer
last Night, and she has been mad ever since, and says she is
my Lady Lovemore.




Poor Woman take care of her, and do not hurt her,
she may be cured of this.



Cured, yes and please your Worship, you shall see me
cure her with this strap immediately, Huzwife do you see this?



Hold, hold, pray do not beat me Zekel.




What says my Dear? Does she insect thee with
madness too?



I am not well, my head turns round.







Wait on your Lady in.



I beseech your Worship don't take it ill of me, she shall
never trouble you more.




Take her home and use her kindly, I'll send my
Physician to her shall cure her I warrant you.



Thank your Worship most kindly, come Nell.




What will become of me?




How now, where's my Father-in-Law?



He has taken Coach, he bid me tell you he loves no
Christmas-Gambals, and he took this for one.



It is a very odd one take it all together, as e're I saw?



Methought there was a Method in her madness, she did
not know her self i'th Glass.



And if you observed, your Lady uttered some strange
words.




She did so, which did very much amaze me.



But that I have not much Belief in Magick, I shou'd have
odd thoughts of this.




Now you have put me in mind of it, there was
something in the latter part of this story, very strange and very sur∣prizing.




Sir, the Doctor who call'd here last Night, desires a
word in private with you on earnest Business.




What can this mean? bring him to me.





We'll take a turn and wait on you suddenly.




Your servant Gentlemen, be gone Servants.



Low on my knees I fall, and beg your pardon, and
put my Life into your hands, I have exercised my art of Magick on
your Lady, I know you are an honourable Man, and will not take
my Life, who might have still concealed it from you, if I had plea∣sed.




Methinks you have brought me to a glimpse of mi∣sery,
too great for me to bear, is all my happiness come only to a
short Live'd Vision and a Dream?



Sir I beseech you fear not, if there be any harm towards
you, I freely give you leave to hang me.




Can Magick bring me any thing but ill?



I never yet did mischief by my Art, there are Aerial
Spirits I command which do no hurt, they are Sylphs.




What have you done? inform me.



I have so transform'd your Ladie's face, she seems to be
the Cobler's Wife, and charmed the face of Iobson's Wife into the
Likeness of your Ladies, and when the storm arose, my Spirits re∣moved
each to the others Bed.




Oh miserable wretch thou hast undone me, I am
fallen from the top of all my hopes, and still must have a most
tempestuous Wife, that fury whom I never yet knew quiet, since the
first minute I had her.



If that were all, I cou'd continue the Charm for both
their Lives.




I'll have no happiness from Hell, all my Blessings
must come from Heaven, and I will hang you if you will not un∣do
your Charm, let the event be what it will.



I'll do it in a moment, and perhaps you'l find it is the
luckiest moment of your Life, I can well assure you your Lady
will prove the best of Wives, give me your pardon Sir.




Upon condition you undo the Charm I will.



It shall be done, and you shall find all my Praediction
true.




Hold there is yet a material thing, which I must
know.



I will resolve you Sir.




May be to Crown this mischief I have suffer'd, the
Cobler may perhaps have made me Cuckold.



Then cut this Throat, for e're she was transported to that
Bed; the Cobler was got up, besides he has done nought but beat
her ever since, and you are like to reap the benefit of his Labour.




Go about the business, i'll send for him and her.






I can assure you, there's no staying for you in this Fami∣ly;
my Lady has yielded all up to my Mistress's power.



Why look thee Edward Chip; thou art mistaken in me,
I can conform in many things, rather than leave so good a House
and so good People.



Where there is so much eating.
(aside.)



At least though I cannot conform inwardly, I will con∣form
outwardly; and that will do your business as well, give us
some Wine, they shall see what I can do.




With all my heart, Gentlemen you are come in good
time to be merry with Mr. Noddy.



Ay God I'm in a merry humour.



Here's a pretty turn.



Give me a Beer-glass, here's the King and all the Royal
Family, Huzzah: to 'ther, here's Sir Richard Lovemore's, huzzah: the
to'ther, nay Gad take me give me a third, here's my Ladies, huzzah:
pledge me all of you, and let every Bumper be a facer thus.




Is that a facer, faith t'is very pretty.



Nounz I'll have you to know, I can be as good Com∣pany
as e're a he that wears a head.
He that wears a brave Soul, and dares honestly do,
Hee's a Herald to himself and a Godfather too.







Come faith, let's sing a Catch.
A Boat, a Boat, haste to the Ferry,
For we come over to be merry;
To laugh and Quaff, and drink old Sherry.





Here's a turn; here's a Hypocritical Rogue, I think
we shall have Ovid's Metamorphosis in this House, but I am too much
concern'd to mind this Diversion: but where are my Friends I
wonder.







Come on Friends, and fall heartily to our Christmas
Gambals after a Rouze or two.




What you tell us Sir has much of wonder in it.



It is prodigious if it prove true.



Come now, lets have a dance.




Now Parson let's have one Christmass-Gambal, we'll
play the Black-smith.



Ay come with all my heart, how is that?



Come we'll show you, you shall down first, here, lye
down upon this form.



Ay come, come, Gad I'm almost drunk.



Come I'll play the Smith and blow the Bellows, ye are
my two Journey-men.

They beat upon him like two Smiths with Boots, he
roars out Murder, Murder, all the Company
laugh, and they leave off when Sir Richard speaks.






Be sure you lay him on.





How now Iobson, have you brought your Wife
with you?



Yes and please your Worship, she's here at the Door,
a little from the House she fell into a Swoon'd, I thought I ne're
shou'd have recovered her. But at last a tweak or two by the Nose,
and half a Dozen straps has done the Business, here where are you
Huswife, come in?





Light there 'tis very dark.





O Heaven and Earth, what's this my Lady?



What does he say, is my Wife chang'd to my Lady?




I thought the other was too good to be my Lady.




 You are the Person I have most offended to
whom I must confess I have been the worst of Women, bating I
have kept my Body undefiled, it has pleased Heaven to punish me
most sharply for my Crimes, Heaven left me to suffer under the
power of Enchantment, I am fully sensible of all my faults, and
since I abhor 'em and detest my self for them, I hope that Heaven
and you will pardon me, here will I kneel and fix till I have pro∣cur'd
yours at least, and Heaven be witness to my Resolutions.
The Remnant of my Life shall be imploy'd in duty and observance
of you, if you'l vouchsafe to take me to your Bosom.




Rise Madam I forgive you, and if you be sincere,
you'l make me happier than all the Enjoyments of the world
could do.



What a pox must I lose my Wife thus? where the De∣vil
is my to'ther wife? here's conjuring indeed.




Oh Sir the strangest accident has happened, it has amazed
us, and almost bereft us of our sences, my Lady was in so great a
swound we thought she had been dead.



And when she came to her self, she proved another wo∣man.




Ha, ha, that's a Bull indeed.



She is so chang'd I know her not, I never saw her face be∣fore,
O Lord is this my Lady!



I shall be beaten again.



I thought our happiness was too great to last.



Fear not my Servants, Sir let 'em all be call'd in, I will
give ease and quiet to your Family, I am a hearty
Penitent, good Servants I acknowledge I have All the Servants and Teunants come in.
been too harsh and rigorous to ye all, but Hea∣ven
has given me another mind, it shall be my
endeavour to make ye all happy. I'm sure no
Mistress shall outdoe me in Kindness and in Gentleness.




Hold in this mind, thou wilt be the best of women,
and I the happiest of men, the other was false and short liv'd
Joy, but this I hope will long continue.



May Heaven wreak all its vengeance on me if once I
alter from this Resolution, or e're I contradict your will again.




This is a day of wonders.





My head turns round I must go home, why Zekel what
are you there?



Look you, look you now, hey day, what a Devil, what's
that Queen my wife? here's a rare business, Gad I dare not come
near her.




'Tis rare indeed, we have all this day been under
the Power of Enchantment, to which Heaven knows there was
not my least Consent. Heaven often turns even the malice of De∣vils
to produce a good end, this is no doubt a happy change, I'll
celebrate it with all the joy I did proclaim, for my late short liv'd
Vision.



To me 'tis happier than my Birth-day was.




Now Madam since you have resign'd your will to
me, where is the Chaplain?



Here Mr. Noddy where are you? he's in the Buttery,
here come in.






Behold your saint here.



I do confess my self in the wrong.




Go Hypocrite, I discard thee.



Discard me for what, Nounz I'll conform, what a Pox
do you mean?




Thou wicked Wretch, thou scandal to thy own
Profession, woud'st thou maliciously thus bring one on ours, by
thinking to conform by being vicious? detested Beast be gone, car∣ry
him to his Chamber, our Church condemns all such Debau∣chery,
though such vile wretches wou'd bring a scandal on it.
Give him ten Pound, and in the Morning send him packing: here
Iobson take they fine wife.




But hold Sir, did not your Worship Sir make me a Cuc∣kold
under the Rose?




No upon my honour nor ever kist her till I came
from hunting, she was my Bedfellow for a little while, and for
this happy change, I'll give thee with her five hundred Pound,
buy store of Lether, and be my Shoemaker, I'll help thee to all
the Custome in the Countrey.



He boys I am a Prince, a Prince, come hither Nell, come
to thine own dear Zekel, I'll never strap thee more.



Indeed I have been in such a dream, I'm quite weary of it.



Can your good Ladyship forgive my strapping
your good Ladyship so very much.




With all my heart, the joy of this blest change makes all
things good again.



Forsooth Madam will you please to take your Clothes,
and let me have mine again.



No thou shalt keep 'em, and I'll preserve thine as Reliques.




Gentlemen let me present you to my Wife.



We wish your Ladyship all the joy your heart can hope
for.



May all your Life be ever happy Madam.



Gentlemen pray pardon me, and I think I was a Madwo∣man
last night, Heaven now has brought me to my self.




No more of this Subject.
Proclaim my joys in every place aloud,
Bonfires surround my house, let the Bells ring,
Let's dance and revel, feast, carouze and sing.


All the Ser∣vants cry.
Long live my Lady and Sir Richard.



Now let me speak if I may be so bold,
Nought but the Devil sure can tame a Scold.



