





HA! ha! ha! Well, Miss Walsingham, this fury is going; what a noble peal she has rung in Belville's ears!




Did she see you, Captain Savage?



No, I took care of that; for tho' she is'n't married to my father, she has ten times the influence of a wife, and might injure me not a little with him, if I didn't support her side of the question.




It was a pleasant conceit of Mr. Belville, to insinuate the poor woman was disordered in her senses! 



And did you observe how the termagant's violence of temper, supported the probability of the charge?




Yes, she became almost frantic in reality, when she found herself treated like a madwoman.



Belville's affected surprise too, was admirable!




Yes, the hypocritical composure of his countenance, and his counterfeit pity for the poor woman, were intolerable!



While that amiable creature, his wife, implicitly believed every syllable he said 




And felt nothing but pity for the accuser, instead of paying the least regard to the accusation. But pray, is it really under a pretence of getting the girl upon the stage, that Belville has taken away Mrs. Tempest's neice from the people she boarded with?



It is: Belville, ever on the look out for fresh objects, met her in those primitive regions of purity, the Green-Boxes; where, discovering that she was passionately desirous of becoming an actress, he improved his acquaintance with her, in the fictitious character of an Irish manager, and she eloped last night, to be, as she imagines, the heroine of a Dublin theatre.




So, then, as he has kept his real name artfully conceal'd, Mrs. Tempest can at most but suspect him of Miss Leeson's seduction.



Of no more; and this, only, from the description of the people who saw him in company with her at the play; but, I wish the affair may not have a serious conclusion; for she has a brother, a very spirited young fellow, who is a council in the Temple, and who will certainly call Belville to an account, the moment he hears of it.




And what will become of the poor creature after he has deserted her?



You know that Belville is generous to profusion, and has a thousand good qualities to counter-balance this single fault of gallantry, which contaminates his character.




You men! you men! You are such wretches that there's no having a moment's satisfaction with you! and what's still more provoking, there's no having a moment's satisfaction without you!



Nay, don't think us all alike.




I'll endeavour to deceive myself; for it is but a poor argument of your sincerity, to be the confidant of another's falsehood.



Nay, no more of this, my love; no people live happier than Belville and his wife; nor is there a man in England, notwithstanding all his levity, who considers his wife with a warmer degree of affection: if you have a friendship therefore, for her, let her continue in an error, so necessary to her repose, and give no hint, whatever, of his gallantries to any body.




If I had no pleasure in obliging you, I have too much regard for Mrs. Belville, not to follow your advice; but you need not enjoin me so strongly on the subject, when you know I can keep a secret.



You are all goodness; and the prudence with which you have conceal'd our private engagements, has eternally oblig'd me; had you trusted the secret even to Mrs. Belville, it wou'dn't have been safe; she wou'd have told her husband, and he is such a rattleskul, that, notwithstanding all his regard for me, he wou'd have mention'd it in some moment of levity, and sent it in a course of circulation to my father.




The peculiarity of your father's temper, join'd to my want of fortune, made it necessary for me to keep our engagements inviolably secret; there is no merit, therefore, either in my prudence, or in my labouring assiduously to cultivate the good opinion of the General; since both were so •ecessary
  4
to my own happiness; don't despise me for this acknowledgement now.



Bewitching softness! But your goodness, I flatter myself, will be speedily rewarded; you are now such a favourite with him, that he is eternally talking of you; and I really fancy he means to propose you to me himself: for, last night, in a few minutes after he had declared you would make the best wife in the world, he seriously ask'd me if I had any aversion to matrimony?




Why, that was a very great concession indeed, as he seldom stoops to consult any body's inclinations.



So it was, I assure you; for, in the army, being used to nothing but command and obedience, he removes the discipline of the parade into his family, and no more expects his orders shou'd be disputed, in matters of a domestic nature, than if they were deliver'd at the head of his regiment.




And yet, Mrs. Tempest, who you say is as much a storm in her nature as her name, is disputing them eternally.





Well, Miss Walsingham, hav'n't we had a pretty morning's visitor?




Really, I think so; and I have been asking Capt. Savage, how long the lady has been disordered in her senses?



Why will they let the poor woman abroad, without some body to take care of her?



O, she has her lucid intervals.




I declare I shall be as angry with you as I am with Belville.
(aside to the Captain.)




You can't think how sensibly she spoke at first.



I should have had no conception of her madness,
  5
if she hadn't brought so preposterous a charge against me.




Lady Rachel Mildew, Madam, sends her compliments, and if you are not particularly engaged, will do herself the pleasure of waiting upon you.




Our compliments, and we shall be glad to see her Ladyship.
Ex. Servant.



I wonder if Lady Rachel knows that Torrington came to town last night from Bath!




I hope he has found benefit by the waters, for he is one of the best creatures existing; he's a downright parson Adams, in good nature and simplicity.




Lady Rachel will be quite happy at his return, and it would be a laughable affair, if a match could be brought about between the old maid and the old bachelor.



Mr. Torrington is too much taken up at Westminster-Hall, to think of paying his devoirs to the ladies; and too plain a speaker, I fancy, to be agreeable to Lady Rachel.



You mistake the matter widely; she is deeply smitten with him; but honest Torrington is utterly unconscious of his conquest, and modestly thinks that he has not a single attraction for any woman in the universe.




Yet my poor aunt speaks sufficiently plain, in all conscience, to give him a different opinion of himself.




Yes, and puts her charms into such repair, whenever she expects to meet him, that her cheeks look for all the world like a rasberry ice upon a ground of custard.



I thought Apollo was the only god of Lady
  6
Rachel's idolatary, and that in her passion for poetry she had taken leave of all the less elevated affections.



O, you mistake again; the poets are eternally in love, and can by no means be calculated to describe the imaginary passions, without being very susceptible of the real ones.




The man, Madam, from Tavistock-street, has brought home the dresses for the masquerade, and desires to know if there are any commands for him.




O, bid him stay till we see the dresses.





They are only Dominos.



I am glad of that; for characters are as difficult to be supported at the masquerade, as they are in real life. The last time I was at the Pantheon, a vestal virgin invited me to sup with her, and swore that her pocket had been pick'd by a Justice of peace.




Nay, that was not so bad, as the Hamlet's Ghost that box'd with Henry the Eighth, and afterwards danc'd a hornpipe to the tune of Nancy Dawson. Ha! ha! ha! We follow you, Mrs. Belville.
Exeunt.








Where is this clerk of mine? Connolly!








Have you copied the marriage settlement, as I corrected it?




Ay, honey, an hour ago.



What, you have been trying those pistols?



By my soul, I have been firing them this half hour, without once being able to make them go off.



They are plaguy dirty.



In troth, so they are: I strove to brighten them up a little, but some misfortune attends every thing I do, for the more I clane them, the dirtier they are, honey.



You have had some of our usual daily visitors for money, I suppose?



You may say that; and three or four of them are now hanging about the door, that I wish handsomely hang'd any where else, for bodering us.



No joking, Connolly! my present situation is a very disagreeable one.



Faith, and so it is; but who makes it disareeable? your Aunt Tempest would let you have as much money as you please, but you won't condescend to be acquainted with her, though people in this country can be very intimate friends, without seeing one anothers faces for seven years.



Do you think me base enough to receive a favour from a woman, who has disgraced her family, and stoops to be a kept mistress? you see, my sister is already ruin'd by a connection with her.



Ah, Sir, a good guinea isn't the worse for coming through a bad hand; if it was, what would become of us lawyers? and by my soul, many a high head in London would, at this minute, be very low, if they hadn't recieved favours even from much worse people than kept mistresses.



Others, Connolly, may prostitute their honour, as they please; mine is my chief possession, and I must take particular care of it.



Honour, to be sure, is a very fine thing, Sir; but I don't see how it is to be taken care of, without a little money; your honour, to my knowledge, has'n't been in your own possession these two
  8
years, and the devil a crum can you honestly swear by, till you get it out of the hands of your creditors.



I have given you a licence to talk, Connolly, because I know you faithful; but I hav'n't given you a liberty to sport with my misfortunes.



You know I'd die to serve you, Sir; but of what use is your giving me leave to spake, if you oblige me to hould my tongue? 'tis out of pure love and affection that I put you in mind of your misfortunes.



Well, Connolly, a few days will, in all probability, enable me to redeem my honour, and to reward your fidelity; the lovely Emily, you know, has half consented to embrace the first opportunity of flying with me to Scotland, and the paltry trifles I owe, will not be miss'd in her Fortune.



But, dear Sir, consider you are going to fight a duel this very evening, and if you shou'd be kilt, I fancy you will find it a little difficult, to run away afterwards with the lovely Emily.



If I fall, there will be an end to my misfortunes.



But surely it will not be quite genteel, to go out of the world without paying your debts.



But how shall I stay in the world, Connolly, without punishing Belville for ruining my sister?



O, the devil fly away with this honour; an ounce of common sense, is worth a whole ship load of it, if we must prefer a bullet or a halter, to a fine young lady and a great fortune.



We'll talk no more on the subject at present. Take this letter to Mr. Belville; deliver it into his own hand, be sure; and bring me an answer: make haste; for I shall not stir out till you come back.



By my soul, I wish you may be able to stir out then, honey. O, but that's true!







Why, Sir, the gentleman I last liv'd clerk
  9
with, died lately and left me a legacy of twenty guineas 



What! is Mr. Stanley dead?



Faith, his friends have behav'd very unkindly if he is not, for they have buried him these six weeks.







Why, Sir, I received my little legacy this morning, and if you'd be so good as to keep it for me, I'd be much oblig'd to you.



Connolly, I understand you, but I am already shamefully in your debt: you've had no money from me this age. 



O Sir, that does not signify; if you are not kilt in this damn'd duel, you'll be able enough to pay me: if you are, I shan't want it.



Why so, my poor fellow?



Because, tho' I am but your clerk, and tho' I think fighting the most foolish thing upon earth, I'm as much a gintleman as yourself, and have as much right to commit a murder in the way of duelling.



And what then? You have no quarrel with Mr. Belville?



I shall have a damn'd quarrel with him tho' if you are kilt: your death shall be reveng'd, depend upon it, so let that content you.



My dear Connolly, I hope I shan't want such a proof of your affection. How he distresses me!



You will want a second, I suppose, in this affair: I stood second to my own brother, in the Fifteen Acres, and tho' that has made me detest the very thought of duelling ever since; yet if you want a friend, I'll attend you to the field of death with a great deal of satisfaction.



I thank you, Connolly, but I think it extremely wrong in any man who has a quarrel, to expose
  10
his friend to difficulties; we shou'dn't seek for redress, if we are not equal to the task of fighting our own battles; and I choose you particularly, to carry my letter because, you may be supposed ignorant of the contents, and thought to be acting only in the ordinary course of your business.



Say no more about it, honey; I will be back with you presently.
(going, returns.)
I put the twenty guineas in your pocket, before you were up, Sir; and I don't believe you'd look for such a thing there, if I wasn't to tell you of it.
Exit.



This faithful, noble-hearted creature!  but let me fly from thought; the business I have to execute, will not bear the test of reflection.
Exit.





As this is a challenge, I shou'dn't go without a sword; come down, little tickle-pitcher.
(Takes a sword.)
Some people may think me very conceited now; but as the dirtiest black legs in town can wear one without being stared at, I don't think it can suffer any disgrace by the side of an honest man.










How strangely this affair of Mrs. Tempest hangs upon my spirits, tho' I have every reason, from the tenderness, the politeness, and the generosity of Mr. Belville, as well as from the woman's behaviour, to believe the whole charge the result of a disturb'd imagination. Yet suppose it should be actually true: heigho! well, suppose it shou'd; I wou'd endeavour I think I wou'd endeavour to keep my temper: a frowning face never recovered a heart that was not to be fix'd with a smiling one: but women, in general, forget this grand article of the matrimonial
  11
creed entirely; the dignity of insulted virtue obliges them to play the fool, whenever their Corydons play the libertine; and poh! they must pull down the house about the traitor's ears, tho' they are themselves to be crush'd in pieces by the ruins.




Lady Rachel Mildew, madam.
Exit Ser.






My dear, how have you done since the little eternity of my last seeing you. Mr. Torrington is come to town, I hear.




He is, and must be greatly flattered to find that your Ladyship has made him the hero of your new comedy.




Yes, I have drawn him as he is, an honest practitioner of the law; which is I fancy no very common character 




And it must be a vast acquisition to the Theatre.




Yet the managers of both houses have refused my play; have refused it peremptorily! tho' I offer'd to make them a present of it.




That's very surprizing, when you offer'd to make them a present of it.




They alledge that the audiences are tired of crying at comedies; and insist that my Despairing Shepherdess is absolutely too dismal for representation.




What, tho' you have introduced a lawyer in a new light?




Yes, and have a boarding-school romp, that sl•ps her mother's face, and throws a bason of scalding water at her governess.




Why, surely, these are capital jokes!




But the managers can't find them out. However, I am determined to bring it out somewhere; and I have discover'd such a treasure for my boarding-school romp, as exceeds the most sanguine expectation of criticism.









Goings to Mrs. Le Blond, my millener's, this morning, to see some contraband silks, (for you know there's a foreign minister just arriv'd) I heard a loud voice rehearsing Juliet, from the dining-room; and upon enquiry found that it was a country girl, just elop'd from her friends in town, to go upon the stage with an Irish manager.




Ten to one, the strange woman's neice, who has been here this morning.
aside.




Mrs. Le Blond has some doubts about the manager it seems, though she hasn't seen him yet, because the apartments are very expensive, and were taken by a fine gentleman out of livery.




What am I to think of this? Pray, Lady Rachel, as you have convers'd with this young actress, I suppose you could procure me a sight of her.




This moment if you will, I am very intimate with her already; but pray keep the matter a secret from your husband, for he is so witty, you know, upon my passion for the drama, that I shall be teized to death by him.




O, you may be very sure that your secret is safe, for I have a most particular reason to keep it from Mr. Belville; but he is coming this way with Captain Savage, let us at present avoid him.
Exeunt.





You are a very strange man, Belville; you are for ever tremblingly solicitous about the happiness
  13
of your wife, yet for ever endangering it by your passion for variety.



Why, there is certainly a contradiction between my principles and my practice; but, if ever you marry, you'll be able to reconcile it perfectly. Possession, Savage! O, possession, is a miserable whetter of the appetite in love! and I own myself so sad a fellow, that though I wou'dn't exchange Mrs. Belville's mind for any woman's upon earth, there is scarcely a woman's person upon earth, which is not to me a stronger object of attraction.



Then perhaps in a little time you'll be weary of Miss Leeson?



To be sure I shall; though to own the truth, I have not yet carried my point conclusively with the little monkey.



Why how the plague has she escap'd a moment in your hands?



By a mere accident. She came to the lodgings, which my man Spruce prepar'd for her, rather unexpectedly last night, so that I happened to be engaged particularly in another quarter you understand me and the damn'd aunt found me so much employment all the morning, that I could only send a message by Spruce, promising to call upon her the first moment I had to spare in the course of the day.



And so your are previously satisfied that you shall be tired of her.



Tir'd of her? Why I am at this moment in pursuit of fresh game, against the hour of satiety: Game that you know to be exquisite! and I fancy I shall bring it down, though it is closely guarded by a deal of that pride, which passes for virtue with the generallity of your mighty good people.



Indeed! and may a body know this wonder?



You are to be trusted with any thing, for you are the closest fellow I ever knew, and the rack itself would hardly make you discover one of your own secrets to any body what do you think of Miss Walsingham?



Miss Walsingham? Death and the devil!








Why surely she has not received your addresses with any degree of approbation?



With every degree of approbation I cou'd expect.







Ay: Why this news surprises you?







Ha, ha, ha! I can't help laughing to think what a happy dog Miss Walsingham's husband is likely to be!



A very happy dog, truly!



She's a delicious girl, is'n't she, Savage?  but she'll require a little more trouble; for a fine woman, like a fortified town, to speak in your father's language, demands a regular siege; and we must even allow her the honours of war, to magnify the greatness of our own victory.



Well, it amazes me how you gay fellows ever have the presumption to attack a woman of principle; Miss Walsingham has no apparent levity of any kind about her.



No; but she continued in my house, after I had whispered my passion in her ear, and gave me a second opportunity of addressing her improperly; what greater encouragement cou'd I desire?


Well, Spruce, what are your commands?



My Lady is just gone out with Lady Rachel, Sir.







I believe you do.
(Aside.)Exit.



What is the English of these significant looks between Spruce and you?



Only that Miss Walsingham is left alone, and that I have now an opportunity of entertaining her; you must excuse me, Savage; you must upon my soul; but not a word of this affair to any body; because when I shake her off my hands, there may be fools enough to think of her, upon terms of honourable matrimony.
Exit



So, here's a discovery! a precious discovery! and while I have been racking my imagination, and sacrificing my interest, to promote the happiness of this woman, she has been listening to the addresses of another; to the addresses of a married man! the husband of her friend, and the immediate friend of her intended husband! By Belville's own account, however, she has not yet proceeded to any criminal lengths But why did she keep the affair a secret from me? or why did she continue in his house after a repeated declaration of his unwarrantable attachment? What's to be done? If I open my engagement with her to Belville, I am sure he will instantly desist; but then her honour is left in a state extremely questionable It shall be still concealed  While it remains unknown, Belville will himself tell me every thing; and doubt, upon an occasion of this nature, is infinitely more insupportable than the downright falsehood of the woman whom we love.



