





WELL but, my dear Caroline, tho' I grant you that Sir George Hastings has his peculiarities, still you must grant me that he has many very amiable qualities.



I never denied Sir George's merit, Sir, but all his good qualities cannot conceal his unaccountable coxcombry; his attention is constantly centered in himself, and there is no enduring a man who fancies that every woman must at first sight fall violently in love with him.



Do you hear her, Miss Montagu?



Why, Sir John, there is no accounting for inclination, you know;   however, I cannot look upon Sir George in the very ridiculous light he appears to Miss Dormer.



No   why he is a narcissus that continually makes love to his own shadow, and I can't bear the idea of a husband, in whose affection I am likely to be every moment rival'd by the lookingglass.



Nay now, my dear, you are rather hard upon him.   Sir George may possibly be a little too fond of himself  



But that does'nt prevent him from entertaining very tender sentiments for Caroline Dormer.



He may be unnecessarily attentive to the niceties of dress  



But then he is attentive to every law of justice and generosity.



And if his foibles provoke us to an occasional smile, his worth must always excite our warmest admiratiun.



Upon my word, Harriot, a very florid winding up of a period, and very proper for an elevated thought in a sentimental Comedy;   but I tell you, I should relish these encomiums on Sir George well enough, if he Was not so particularly recommended
  3
to my attention.   I really can't support the imagination of vowing honour and obedience to the object of my own ridicule, and it wou'd mortify my pride beyond conception, to see my husband the constant jest of his acquaintance.



My dear Caroline, don't be too difficult in your choice, nor entertain any romantic idea of finding a husband, all perfection.   The expectation of too much before marriage, frequently imbitters the union after;   and as the best men will have their little blemishes, we may farley number those among the best, in whose characters we can discover nothing more than a few trisling peculiarities.



I see, Sir, you make a point of this affair.



I wou'd not make a point of any thing, my dear, which I thought wou'd be in the least repugnant to your happiness:   but, really, when I consider this proposal in every respect, when I consider the rank, the fortune, and what is above all, the merit of the man, I cannot but with that you wou'd give him a favourable reception; and this the more especially, as I am convinced, if the match should take place, that your fine sense and sweetness of temper, will easily mould your husband to your wish, and quickly remove every trace of those foibles, which, are at present the only reason of your objection.



You are very good, Sir.



This morning, my dear, Sir George purposes to declare himfelf in form. If you can receive his addresses, you will make him happy, and oblige me exceedingly;   but if you cannot, deal ingenuously, and reject him; the justice which I owe to him, as well as the tenderness which I have for you, makes this advice doubly recpsite.









I'll wait upon him instantly.  Think therefore seriously, Caroline, before you determine, for I neither wish to cheat my friend into the possession of a reluctant heart, nor to sacrifice my daughter to the object of her aversion. 



Well, Harriot, what shall I do? You hear he has actually mention'd him to me in the most serious terms, and that this very morning he is to make a formal declaration.



And what then, does'nt Sir John desire you to reject him, if he is really disagreeable?  Can you possibly wish for a greater degree of indulgence?



And yet that very indulgence, my dear Miss Montagu, is likely to render me extremely miserable.



Why indeed, Miss Dormer  remember, child, you complimented me first with the cold respectful
  5
epithet of Miss the men in general say that the surest way of making a woman wretched is to indulge her inclinations But pray, my dear, why is this liberty which Sir John allows you, of promoting your own happiness, so very likely to make you miserable.



Ah, Harriot! don't you see that while he is so generously anxious to consult my wishes, I am bound by gratitude, as well as justice, to pay the greatest regard to his expectations.



You are really an excellent girl, my dear. But pray answer me one question seriously.







Is this dislike, which you entertain to your father's choice, entirely the result of your aversion to Sir George? or is it, be honest now, the consequence of a secret partiality for somebody else?



A secret partiality for somebody else? Pray, my dear, for whom is it likely I should entertain a partiality?



Caroline, Caroline, this reserve is ill suited both to the nature of our friendship and the customary frankness of your temper yet notwithstanding the secresy you have hitherto so unkindly observ'd, I can easily see that Mr. Villars What, conscious, Caroline?



O Harriot, spare me nor be offended that I have endeavour'd to keep a secret from you, which I absolutely shudder to whisper to myself to deal candidly, my dear, I must acknowledge that your charge is but too just and notwithstanding every effort of my pride, and every argument of my prudence, I find this humble yet deserving Villars possesses a much higher place in my esteem than can be consistent with my happiness.



Why, to do the young fellow justice, he is really very agreeable, and has something in his manner that would do credit to a more eligible situation but 



Ay, Harriot, there's the misfortune agreeable as he is in every respect, he is still a total dependent on my father, and thinks himself extremely happy that his talents have obtain'd him even a temporary establishment in an opulent family.



Well, my dear, Sir John is generous, and Mr. Villars is very useful to him in his literary researches; besides, I am not a little pleas'd at the distinction with which he, as well as the Captain, constantly treats Mr. Villars.



I don't know how it is Mr. Villars has a manner of commanding respect from every body; he is humble without servility, and spirited 



Oh! he is every thing that's amiable, no doubt  and the stars have been exceedingly relentless
  7
in not giving him a large fortune however, if I have any skill in the business of the heart, Villars is to the full as uneasy upon your account as you can possibly be on his he is always contriving excuses for conversing with you, yet when he does, he is in visible confusion; and it was only yesterday evening, when I beg'd he wou'd put a letter for me into the post-office, that he stammer'd out, in the utmost perplexity, I shall take particular care, Madam, to deliver it to Miss Dormer.



If this be the case, Harriot, I must indeed behave with particular circumspection to him; and yet, tho' I see the impossibility of ever being his, he has given me an insuperable aversion to the rest of his sex.



What then do you intend to do with Sir George?



To reject him; but still to do it without giving any offence to my father.



And how do you propose to manage it?



By throwing myself honestly upon Sir George's humanity, by telling him my affection is engaged, and by begging of him to withdraw his addresses in such a manner as shall appear to be the result of his own choice, and not the consequence of my disinclination Sir George, notwithstanding his egregious vanity is uncommonly good-natur'd  but let us retire to my room, my dear, I am
  8
unfit for company at present, and here we are likely to be broken in upon.  O Harriot.



And O, Caroline, what a very foolish figure does a woman make, when she is lamentably in love. 





Well, my brother-in-law elect,  you are very splendidly dress'd this morning.



Why, Jack, I think, I do make a pretty tolerable appearance.



And do you think this appearance calculated to make an impression upon a woman of spirit.   Zounds, man, give up your pretensions, for nothing but a fellow of life is likely to succeed with my sister I can promise you.



A fellow of life, Jack;  that is, I suppose, a fellow of profligacy:  truly you pay your sister a very pretty compliment.



And why pray do you necessarily connect the idea of life with the idea of profligacy?



Because, in the vocabulary of libertines, like you, Jack, the word life always means a round of every thing that is foolish or unwarrantable.



Why, what the devil are you turn'd fanatic, George, that you begin to deal so much in secondhand morality?



In short, your fellows of spirit never allow a man a scruple of common-sense, till he has entirely prostituted his understanding; nor suppose him to be fit for a commerce with the world, till he absolutely merits to be hunted out of society.



Well but, George, there is one excess of which you yourself have been guilty; and I have known the time, when you took a bottle so freely, that you were generally made toast-master of the company.



Yes, but I soon found out that drinking was detestable, and toasting the greatest of all absurdities.



Why how wou'd you wish to pass an evening?   Can any thing exceed the pleasure of society, with a few select friends of good-nature and vivacity?



O nothing to be sure is so delightful as guzzling down half a dozen bottles, and enjoying the rational discourse of where does the toast stand with you, Sir William no, with you, Sir George  fill him a bumper, Captain Dormer fill him to the top.  O, an evening spent in this manner must be delectable, especially if a couple of fools should happily quarrel in their cups, and cut one another's throat to prove the superiority of their understanding.



Ha! ha! ha!  But was this all your objection to the bottle?



No, for it made my heach ach, and disorder'd my dress beyond bearing.



Disorder'd your dress, ha! ha! ha! what unaccountable coxcombry.



Why to be sure it's a very ridiculous thing for a man to shew a little regard for decency.



Well, notwithstanding you are a coxcomb systematically, I am sure the character will not be a strong recommendation to my sister.



Your sister, Jack, is a woman of sense, and must see that she has a much stronger chance of being happy with me, than poor Miss Montagu has of being happy with her brother.  My heart is unadulterated, and is therefore worth any woman's acceptance.



O no doubt it is a very valuable acquisition.



Whereas, you fellows of life, hawk about your hearts from commoner to commoner, till they become quite contemptible; and then with the additional merit of broken constitutions,  tottering limbs,  pale cheeks, and hollow eyes, you politely offer the refuse of the stews to ladies of fortune, family, and character.



And so your affection is unadulterated;  ha! ha! ha!



Ay, laugh on and welcome;  but who have we here?



Mr. Willoughby, who will keep you in countenance with maxims of musty morality.



What, my good-natur'd optimist, who thinks every thing happens for the best?



Ay, Candide to perfection, who is continually blessing his stars the more they load him with misfortunes;  and pray heaven his business here this morning has not been to talk with Sir John about my intimacy in his family. 





Sir George, your most obedient.  Captain, I am your humble servant.



Mr. Willoughby, yours.  How do the ladies, Sir?  the good Mrs. Willoughby, and your amiable daughter.



Why my daughter, Sir George, is very well;   and my wife is as usual, continually embittering every comfort of life, and lamenting the miseries attendant on mortality.



I wonder she does not chuse to follow the sensible example you set her, and endeavour rather to lessen, than to aggravate the measure of unavoidable misfortunes.  She's a young woman, and misanthropy at her age is rather out of character.



Why yes, Sir George, she's twenty good years younger than I am, and yet she is twenty times more impatient under the smallest disappointment.



But, my good friend, you don't think her youth a very unfortunate circumstance?



O, Sir George, my principle is to think every thing for the best.



Well said, Mr. Willoughby.



It was'nt her youth, however, that struck me, but the sobriety of her conduct, and her affection for my daughter;  she was besides a distant relation of my first wife's liv'd with us in the same house; and some how I lik'd her, because having no fortune, it gave her but little expectation of a better husband.



But why don't you teach her to adopt some part of your own fortitude under disappointment?



Perhaps it is not in her power to exercise so desirable a philosophy.



My dear Captain, life has misfortunes enough without our being industrious to encrease the number of them when an accident therefore happens, we shou'd consider that, bad as it may be, it might have been still worse; and instead of arrogantly murmuring at the dispensations of providence, we shou'd thankfully acknowledge the goodness that did not plunge us into a deeper degree of affliction.



Upon my word I think there is much reason in this argument.



Ay, and much policy too, Sir George   we shou'd always imagine that every thing happens for the best about ten years ago I broke my leg by a fall from a horse 



And pray did this prove a fortunate accident?



Yes; for your father, who generously pitied my situation, got my place continued to my family; so that, if I drop off to-morrow, there's a comfortable provision for them Indeed when the accident happened I cou'dn't foresee this consequence   however, I made the best of matters  was thankful that I hadn't broke both my legs, and drew a kind of negative good fortune from a stroke of real calamity.



Why what the devil is this fellow Dormer laughing at?



Why how the devil can I help laughing, when the very evils of life are made so many indirect instruments of happiness.



Oh! let him laugh, Sir George; he can by no means joke me out of my sentiments why when my son was stolen from me in his infancy I found a consolation in reflecting that I had not lost my daughter too; and tho' I have never since been able to hear any account of my poor boy, I am satisfied he was taken from me for the best, and I bear my lot with resignation.



How! do you set down the loss of your son in the chapter of fortunate accidents?



Negatively he may, Dormer; for he might have turned out a libertine like yourself, and in that case his being lost is indeed a very fortunate circumstance.



Very smart truly but I suppose you bear your lot with resignation too, Sir George,  for you have lately got a good two thousand a year by the death of this young fellow's godfather, old Webly the humorist; and it is your interest to pray that he never may be found, as there is a certain clause in the will you know, which  



Which obliges me to invest him with this estate if ever he is discovered a mighty hardship really; and you must be a very pretty fellow to suppose it any way difficult for an honest man, to do a common act of justice.



All for the best still, Captain. Sir George we are certain will do good with his fortune,  whereas had it been possessed by my boy,  how am I sure that it wou'd not be applied to very different purposes:   yet who knows that it might either;   who knows but however  I am positive every thing happened for the best,   and so and so a good morning to you. 



Poor man, how sensibly he feels the loss of his son, notwithstanding his endeavours to be chearful.  But what am I throwing away my time upon you for, when I have business of so much importance
  15
with your sister? Good bye, Jack, and now let us see if profligates only are to meet encouragement from the ladies. 



Ha! ha! ha! was there ever such a compound of sentiment and vanity.  Caroline must keep the fellow in a glass case, or he'll kill himself before the honey-moon is over, with the fatigue of seeing company. 





Jack, Jack, come back a little I want a word or two with you.



I fear'd as much  What are your commands, Sir?



Why, Jack, I need not tell you how anxious I am to have you settled in the world, nor is it necessary for me to put you in mind of the engagement I enter'd into with my late worthy friend, Sir Ralph Montagu.



I know your obliging sollicitude for me extremely well, Sir, and I feel it with the most grateful sensibility,  but sure there is yet time enough before I undertake the important charge of a family.



Come, come, you have seen enough of the world to become, if you please, a useful member of society;  besides, Miss Montagu is now without a father, and shou'd be treated with an additional degree of attention.  Nothing therefore can be more improper than to keep a young lady of her merit
  16
and fortune waiting for the result of your determination, when you ought to think it a very great honour that she can be prevail'd upon to receive you as a husband.



Miss Montagu, Sir, will, I dare say, be no way offended at the delay, if I can judge from the indifference with which she constantly behaves to me.



And how can she behave otherwise, when you constantly treat her with indifference?  To be plain with you however, Jack, I fear you are too wild, too dissipated, to think seriously: you moreover possess a spirit of gallantry, which gives me many an uneasy moment,  and I am not a little troubled at your continual visits to Mr. Willoughby's.



To Mr. Willoughby, Sir,  to your own particular friend!



Yes, and the more I esteem him, the more uneasy I must naturally be at your visiting there so frequently.  Miss Willoughby has a fine person, and a feeling heart; she thinks, besides, I have obliged her father, and may in the fulness of her gratitude, imbibe sentiments for the son of his benefactor.   Take care, therefore, take care; gallantry, tho' a fashionable crime, is a very detestable one; and the wretch who pilfers from us in the hour of his necessity, is an innocent character, compared to the plunderer who wantonly robs us of happiness and reputation.



I hope, Sir, I shall never do any thing to bring a reflection upon the honour of my family.



I hope not, Jack, and therefore I cou'd wish you were not a man of gallantry: to engage the confidence of the innocent on purpose to betray it, is as mean as it is inhuman.





Every thing is ready in the library, Sir.









Well, Villars, I fancy Willoughby has at last made a complaint to my father, for I am commanded, in the most positive terms to think of an immediate marriage with Miss Montagu.



And isn't it by much the most sensible course you can follow?   Miss Montagu is a very fine young lady.



True but you have never seen Miss Willoughby.



Besides the great fortune 







That courts your acceptance, if I may so express myself 







Oh I see how it is;  and are you then determin'd to marry Miss Willoughby?



Not so fast not quite so fast, my dear Villars, I beg of you:  Miss Willoughby certainly possesses a greater share of my affection than any other woman in the world; and I don't know, if my father could be brought to approve of such a match, that I should find the least disinclination to marry her:   but as matters stand at present there's no likelihood of such a circumstance, and therefore I wou'dn't choose to disoblige Sir John in so material a point, especially as my wishes with regard to Miss Willoughby may possibly be indulg'd without so considerable a sacrifice.



I don't understand you.



Why Miss Willoughby knew all along of my engagement with Miss Montagu, and consequently had no reason to suppose that my intentions cou'd be very matrimonial; besides, she let nobody into the secret of my addresses but her ridiculous stepmother, who is a miserable compound of avarice and affectation:  indeed, to do the young lady justice, it was a considerable time before she wou'd hear a syllable of a tender nature from me, on account of my connection with Miss Montagu.



And how did you manage it at last?



Why in the customary manner:   I talk'd a damn'd deal of nonsense with a very tragical tone and a very melancholy countenance   exclaim'd
  19
against the tyranny of fathers who wanted to force the inclinations of their children from despicable motives of interest and curs'd the poor stars for giving her so much beauty, and making me so sensible of it:  then pressing her tenderly by the hand, I usually ran out of the room, as if in violent emotion, affecting to gulp down a torrent of tears, and left her own pity to be my advocate the moment she recovered the use of her recollection.



What, and did this auswer your purpose, Sir?



Oh, perfectly; the women are inconceivably fond of the pathetic, and listen to you with rapture if you talk about death or distraction spring but the mine of their pity, you soon blow their hearts into a flame   and reap more service from an hour of compleat substantial misery than from a whole year of the most passionate adoration.



Well, Captain, and may I presume to ask what use you intend to make of Miss Willoughoy's partiality for you?



Why faith, Villars, that's a very puzzling question upon the whole;   notwithstanding all my levity, you know I have the deepest reverence for my father, and he must not be disoblig'd upon any account,   tho' to deal honestly with you, I have no mighty inclination to Miss Montagu.



And what must become of poor Miss Willoughby?



Why I shou'd'nt like to be a rascal there neither,  yet what can one do;   where a woman's weak enough to encourage the addresses of a man whom she knows to be pre-engaged, she gives him a kind
  20
of title to deceive her:   besides, Villars, Miss Willoughby has herself shewn a genius for duplicity in this affair which shou'd make a man of any sense a little considerate.







Don't you recollect she has deceiv'd her father thro' the whole transaction? and it is a maxim with me that the woman who can forget the sentiments of nature, has half an inclination to forget the sentiments of virtue.







You are mightily concern'd for a woman you never saw in your life; however, be easy   I am as sentimental for a libertine, you know, as any fellow in the kingdom, and it shall be Miss Willoughby's own fault if matters are carried to extremities.   But, Villars, step with me to my agent's, and we'll talk farther on this subject:  few people despise money more than myself, and yet there are few to whom a snug sum would at this moment be more acceptable.



You promise me then that in this affair of Miss Willoughby's 



Zounds, Villars, I won't brag too much neither,   I am still flesh and blood,   and these make a very dangerous composition in the hour of love and opportunity.



My dear Captain, this is no jesting matter the happiness of a deserving young lady is at stake, and a laugh will but poorly repay a violation of your honour, or a breach of your humanity. 











AND so my prudenr, sage, considerate dear, you have actually advited Sir John Dormer to restrain his son's visits to our house?



Yes, that was my business at Sir John's this morning.



And you imagine this wise measure will turn out for the best I suppose?



I do really  



What? You think it for the best to let your poor family continue always in obscurity; and look upon it as a great unhappiness, whenever they have the least chance of rising in the world?



And you think I have done a mighty foolish thing in preserving the peace as well as the honour of my poor family, from the greatest of all misfortunes?



From the greatest of all misfortunes! did any body ever hear the like?  Why I tell you Captain Dormer is in love, passionately in love with your daughter.



So much the worse  



So much the worse! this is the only thing in which you ever forgot your all for the best principle.   So much the worse! so much the better I tell you; and in all likelihood he might have married her, if your ridiculous fear of being happy, had not put Sir John upon his guard, to prevent so desirable a circumstance.



What, madam, wou'd you have me trepan the only son of my benefactor, into a marriage with my daughter, and at a time too when I know him engaged to a lady of Miss Montagu's family and fortune.  O, Mrs. Willoughby, I am ashamed of these arguments; and if there is no way to be rich without being despicable, let us look upon poverty as the most eligible of all situations.



Don't tell me of Miss Montagu's family, Mr. Willoughby, your daughter is not her inferior in that respect; besides, a woman of beauty, educated as I have educated Cornelia, even if she has not altogether so much money, has merit enough to deserve the first man in the kingdom.   I am sure if I was a single woman again  



You have been a single woman, madam, and are now married to a fellow old enough for your father.



I don't deserve to be reproach'd by you, Mr. Willoughby;  you are, at least, a gainer by my pity.



I think so, my dear-I think all for the best.



What all for the best; my marrying a man as old as my father?  Have a little gratitude, Mr. Willoughby.



Well, well, my dear,  'tis foolish for a man and wife to quarrel, because they must make it up again.  However, we were here talking of Captain Dormer,  and what is our girl's beauty and education to the purpose?



Very much to the purpose.  They shew there would have been no impropriety in suffering Captain Dormer to marry Cornelia, and they shew that you behav'd very absurdly in striving to prevent the advancement of your own daughter.



Madam, madam, young women are apt enough to err of themselves, but a father has indeed a great deal to answer for, who exposes his daughter to unnecessary temptations  Captain Dormer has been already too successful in some families of our acquaintance; and if, while we are contriving to trap him into a marriage with Cornelia, he should find it possible to rob her of her honour, we shall be very properly punished for the baseness of our designs.



And do you think that possible, after the share I have had in her education?  tho' I am but her mother-in-law  



My good wife, it is by supposing our own children wiser than the children of other people, that so many are constantly ruined.  If we are desirous, therefore, of preserving them unsullied,
  24
we should always keep them out of danger;   but our ridiculous partiality, constantly paints them in the most flattering colours or perfection, and we never suppose them cap•ble of committing the smallest mistake, till they 〈◊〉 totally undone.



Well, it is in vain to talk with you;  but remember I say, you will always be the enemy of your own family.



I shall always endeavour, madam, to act as becomes a father,  but I shall also strive to act as becomes an honest man,  and therefore Captain Dormer shall have no more interviews with my daughter.







No.  My avarice shall neither lead me to injure the happiness of my friend's family, nor shall my weakness betray the honour of my own.  Every thing will, I dare say, turn out for the best; tho' if the worst shou'd happen, I shall still find a consolation in having taken every justifiable method to prevent it. 





O, madam, I have heard all: what will become of me?



Ah, my poor dear child, was there ever so preposterous a fool as your father!



Dear madam, say something to comfort me.   You have kindly made yourself the confidant of my sentiments for Captain Dormer, and I must
  25
be the most miserable creature in the world, if my father is inflexibly determined to drive him from the house.



I can say nothing to you, Cornelia, but what must add to your regret:  there is no hope of any favourable turn in the affairs of our family:   day after day produces fresh disappointments; and instead of having any agreeable prospect to cheer us as we go on, the view becomes more and more clouded with misfortunes.  No, there's no enduring life upon these terms;   no, there's no possibility of enduring it.



O that I had never seen Captain Dormer,  or that he had been less amiable!  



Ah, my dear child, I know but too well how to pity your distress:  I have been in love myself; strangely as he now neglects my advice, I was once very desperately in love with your father:   He was the first man that ever said a tender thing to me;  and Mexico, if he was dead tomorrow, would not purchase a single glance of regard for another, nor the mines of Peru obtain a smile of approbation.



Well, madam, it is happy for me that you have yourself been susceptible of the softer impressions, since that susceptibility has induc'd you to assist me, during my acquaintance with Captain Dormer.



It is happy for you, Cornelia, and it shall be happy for you.  My tenderness is more than the tenderness of a step-mother,  and there is nothing I admire so much as constancy in love.   My thoughts, therefore, have not been idle on this affair, and I believe you will allow my understanding to be tollerable.



The whole world concurs in an opinion of your good-sense, madam, but few entertain a higher idea of it than Captain Dormer.



The Captain, my dear, is a man of taste and discernment.



And yet I must give him up for ever.



'Tis your own fault;  why won't you take my advice, and make him yours securely?  there is but one way  



O, madam, you know my abhorrence of an elopement   I have often told you  



Yes, and I have often told you,  that your father's forgiveness may be easily obtain'd;  but that Dormer once married to that Harriot Montagu, is lost for ever.  Do you imagine, child, I wou'd advise you to an impropriety?



But how can I betray the dignity of my sex, in proposing so bold a measure to the Captain?



To be sure it's very bold in a woman who has given away her heart, to make an honourable offer
  27
of her hand to a lover.  However, stay child  let poor Dormer be forc'd into this marriage with Miss Montagu,  let him be torn irrecoverably from you,  and let your obstinacy, like your father's, continually counteract the happiness of your family;  were you once Mrs. Dormer, very handsome things might be done for Mr. Willoughby.



O, madam, don't attack me in so tender a point!



Come up stairs child;  suspecting your father's business to Sir John Dormer's this morning, and dreading the consequence, I have pack'd up all your things ready for an expedition to Scotland:  you must determine, therefore, instantly;  and if you determine to have Dormer, you must act instantly too.



What will become of me!



I don't know what will become of you, if you don't take my advice;  and I am sure, on the present occasion, I give you advice that wou'd be very agreeable to half the young ladies within the bills of mortality. 



Miss DORMER and Sir GEORGE discovered.



Nay, my dear Miss Dormer, there is no bearing so unjust an insensibility to the power of your own attractions.



Indeed, Sir George, you over-rate my little merits exceedingly;  and probably the greatest I can boast, is my consciousness of their being contracted within a very limited circle.



Well, madam, the very modesty which induces you to decline every pretension to the admiration of the world, is but a fresh proof how greatly you deserve it.



You have much politeness, Sir George, but politeness is your peculiar characteristic 



At least, madam, I have much sincerity;  and if Sir John's mediation in my favour, together with as fervent an attachment as ever warm'd the bosom can obtain a look of approbation from Miss Dormer, she may rest satisfied that the business of my life, will be an unremitting sollicitude for the advancement of her happiness.



I am infinitely honour'd by this declaration,   and I believe there are not many ladies 



Why, madam, if the vanity may be excused, I flatter myself there are not many ladies who wou'd highly disapprove my addresses.   I have more than once resisted some flattering overtures, and from very fine women too;  but my heart was reserv'd for Miss Dormer, and she will make me the happiest man existing, by kindly condescending to accept it.



I am very sensible how just a value shou'd be
  29
plac'd upon such an affection as yours, Sir George, and it gives me no little  




So the Captain imagin'd I shou'd not succeed with her.



You Will Pardon My Confusion, Sir George,  But The Declaration I Am Going To Make 



Will demand my everlasting gratitude, madam.



I shall be very happy to find you really of this opinion.



I must be eternally of this opinion; condescension and benignity, madam, are animating every feature of that beautiful face, and I am satisfied you will be prevail'd upon, not utterly to disregard the heart that so passionately solicits your acceptance.



Indeed, Sir George, I must own you are possess'd of extraordinary merit.



This goodness is too much, madam.



Your understanding is enlarg'd.







Your person is unexceptionable.



You distress me, madam, by this excessive generosity.



Your manners are amiable.



I want words to thank you, madam.



And your humanity is unbounded.



What I am, madam, take me: I am yours and only yours; nor shou'd the united graces, if prostrate at my feet and soliciting for pity, rival you a moment in my affection. No, Miss Dormer, your happiness will ever be the ulimate object of my attention, and I shall no longer wish to exist, than while I am studious to promote it.



Sir George, I fear you misunderstand me,  and yet it is in your power to make me very happy.



How can I misunderstand you, my dearest creature, if it is in my power to make you happy.



'Tis in your power indeed, Sir George.



Bewitching loveliness, how you transport me;  so the Captain thought I shou'd'nt succeed with her. 



But if you wou'd wish to see me happy,   you must withdraw your addresses.







It is impossible for me ever to return your affection.







And I shall be miserable beyond belief by a continuance of your sollicitation.







O, Sir George, to the greatness of your humanity let me appeal against the prepossession of your heart.   You see before you a distressed young creature, whose affection is already engaged;   and who, tho' she thinks herself highly honoured by your sentiments, is wholly unable to return them.



I am extremely sorry, madam,  to have been  I say, madam,  that really I am so exceedingly disconcerted, that I don't know what to say.  



O, Sir George, you have no occasion for apologies, tho' I have unhappily too much;  but I know the nicety of your honour, and I depend upon it with security.  Let me then entreat an additional act of goodness at your hands, which is absolutely necessary, as well for my peace, as for my father's:   this is to contrive such a method of withdrawing your addresses, as will not expose me to his displeasure.  Let the discontinuance of them appear, not to be the result of my request, but the confequence of your own determination; he is a zealous advocate for you, and I shou'd incur his severest resentment, if he was to be acquainted with the real impediment to the match.   You are distressed, Sir George, and I am sinking with confusion;  I shall therefore only add that I trust you with more than life, and that I conjure you to compassionate
  32
my situation.   By this conduct you will engage my eternal esteem, and merit that happiness with a much more deserving woman, which it is impossible for you ever to enjoy with me. 



What is all this!   a dream!  No, 'tis no dream, and I feel myself awake but too sensibly.   What then, am I rejected, despis'd, where I suppos'd myself certain of success and approbation.  This is too much;  neither my pride nor my tenderness can support the indignity,  and I shall what shall I do? Shall I meanly betray the poor girl who has generously thrown herself upon my humanity, and convince the world by such a conduct that she was right in refusing me:  no, damn it I scorn a littleness of that nature, and I must shew myself worthy of her affection, tho' her unfortunate pre-engagement wou'd not suffer me to obtain it. But how in the name of perplexity shall I manage the matter?  A refusal on my side necessarily incurs the general resentment of the family, and the censure of the world into the bargain;   so that in all probability I shall not only have the honour of risquing my life but my reputation, and this for the happiness of giving the woman I admire to the arms of my rival.  Really the prospect is a very comfortable one. 





Upon my word, Caroline, you have acted a very heroic part;  but this unaccountable love is able to carry the most timid of the romantic ladies thro' the greatest difficulties.  Now had I
  33
been in your situation, I cou'd no more have ask'd the man to take my fault upon himself, than I cou'd have made downright love to him.



Ah, Harriot, you little know to what extremities a strong prepossession is capable of driving a woman, even where there is the most evident impossibility of ever obtaining the object of her inclinations.



O, my dear, I see very plainly that it is capable of driving a woman to very great extremities.



Well I am convinc'd that if any thing was to prevent your marriage with my brother, you wou'd, notwithstanding this seeming insensibility, look upon the rest of his sex with the utmost aversion.



I wonder, Caroline, after my repeated declarations of indifference with regard to your brother, that you can imagine I consider him with the smallest partiality.  There was indeed a time when I might have been prevailed upon to endure the creature,  but his negligence quickly alarmed my pride, and prevented me from squandering a single sentiment of tenderness, upon a man who seem'd so little inclin'd to deserve it.



Well, my dear, I am in hopes that you will have but little reason to blame his negligence for the future,  because I know he intends this very day to solicit your approbation.



O he does me infinite honour, and I suppose you imagine he is entitled to one of my best curtsies
  34
for so extraordinary an instance of his condescension;  but, Caroline, I am not altogether so critically situated as to be glad of a husband at any rate,  nor have I such a meanness of disposition as to favour any addresses which are made to me with a visible reluctance.



A visible reluctance, my dear ?



Yes, Caroline, a visible reluctance.  'Tis true indeed there are a good many kind-hearted creatures who can stoop to fatter a fellow's vanity, even while he treats them with contempt;  but I am made of different materials, my dear,   I love to mortify the presumption of those confident puppies, who ask my hand with as much familiarity as if they ask'd a pinch of snuff, and seem to say, so child, I want to make you the upper servant of my family.



You are a whimsical creature, Harriot,  but how can you contrive to invalidate the contract between my brother and you, if you are even serious in your determination?



If I can guess right, your brother will himself find a very expeditious method of breaking it.   However, if he shou'd not, I am in no great hurry for a tyrant, and my Strephon's impudent brow shall be pretty well loaded with wrinkles, before he finds me in the humour of saying, whenever you please, good Sir,  and I am very much oblig'd to you.



Well, well, Jack must solicit for himself, and I am sure, notwithstanding this pretended want
  35
of feeling, you are no way destitute of goodnature and sensibility.



Good-nature and sensibility, Caroline;  ay, 'tis this good-nature and sensibility that makes the men so intolerably vain, and renders us so frequently contemptible.  If a fellow treats us with ever so much insolence, he has only to burst into a passionate rant, and tell a gross lie with a prodigious agitation;   in proportion as he whines we become softened; till at last, bursting into tears, we bid the sweet creature rise,  tell him that our fortune is entirely at his service, and beg that he will immediately assume the power of making us compleatly miserable.







While he, scarcely able to stifle his laughter, retires to divert his dissolute companions with our weakness, and breaking into a yawn of insolent affectation, cries, poor fool she's doatingly fond of me.  However, Caroline, to convince you at once with regard to my sentiments for your brother  







Let me tell you now you have determin'd against Sir George, that this very coxcomb as you call him, this Narcissus, who can love nothing but himself, according to your account  







Is the only man I shall ever think of seriously  
  36
There, wonder,  be amaz'd that I don't see with your eyes,  and despise my want of taste; I'm a mad girl, you know, and possibly like Sir George for his peculiarities,  but still foibles are less culpable than faults, Caroline, and the vanities even of a coxcomb arc more ealsily cured than the vices of a libertine.





Mr. Villars ladies, sends his compliments, and is ready if you are disengaged, to play over the new air which you commended last night at the Opera.



O we'll wait upon him instantly. 




O yes, we'll wait upon him instantly!



How can you be so provoking, Harriot?



What, provoking to wait upon your Corydon instantly.  Come, my sweet shepherdess, let me shew it to the parlour. 






Mr: Willoughby is return'd I find, and has got the letter Cornelia left for him.  Well, by this time she's with her husband that is to be, and will, I suppose, be speedily on her journey.  The Captain can't recede now, and let his father be pleated or displeased, he is still heir to his title and fortune.  What a difficulty I had to shew her the necessity,  pay the propriety of this measure;  
  37
fond as she is of Dormer, it was hardly possible to engage her in it, and she seem'd at one time more determin'd to give him up for ever, than betray the dignity of the female character.  Dignity indeed I think I know what belongs to female dignity, as well as most people;   these very young girls, however, art strange creatures;   their nicety is not in the least wounded when they tell a man they love him.  But O'tis a deviation from dignity to own they wish him for a husband.  Here comes Mr. Willoughby;  he mus'nt know my share in this transaction 'till he finds himself happy in the good consequences, and owns there is at least one sensible head in the family.




Let a coach be call'd directly,  she must certainly be gone off to this libertine Dormer.



Well, have your elevated notions done you any service, or has all turn'd out for the best now?



Madam, madam, don't distract me,   don't distract me,  I am sufficiently miserable without these unnecessary reproaches.



O you are! I am heartily glad of it  



Yet something whispers at my heart that all will still turn out for the best  







Yes,  the dispensations of providence are always
  38
ways founded on justice;  and none are ever sufferers in the end, but those who have merited the utmost severity from its hands.



Fine philosophy truly;  and I suppose you wou'd have thought it for the best if you had lost me, as well as your daughter?




I wou'd have tried at least, madam, to be as easy as possible under so great a misfortune.



You wou'd you barbarous man,  but you are miserable enough without such a circumstance, and that's some comfort to me.   Your obstinacy has made your only child desperate, and you have thought it better to run the hazard of her ruin, than to establish her happiness on a certain foundation.



I tell you, madam, any distress is preferable to the perpetration of a crime; and there was no way of acting upon your principles, without the blackest ingratitude to the common benefactor of my family.   I feel for the indiscretion of this unhappy girl with the severest poignancy, but I rejoice that my partiality for her led the father into no action that could impeach the probity of the man.







This, madam, is a consolation, a great consolation in this hour of affection; and let me tell you that in the severest trials, the truly honest feel a satisfaction, which is never experienced in the most flattering moments of a guilty prosperity.



Well, well, follow your own course, and answer for the consequences.  Had my advice been taken,   but who indeed takes sensible advice now-a-days;  you never took my advice in your life, and you see what the effect has proved to your unfortunate family.



A truce with, your wisdom, madam, I beseech you; for if it only teaches you to be worthless, it wou'd be happy for you to be the greatest idiot in the kingdom: but I have no time to waste in words, every possible measure must be taken for the recovery of this infatuated girl  



And suppose you shou'd not be able to recover this infatuated girl as you call her,  what medicine will your philosophy in that case administer for so great a misfortune.



The best of all medicines,  the consciousness of having never deserv'd it. 



Why you ill-bred brute won't you take me along with you  I must go with him to see that every thing is conducted with propriety. 

