Gent.
WELL met noble Captain, you're wellcome on Shore,
Pray when did you land?











No by G d; 'twas a wonder I landed so soon,
For the Wind has blown hard since the change of the Moon.



Pray what News do you bring from the African Coast?



Why good News I think I had surely been lost,
If NEPTUNE the Sovereign God of the Sea▪

Had not interpos'd twixt EOLUS and ME.
But what's the most talk'd of in this famous City,
Where the PEOPLE are all so polite and so witty?

So extensive the Place, it must something afford:



Why faith honest Captain, I know not a Word
That's worth my relating; yet list and you'l hear;
Tho' 'twill rather chagrine you, than please you I fear:
Our GENTRY of late, to their Honour be't spoke,

(Who think themselves wiser than all other Folk)
Have acted, like People bereft of their Senses,

For Gentility's lost when the Player commences.




The Player commences! Why what do you mean?



Have Patience good Captain, I'll open the Scene:
You must know that in London some People there are,
So fond of the Greatness, that waits on a Play'r,
That at once they turn'd ACTORS themselves to expose;

To the Pity of Friends and the Censure of Foes:




Lord what cou'd induce them such Madmen to be;



Oh you know the French Phrase, a la Mode de Paris,



Sir, the French have perform'd*




oh then 'tis all well

The English must follow them THO' 'TWERE TO HELL;
Where if Cerberus did not the French Men affright,
(But would let them go visit the Regions of Night)
Each Monkey, would after them, like a Brave Fellow,




As they've done now by playing the Fool  and OTHELLO.
There's a Fable I learn'd it at School Years ago,
I'll relate it, I think it is quite apropo:

On a Time, as (Fame says) the Apes acted a Play:

Tho I know not the Date of the Year or the Day,
Nor is it material since it was enacted.
And For Apes, 'twas done better than could be Expected?
The Asses Soon heard on't and they must Needs try.
Yet they used this Precaution that None should be by,

But Those Who Were really Asses indeed:
For (says they) they may Laugh? if we do not Succeed;
But our Gentry So Confident bold, and Conceited,

Ne'ver used this Precaution, But Fairly admitted.
An Audience of Critics, To See their Fine Play,




Then the Asses In Fact Acted wiser than They.
Pray How Was't Receiv'd were the Hearers quite Civil?





Ay, or else the Whole Play had Gone Souse to the Devil.


Good Manners Obliged, them Somtimes to applaud;
Tho they Little Deserv'd it:



I Believe so by G-d.
And Pray What expence Might attend this Affair,




Why FIFTEEN HUNDRED POUNDS our papers declare.




Fifteen Hundred! D'ye Say, Why G-d Dam my Blood
So much Money Spent to do no Sort of Good,
How much more Commendable would it have been?
Since Objects of Pity So frequent are seen.
With benevolent Hands to have giv'n it to Those,
And not paid so dearly themselves to expose;



Faith Captain you're right, my Opinion's the same,
For in every Respect they are greatly to blame:

Now if I was an Actor, this Method I'd take,
The Stage and its Drudgery both I'd forsake;


Turn GENTLEMAN now, as the GENTRY turn Players

And exhibit a Taste far genteeler than THEIRS.

