


HAve you yet Learnt Secropius, from whence this Rumour comes concerning Hungary?



I can by no means find the Author Sir; yet the whole Town is full of it, 'tis in all mens mouths that Prince Phillocles is Crown'd King of Hungary, yet •…one know why they say it?





It cannot be, these Letters are but three dayes old, in which Antillacus onely mentions Phillocles return'd to Belgrade, having chased the Germanes home: 
Enter the Princess Ordella, Selin∣dra, and Ladies to them



Daughter I sent for you to partake the Newes these Letters bring; they speak Phillocles his Victories over the bold Germanes, by which we gather, he will be shortly here; We will welcome his return Ordella, with a Solemn Tri∣umph, to raise his great thoughts to Higher Actions; To this end I sent for you, to think of some new way to Entertain the Princess Astella, who no doubt your Brother will bring with him.



Sir, I am so pleas'd to hear my Brother's well; I cannot yet enjoy his Conquest.



Secropius, be it your care to see these Tri∣umphs ordered for Phillocles, as they were for me when I return'd Victorious out of Asia; And Cle∣onel thy charge is to Summon all our Young No•… bility unto a Royal Turnament, and be thy se•… the Glory of our Court.



You make me blush Sir.



It shall be as you direct Sir; but how soo•… does the Prince write his motion will be this way



My Letters are from our General Antil∣lacus in hast; who by the next, doth promise full Relation.



Have you no Letters from my Brother Sir.





Not yet Ordella; What Newes Ar∣manthus?
Enter Armanthus in Mourning, he kisses the Emperours hand.



Sir, the Prince sent me before, to give you notice of his approach.



His approach! how near?



He is about a League behind Sir.



Is this habit, and thy sad looks, the signes of Victory? are Phillocles and you alone return'd? Is all lost Armanthus.



Your Army is safe Sir, the Germanes have quitted Hungary as you have heard, and that Crown also has been offred unto Phillocles.



And by him received I hope; why then is this sad shew? why such sorrows in thy face? while we were ordering Triumphs to receive Phillocles, thou hast surpriz'd us with such sadness, as becomes ruined States onely.



'Tis for no less a losse I mourn Sir, for by your Victories, so sad a fate is befallen Hun∣gary, that all Noble hearts will feele some sorrow for it, though they merrited no less.



Make me know it.



When we had freed Hungary from the Germane War, and while the brave Prince Pol∣linesso, with Phillocles was Conquering, and return∣ing from the Germane Confines back to Belgrade, the old King Trebellio, and his Eldest Son Barzanes, repented the Conditions made with your Ma∣jesty, for the re-delivery of Moldavia; they forgot
  4
the benefit received by our Grecian Swords, and prepare to send home Phillocles, loaden with Scorns, instead of Trophies.



Strange Insolence! and as high a perjury as ever provok'd Heaven! what followed? how did Pollinesso bear himself?



The Young Prince Pollinesso was a firm Friend to Phillocles, and Endeavour'd what he could, to divert his Fathers, and his Brothers wicked purposes.



I'le make the whole Nation shrink under my Just Anger.



It will not need Sir, for as they secure∣ly sought to seize on Prince Phillocles (who lodged in the same Castle with them) it so pleas'd the gods, that he by a quick securing of himself, the same night the Plot was laid, did accidentally oc∣casion all their ruines, though he intended no harm unto their persons.



Their ruines! are they dead? all dead.



They are Sir, and their crimes, not worthy of that sorrow the Prince has for them, had not the innocent Pollinesso fallen with them.



By what accident fell he?



Pollinesso to do Phillocles Service, was that fatall night conceal'd, where he in a by∣room might discover his Fathers wicked Coun∣cells, unto which he was never call'd, by reason of his avowed love to Phillocles; So that when we from the Princes Lodgings surpriz'd the Castle Gate, the Alarum rouz'd the Hungarians from their close Council, and discovered Pollinesso where he stood hid, who being in that amaze,
  5
compell'd by his Father and Barzanes, to fly with them unto a little Postern Gate, (to us unknown) that led unto the River, where all entering a small Fisher Boat, they hasted down the stream to their own Camp, which they found newly de∣stroy'd by our Army: (a mischief they designed that night on us;) frighted by this ruine, they all return into their Boat, and by a suddain wind that rise, were all drown'd in the rough Danube.



Why had not Pollinesso notice of your pur∣pose?



We had no time, nor could we come where he stood Conceal'd, if Phillocles had delay'd he had been lost; and then our design being only to Seize on Trebellico, and Barzanes persons; we could apprehend no danger towards Pollinesso.



Where is Astella? how did she escape? how does she bear her Father and her Brothers losse? how does she look on Phillocles? and how become the Crown, and Throne, now they are her own?



After this sad accident, Phillocles was inform'd that Astella was convey'd away before the War, on purpose to abuse him; but where conceal'd, none knew but those who were with Lascares drown'd.



But how has Phillocles despos'd the Affairs of Hungary?



The Hungarians much amaz'd at Astellas absence; did urge Phillocles to accept the Crown, as by the hand of heaven thrown on him, but he without delay, delivered up the sole power and trust unto Orsanes, and five more, untill Astella might be found; and then by the consent of all,
  6
he did Command Antillacus in his return with the Army, to take possession of Moldavia, which by a double right is now again rejoyn'd unto your Empire Sir.
Enter Prince Phillocles, and Lords in mourning; with Servants he kneeles and Rises.



Phillocles the gods are just, they have blest thy undertakings, which thou shouldst not grieve, but thank them for, they have saved me a labour too, in punishing those ingratefull perjur'd Princes.



Had not Pollinesso fallen, I had not cast a∣way a sigh for all the rest, for him, my whole Life spent in sorrow is not enough, He was as Noble, as the others were unworthy; he and I, contracted such a Frindship, you would have thought but one heart had given Life to both.



Thou hast done ill Phillocles, so rashly to despose so great Affairs without my Councel; I hear you have given away a Kingdom, in a Com∣plement.



Sir, what I have done will not abate my interest there; I have also made a promise to search for Astella in our Neighbour Islands, where tis most like she is concealed.



That will be near as great a folly as the other, to what purpose will you run such a haz∣zard? rather meet our Army, and return with it to Belgrade, there let Astella find you securing her interest, in her absence.





I cannot with my Honour do it Sir, Astella may then believe, I sought the Ruine of her Fa∣mily, to gain the Crown unto my self.



What if she do? you may at leisure in∣form her of the Truth; I do Command you to lay by your further thought of this fond Journey, to search for Astella; is this a time to Act Romances in? when the whole World is in Com∣bustion round us; think better on it Phillocles.



I hope my Brother will not throw himself on dangers, without a good Argument to justifie his Actions; this new Journey, gives me new fears for you.



I shall consider ere I go Ordella, and at your Lodgings this night, express my joyes to see you.

Phillocles Embraces his Sister Ordella and leads her out after Lascares.


Onely Selindra stayes and sits •…n a Chair.









Selindra weeping, has the sad tale of Hungary drawn these tears from your faire eyes Madam?



Good my Lord, spare me a while, I am not fit for Courtship now.





I cannot with Honour leave you in the power of such an Enemy, as your sorrow is.



You cannot deliver me from a greater then your self, at this time.



That is not kindly said Selindra, scarce Civil, if you consider my long Love, and my Re∣spects.



My Lord, you know I ever shun'd your Love, and as much as in me lay avoided those Respects, you now upbraid me with.



I do confess you have, tis therefore I now come, to pres•… you to declare if I may ever hope to gain more favour from you; my Sute is present Marriage, may I hope for such happiness at last?



As I never have, so I shall never give you cause to think it.



So Fair, so Innocent, so Gentle, and so Severe, I never saw before. But I shall hope to find you in a better humour at some other time Selin∣dra; your Father interrupts me now.







Unhappy day that I was born, and more unhappy this, that I have liv'd to hear such mis∣chief on: Oh Periander! my Father, and my Brothers are all Dead, Murther'd by Phillocles, Be∣tray'd, and Slain by Phillocles; Pollinesso's dead, my onely comfort is for ever gone, and yet I live to tell it.






Madam the Crown of Hungary is now yours, and Phillocles but the •…nstrument sent by the gods to punish your parents crimes, their per∣jury pull'd this Judgment on their own heads.



It does not become you my Lord to tell me so, nor yet to think it, if you consider Lascare's co∣vetous nature, and Phillocles ambitious spirit, you might with me see all this was design'd to ruine my Family, and so to get the Crown unto them∣selves; but I shall soon revenge it on dissembling Phillocles and bring such a Ruine into Greece, as no time shall parrallel; here to Pollinesso's Ghost, She Kneeles. I vow Phillocles his Life, if ever I can safely reach it.



Madam take heed, least you like them do pull a second mischief on your self; Phillocles you see is Noble, he leaves the Crown to you, when offer'd him by all your Subjects; he Lov'd Pollinesso you have no Argument against Phillocles, he La∣ments him as much as you can.



I Periander, and in sorrow seeks me too; no doubt but he would gladly have me in his power to murther.



I cannot think so; but Madam you should now consider where you are, and in whose pow•…r; in my opinion you must keep this dis∣guise, with all the Art you can; and lay by your sorrow for a while, not practice any thing towards revenge, nor by a look discover such a thought, un•…il I can go to Belgrade, there make Orsanes and the rest, know that you live, that we may finde some way to fetch you home with safty, where
  10
you may with security prosecute your revenge.



I shall take your advise my Lord, now that you comply in my revenge, and study to disguise my grief till your return, but can admit no thoughts, but my revenge on Phillocles; Pollinesso my dear Brother, I will Celebrate thy Funerals in such a manner, as shall speak my Love to thee; and hate to him that murther'd thee;
No Roman Pile e're made so great a flame;
I'le Sacrifice this Empire to thy Name.
Weepes.



Madam, this passion will discover, and de∣stroy you in spight of my Endeavours.



I have now done my Lord, indeed I have.



I can have no Faith Madam, unless you will now promise in presence of our gods, to hide this anger, and not to discover your self till my return, unless some Eminent necessity require, for you will be lost, when known unto Lascares.



I do ingage as you desire, and shall 
Enter Ordella to them with Ladies.



In tears Selindra! what cause hast thou to weep?



My present departure for Ciprus, makes her thus Childish.



Will your stay there belong my Lord?



Not many dayes Madam.



Come Selindra, thou shalt go with me, I'le divert thy tears, by shewing thee my griefes which thou wilt be Concern'd for, if thou dost love me.



Re-enter Ordella, and Selindra, in Ordella's Chamber.



Truly Madam, I am very sensible of your Grief, and do not approve of the Prince his jour∣ney, to search for Astella.



You must not only not approve it Selindra, but with me condemn it, as a rash and hazzar∣dous undertaking; besides the folly of seeking one he never saw, one that he hath no ingagement to! What madness will it be for Phillocles, to put himself within her power, before he knows how she recants her Friends deaths? for if there were such affection between Astella and Pollinesso (as is said) the sight of Phillocles, must needs raise a pas∣sion in her, such as may destroy my Brother, be∣fore Selindra Weepes. his innocence can appear; (How's this? can these tears fall for her Fathers absence a few dayes? or is it for what I utter? I hope she 
Ordella speaks (aside) is not so much concern'd for Phillocles;) Selindra I do take it ill, that you thus lament your Fathers absence, who runs no hazzard a∣bove my sorrow, for my Brothers dangerous Journey, in search of Astella.



Madam my tears were re-call'd by your Highness sighes, by your trouble for the Prince his Journey, your favours have been such to me, that I were unworthy, if I should not weep, as well as smile with you.





Tis handsomly put off,  I thank thee

Selindra, and doe so little doubt thy Love, that I do begg thy best Arguments to assist me, that we together may convince my Brother, and prevail with him to stay.



Madam, I shall obey your commands; and observe your directions as farr as will become me: But I doe fear the Prince will condemn me of much rudenesse, If I shall interpose my vain opi∣nions against his purposes; good Madam doe not put me to doe, what hereafter you will blame me for.



Fear it not Selindra, I love thee better, then to throw away thy credit so! see where my brother comes.
Enter Phillocles, Ordella meets him kindly, yet sadly too.



I have a hard taske on me!


(to complement the man I hate to death▪



Why so sad my Deer Sister; your looks speak a sorrow through your smiles!



Can you aske? and know your self to be the cause of it, can Phillocles be in danger? and Ordella, not be sad! can you think smiles would become my face? when my heart shrinks to think of your rash journey, to seek Astella you
  13
know not where; I can no more put off my fears, then my affection for you.



Dearest Ordella, let not a mistaken cause of fear for me, beget such a trouble in you; there is no danger in my purpos'd Journey, I shall onely search the Grecian Isles, where none dares doe me harme, you know I am engag'd in honour to per∣form, what I have so publiquely declar'd, and I am sure you love my Honour, equall with my Person.



I do so, and could I see the necessity you urge, to search for Astella, my passion should sub∣mit to your reason, and that I may not flatter my own affection, I shall now submit unto Selindra's opinion, who has no reason to be partial to either of our arguments; I prethee good Selindra, speak freely what thou thinks't of my brothers Jour∣ney.



Truly Sir, if I may judg! the Princesse tells you what you should better consider of, then I think you yet have; not that I doe apprehend any dangerous hazzards in the Journey as she does, nor can I finde any arguments fit to per∣swade you from attempting dangers, when your Honour calls you to them; give me leave Sir, on∣ly to aske, how your Honour is concerned to make this search? why do you entend so great a trou∣ble to your self; from whence is this value of A∣stella? who you never saw; why does your High∣ness seek a Woman that has never oblidged you? nor you her, but by the ruine of her Family, in∣senc'd her.



Tis true that I have never seen, nor ob∣blidg'd
  14Astella in perticular; but I have by many hazards of my Life endeavour'd both; the Fame of her Excelling Beauty, and greater Vertue, be∣got in me a desire to serve her, and her whole Family, which I did faithfully, in freeing Hun∣garie from the Germain Yoak: 'twas an unhappy Fate befel her Parents, by themselves pull'd on them, not by me intended; in which sad losse, I beare so great a share, that I have no peace with∣in, untill I have made my Innocence unto Astellas self appear, that she may see, that I had no de∣sign to hurt the Princes persons, nor to Conquer Hungarie.



What you have bravely done in that War, deserves a Trophie, and from Astella no less va∣lue, when she shall be well enformed of all that past there; till then Sir, the Princess thinks it not fit for you to Visit, Astella, for we often see Great Princes Vertues, does not answer the Re∣port Fame gives them.



Most true Selindra, my heart presages a Ruine if you goe; could I lay by my affection to you, and put on Astellas cause, I would undertake to confute those Arguments, you so much trust in: Methinks I see you kneeling, and the inraged Astella, deafe to all you say, swelling with anger, for brave Pollinesso's loss, and ready to facrifice you. come Selindra if ever I have deserved
Ordella weeps,
Love from thee! shew it now by assisting me my own way, by thy best Language: doe thou stand forth, and as Astella, receives my over-confident


She pulls Selindra to Act Astella: She stands before the Chaire of State.
Brother, spare him not Selindra, but suppose you had a Brother as dear to you, as Pollinesso was to her, and that beloved Brother, by Phillocles his rash attempt, sent to his untimely grave; let loose some tears, to accompany those I have shed, and for my sake, put on a look so mixt with Majesty, Grief, and Anger, as may present her Part thou play'st: (I, that look will do it.)



Madam, You see my ready Obedience to your Commands; but will the Prince permit such boldness?



Yes Selindra, since nothing else will satis∣fie my Sister, I am content for once to bear a part in this Childs play, on condition Ordella that you put off your sadnesse if I prevaile.



I shall, so you will stay at home, if she doe get the better of you.



Content: can Selindra frown in jest?
He turns to Selindra and sees her looks angry 
methinks she looks as if she would doe it to the life Ordella.



Yes Phillocles, I can frown when I have just, cause! and will make thee repent this rash at∣tempt to visit me, thou hast beyond my hope, put thy self into my power to punish;



How that angry Cloud spreads! Can those bright Lights suffer an Eclips, and not por∣tend
  16
some fatall Ruine? what if they doe! shall I shake at Thunder, that cannot reach me? be con∣cern'd for an unjust anger! no, not though the gods did threat: But Astella will not nourish a thought mis-be-coming her Vertue, nor so much lessen her great name, by a mistaken passion, to harm a man, whose Endeavours were to serve her.



A mistaken Passion Phillocles! are not my Father and my Brothers dead? though not by thy hand Butchered, yet by thy attempts they fell; is not the glory of our name Extinguish'd? the honour of men fall'n? all lost in Pollinesso's death!



Astellas self is not more free, then I was, from intending evil to her friends; they forc'd me to secure my self; by which they were all lost, their Plots and Perjuries pull'd this Ruine on them: onely Pollinesso was not Guilty, he would not comply with fierce Barzanes envious designes, nor with his Fathers blacker purposes, Pollinesso was a witness of my hazards in that Warr, and did partake an equal share in them, and in the Victory; we often seal'd our vows of Amity in our best blouds together, which did beget so mutual a Love, that our souls moved ever one way; I would rather have dyed with Pollinesso, then live thus to lament his losse; by these unfained tears I would.



Thou speakst a Language so pleasing to my ears, that I could wish my vow to sacrifice thee to my brothers ghost, had never past my lips, for I can see, and value all thy noble actions; and
  17
judg the guilt of my own friends that sell, and can beare the losse of all but Pollinesso! he you say dyed Innocent, free from the others Crimes, full of Honour, Rich in Vertue, in the Blossome of his Age, my onely Joy fell: and you my onely hate, shall dye so too! your Worth, your Youth, & your Innocence, will make my oblation acceptable to those powers, I have vowed you too; vain man, canst thou think Pollinesso's ghost will be appeased with words? or tears! if thou wert ever worthy my brothers love, shew it now, in couragious dying to his memory, for by all our gods thou dyest; a guard there.
She is interrupted by Ordella.




Tis bravely done Selindra, thou madest me start, and shake to see thee look, and hear thee speak with such aweful majesty! how is it Bro∣ther? how do you think Astellas self will receive you? when one so unconcern'd, can use you thus! doe you yield yet? have we the better argument?

Phillocles and Selindra stands both amazed.











I think I shall.



My deer, deer Selindra, let me kisse thee, thou hast oblidged me beyond my power to grati∣•…ie, beyond my expression to acknowledg; the Emperour, and the whole Empire shall thank
  18
thee for Phillocles his safety; come my bro∣ther, let us now finde my father; this change will please him.
Exeunt Ambo.



How near lost was I, on his fresh mention of Pollinesso's death! how dangerous a work did I undertake; and how happily brought off, by the Princess Ordellas timely interruption! I thought my self within my strengths at Belgrade, and Phillocles in my power to punish; I must no•… more of these games, tis my disguise preserves m•… life, and I doe care onely to live to be reveng'•… on Phillocles, the Author of all my sorrows. Oh! but the Princess Ordella sits too neer my heart, to suffer that; she is my friend, if I destroy her beloved brother! I wound her to death; a•… least give her the same intollerable grief for Phil∣locles, I now suffer for Pollinesso.  Oh! horri•… ingratitude! Oh miserable Astella! my Obligati∣ons to Ardella, doe infringe my vows to heaven  yee gods, direct me so; that these differ∣ing passions may not distract me; I would do•… what should become me best, and please yo•… most, though my own life in the attempt be lo•…









MIghty Sir, what you have said, was my thought, when I first heard of the Prince his stay, and had been now my Councel, as the best way to secure his Interest in Hungary, by which Astella must submit unto the will of him that has already woon the hearts of all her people.



Sir, you know I have long lov'd, and long sought Selindra's Love; and Lovers Eyes are quick to discover the like looks in others; tis my duty (as well as my own Concern) to tell your Maje∣stie that I have observed Selindra's good looks, to •…e the Orators that have put off the Prince his journey, not his kinde sisters Importunity, and when your own observation shall inform you bet∣ter, your Majesty will finde this no causelesse •…ealousie in me.



What he tell you sir, is the whisper of the Court, but I look on it slightly, the Prince may have a minde to a Wench, and Selindra is a pretty one; but sir, in my opinion, you should •…ake no notice of such youthfull passages; the •…rince cannot think her a fit Wife, and then no matter who is his Mistresse.










Daughter, you have wrought a go•… work on your brother; thy Interest I see, has pr•… vail'd, beyond my intreaty, or my Comman•… I thank thee for it Ordella, and am glad Philloc•… to finde that your Ears are open unto reason, i•… deed the journey would not have suited w•… your other great actions; I like well thy galla•… spirit; but I like not to hazzard a Kingdome 〈◊〉 a Complement.





first disobedience to your commands, and 〈◊〉 confesse my sister wrought my consent to st•… ye•… I must tell you sir; 'twas because her Arg•…∣ments
  21
complyed with your commands, nor was your command her least Argument.



Thus let me imbrace the greatest com∣fort of my life, thou shalt set ever next my heart
He holds their Armes under his, and walks as he speaks,
 give me thy hand Ordella, and thine Phillocles; What wealth is there beyond these? what joyes beyond those I feel? thus supported! I am the envy of Princes; may all the blessings Heaven can bestow, fall on you both for this love, and this obedience to your old dying Father, tell me Phillocles: how stands the affairs of Hungarie? I have had late Intelligence, that some Commoti∣ons doe appear there: if so? since you have thus discreetly laid aside the search of Astella, in my Judgment, 'twill be next best that you repair to Belgrade with your Army, there by your presence to keep the people in Obedience, untill Astella be found; we know the Hungarians are a busie hea∣ded people Phillocles.



Sir, I have left the Government of that State, in those hands that will neglect no means to invite Astella home; they love her sir; and do want no power to secure the Kingdome for her; my presence at Belgrade, would rather deter A∣stella, then invite her home, and may be justly thought I meant to force, what I yet doubt to sue for: In my opinion sir, I ought to hear more from thence, before I stir that way, but my opinion and my will, shall submit to your Commands.





Thou art still on thy Complements, but my gray Haires are not convinc'd by such Argu∣ments, think better on what I propose, though I

Phillocles and the rest go off.
doe not command, but onely wish it; while I in∣struct your sister with my reasons, that she, and you may consult together.





I shall obey you Sir, and weigh well what you have said, I shall not be wanting in my care for Selindra, nor in my love unto my Brother.



I am satisfied Ordella, and doe onely won∣der why he will not lead the Army into Hungari•… where such apparent need is of his presence.



He will go, if you will have him Sir.



I will think further on it a day or two.
This while Cleonel Courts Selin∣dra, she shews dislike to him.



Cleonel I see loses no time in the War he makes, ply her hard young man, those knit brows do often prove the •…ipher to a smiling heart, and yet Cleonel I must tell you, that I approve not this whining wa•… of Wooing; most Women like to be approach'd with such Alacrity, as shews the mettle men are made of; where is thy heart young man?



Mighty Sir, one frown from bright Selin∣dras eyes, has power to shake me into Attomes, to unman me quite!



I think so, and must my self Wooe for thee,
He speaks to Selindra.

how is it fair one, that you neglect such honour•…  23
and such Wealth, as Cleonel brings with him? he is a man in my eyes worthy the greatest subject of my Empire: Or is it the nice Lovers part you thus do act in Publique, while your united hearts delight in private? say Selindra, when shall our Court flourish in triumphs for your weding? while Ordella provides Ornaments for you, it shall be my care to set forth Cleonel like himself, and fit for such a Mistris: tell me when Selindra, when shall this Jolly time be? come I must press you for my Friend.



I am very sensible of this Honour you now do me Sir, yet cannot chuse but wonder why your Majesty thinks fit to press me to a publique Answer.



You have delayed it long enough, tis a good time to declare now.



I obey Sir, and do confess that I have ever had a true value of Cleonells worth; I have also observed your favour to him, and do believe that he may make the best of Women happy; but yet I think not fit to entertain his Love, I have more Noble thoughts, then to incourage him with hopes, of what I never can afford him, such a re∣turn as his merrit may jus•…ly expect from one more worthy then my self; I must declare that my purpose is not to marry, but to attend the Princess so long, as that honour may be permit∣ted, and her Highness favour shall continue to me.



May all thy wishes be ever on thee, happy will that man be, that gets such a Treasure, as this fair Cabinet contains: I am vanquish'd Cleo∣nel, and I advise thee to tear this Serpent from thy
  24
heart, before it be too big for thee to graspe; (observe you this Ordella?) Phillocles are thy thoughts yet for Belgrade?




They shall be Sir, if you Command it.





Ordella can you guess why my Father does now urge my absence? that so late inforc'd my stay?



Does not the Affairs of Hungary require you there?



No Ordella, I should not then wonder at it.
Enter Messenger.



Madam, the Emperour calls for you.



I'le o're take him presently; I have much to say to you Brother, pray stay my return; good Selindra Entertain him in my Chamber, with Cleonells last Melancholly Song, I like so well.




Cloris we see the offended Gods,
At first do shew, and shake their Rodds,


That they may rather threat, then strike,
So we forgoe, what they dislike:
These faulty streams, shall flow no more
Above their banks▪ as heretofore;
Nor swelling tempest from my breast,
Hence forth thy Virgin cares molest;
All shall be fashion'd to thy will,
So thou wilt let me Love thee still;
My Lips shall not a word let go,
That may offend to tell thee so;
But to dissemble, or deny
That I do Love thee were a lye
Would stain my soul, 'twill prove a spot,
To look as if I Lov'd thee not.



This charity becomes you Madam, and Cleonells lines I see are smiled on, though himself be not, but why did you with such severity, in publique disclaim his interest, and seem to reject a man so worthy, when the Emperour himself wooed for him?



'Tis the Princess Ordellas pleasure, that I should learn his Song Sir, and not my fancy to the maker of it, though his love, and respects may challenge a greater complement from me, for I shall ever acknowledge obligations to Cleonel, yet not think fit to treat a Marriage in my Fa∣thers absence, by whom I shall be wholly rul'd in that matter, if he think fit to make that choice for me, I must submit.



Give me leave Madam so far to interest 
Phillocles takes her hand, she shews dislike.  26
my self in your Affairs, as to aske if your thoughts for Cleonel be such, that you will not admit the like profession from another; For though my Fa∣ther cannot match him in his Dominions, I believe that I can find you a Servant as faithfull, and as full of love; one every way as worthy your favours, one that will out-bid Cleonel, to gain Selindra, do but 




I beg your Highness pardon for some time.





Thus to leave me while I was speaking to her, is a scorn I look'd not for; Selindra was not wont to be so rude, nor I so foolish, sure my looks and Language rendred me Rediculous, so slight, that she blush'd for me, which to hide she thus withdrew, leaving me to wonder at my self, that am of late become, what I want a Name for;  If this be Love, and this the Effects of Love, I'le tear the Monster from my heart and be my self again, before it grow too mighty for me; my hands cannot reach it, no force can touch it, tis a subtile foe, not to be compell'd; tis reason only must prevail; Selindra loves, and dis∣sembles her affection to Cleonel, neglecting me; how unworthy then am I, that seek to separate united hearts; how fond, to Cove•… what another does Enjoy; how much am I now fall'n below my self, by this passion?
He throws himself on the Couch sadly.





When went my Brother hence Selindra?



He sits there Madam.



My Father I fear has too much cause for what he said; Prethee leave us a while Selindra, and let none disturb us.

Ordella goes to Phillocles, he starts at her approach.







She is not here, why do you stare thus on me? are you not well?



Onely a little dull for want of sleep Or∣della; but why sent the Emperour for you in such hast?



To tell me that Phillocles does love Selin∣dra and to enquire my thoughts of it; I answer∣ed boldly, that you were too Noble to dishonour Selindra, and too wise to neglect Astella and a Crown, for such an idle fancy; I have con∣firm'd him that you have not such a thought, be∣cause I saw him troubled at it; but what is this that thus distracts you?



Ha! what sayes my dearest Sister.



Ye Gods defend that I be not mistaken; Brother what have you done with your self, since I went hence?



My head is full of the Affairs of Hungary, I was contriving how I should secure Astella in
  28
her Throne, and thinking of a thousand other things; but why did my Father send for thee?



This is very strange, I told you why, and you regard me not, it was about Selindra.



About Selindra; prethee Ordella let us talk of something else, thou weepest.



How can I chuse but weep, to see you thus distracted, and all my hopes of future joyes dying in me? Phillocles has left to Love me▪ he dares not trust me with his heart he Loves, and by dissembling seeks to hide his love from me, that can dye for him.



I am guilty Ordella, thy charms o're∣come me, and I do submit to thy severest Judge∣ment, I do love Selindra, and would do more then thou canst fancy, to gain her Love; now my heart lyes open, thou wilt find the wound is deep Ordella, touch it gently my dear Sister.



'Twill not be cured then Phillocles, I must launce it to the quick, and you must indure to hear that Cleonel, and she have been long con∣tracted, and only do disguise their Loves because Cecropius seeks Selindra for himself, tis only untill her Fathers return, they thus dissemble it.



Contracted Ordella! thou hast blasted all my hopes, destroy'd me in the twinckling of an eye, the gods have not a greater curse in store to throw upon me, is this thy cure? I shall sink un∣der the burthen of this remedy! fare-well Ordella, fare-well for ever! for I am undone for ever!



Stay Phillocles I can cure thee yet; Ile stroke

Phillocles going out, in haste turns back.  29
thy wound, and try how that will work, they are not contracted, that I ever heard, it was my pure affection that thus abus'd your ears: by my Fa∣thers command, I was in the bud to crush your love, which by their pretended Contract I thought best to doe: can my Brother pardon my Zeal to serve him this way? and yet trust my love.



I can do both Ordella, now thou haste re∣stored me to life again; come let us sit, that I may at large declare my purpose concerning Se∣lindra, doe you remember Ordella, that day you made Selindra act Astella? how I was then con∣vinc'd, and overcome by her; how she spake then! and with what Majesty she appea•…'d! Me∣thought then if Selindra were not born a Queen, yet she was design'd to be one! from that hour I lov'd her, (and you the occasion of my love,) I have since observed her strictly, and well weighed all her perfections, and consider∣ed Cleonells hopelesse suit to gain her: if she can afford me love Ordella; I would wade deep in blood it would look like vanity, to tell thee how great things I would doe to win a value from her.



When I consider Selindra's Beauty, and her worth, I cannot blame your admiration of her, truly brother, I do wish your desires upon you, but know not how I can comply, or how to serve you this way?



I have weighed all kinde of arguments Ordella, and doe allow them to be good worldly thoughts, fit for Princes that have no other hea∣ven on earth then their Wealth, and their Domi∣nions!
  30
 I tell the Ordella to be Emperour of all the world is poverty without Selindra! if thou lovest me, thou wilt use thy interest to perswade her to cast off all thoughts for Cleonell, and re∣ceive me, who she yet shuns: now my Si∣ster speak comfort to my soul; that must languish untill you ingage for me.

Ordella sits silent a while, and he staring on her.



I have been thus long silent Phillocles, to consider how I might comply with your desires, and not break my Fathers trust, doe but shew me an honourable way, and I will serve you with the same Zeal you wish it; but if I should consent? how can you avoid Cleonell? or how disguise your love from my Father?



Wee'l think of twenty wayes to blinde the old mans eyes, and as for Cleonell, I will so over∣load him with Wealth, and Honours, that he shall gladly give up his interest in Selindra, (if he have any!) but if he refuse! I will become his Rivall publiquely, I will either carry the faire prize or loose my self Ordella; say now, will you strain a Complement with my Fathers trust to save thy brothers life and honour?



Pardon me heaven! if I offend by varying from my Fathers trust, to save my Brothers Life and Honour! Phillocles now I am yours, imploy me like a Sister that you love, put me not to use artifices unworthy of that value, the World now holds me at.



By all our gods, Ile rather perish, then per∣mit
  31
thee to act any thing unworthily: Deerest Ordella lose no time to make known my affection to Selindra, while I seek Cleonell, to make him mine.



Since no argument can prevail against your passion, I am content to be directed by you.



Thou wilt make me happy then Ordella! beyond all the State arguments.
The greatest Polititian can invent,
Or brightest messenger from Heaven's sent.






This falls out well for my designes upon Selindra, the Prince his absence, will give me op∣portunity to effect, what his presence might pre∣vent, for 'tis now most evident that Selindra slights my Professions in hope of Phillocles, who is become my Rival; by subtilties I must therefore compass, what my power and credit cannot reach: the Prince is too mighty for me, to contest with? but this New War, will do my work see
Enter Phillocles.

where he comes, how full of thoughts he is of late! this love transforms us all.



Ile share the Empire with him if he con∣sent! if he consent! if he will not! I'le force my way. 
He sees Cleonell.




Sir, The Emperour sent me to signify un∣to
  32
you the News from Belgrade, that Astella is ar∣riv'd there, and is rejected by those you left to govern; 'tis his pleasure Sir, that you prepare to march with all possible speed to her relief.



I have just now received an express from thence, which informs me of a Faction there, that did hope to have set up a Counterfeit Astella; but those Tumults are alayed, the plot being dis∣cover'd, all the partakers fled the Country; I therefore hold it fit to hear again from thence, before I stirr: but if my Father will needs have his Army march into Hungarie, I shall advise him to conferr the honour of that War, Cleonell on you.



On me Sir, I am neither worthy, nor ca∣pable of so great a charge; your Highness does me much honour in this thought, but I must not presume to accept the favour, least the Emperour do think me so vain to seek it.



Why Cleonel? thy forward youth pro∣mises great things, and I know the Emperour will be pleas'd to see me joyn to heap honours on thy deserving head; I will undertake it with my Fa∣ther, and shall not doubt to say, thou wilt deserve the sole Command of all our Forces.







I tell thee Cleonel, tis in thy power to lay an Obligation on me, such an Obligation Cleonel, as half my Empire cannot recompence; Say,
  33
may I hope such kindness from thee? but if it be not in thy heart, do not flatter me into a hope of what I shall not find.



Sir as you are my Prince, my duty binds me to serve you with the hazard of my life and fortunes.



I thank thee for thy love, as I do all that will like thee, say, and do as much, but I would have ingagements unto thee, beyond the com∣mon complement of other Subjects.



Your many favours Sir, have so much ob∣liged me beyond all others, that your Commands (what ere they be) shall make me happy.



Take heed Cleonel, do not ingage too fast, for I shall demand what thou hold'st dearer then thy life; darest thou hear me now?



Speak boldly Sir, I am yours, and all that's mine is so; I hope he will discover his love to me.




Thou art indeed my fate, or I am thine I would have thee give up to me thy interest in Se∣lindra, dissolve all ingagements between her and you: my dearest friend; thus thou mayest bequeath an Empire to me, that I prize far above this I am born to, start not at it, for I will 
Phillocles Embraces him. wear thee in my bosome, thou shalt be the grea∣est and the richest man in Greece!











What is all Greece worth, without Selin∣dra?  34




Thou doest not mistake, 'tis onely that can make me happy.



And onely that I cannot grant, I can no more consent to part with the hope of such a hap∣piness, then with my interest in Heaven; pray Sir, find some other way to try my Faith.



The Gods cannot give thee a means to oblige me another way, themselves cannot bles•… me with a gift, that I can prize beyond Selindra.



And you would have me debauch thi•… young Lady, for your private pleasure?



By all that's holy I would marry her.



Marry her! what shall then become 〈◊〉Hungary, and Astella?



Thou shalt have that Crown, and her I'le woe her for thee, I'le fight that Conquest o'•… again, and give it thee, if she refuse.



Will you get the Emperours consent 〈◊〉 this exchange?



Yes, or I will do it without him.



(All this shall to the Emperour,) (Asi•…
  35
but if you can do neither? this inestimable jewel you would have me throw away.



Will it be thrown away; if placed on me?



I might have put my words into a Court∣lier phrase I do confess, but I can never mould my heart to such a form, as shall consent to make my tongue betray it: I swear by all that's good, I never can relinquish my interest in Selindra? I do prize my weak hopes there, above all the wealth and honours you can lay down to purchase it.



He has abus'd me all this while, to get the secret out, which shall now consume him; since he will not consent, his base treachery shall be my first step to climb unto Selindra.

Phillocles stands silent musing.





Cleonel is go∣ing out▪



Stay Cleonel, I have more to say; I have considered my rash suit, and cannot with Justice quarrel with thee for not parting with such a Treasure as Selindra is; but I must call thee to ac∣count for thy late smiles, and false fawning on me, •…nd for thy base treacherous kindness, by which thou hast betray'd me to reveal a secret too great •…o trust thee with: Thus I lay by my great∣ness,
  36
and as a private injured man, I draw my sword to kill thee.



But I must not lift up mine against my Prince, I have been ever taught to draw my sword in your defence, and shall be as glad to serve you with it, as I should be proud to use it in this cause against any other man; I dare scarce shew it you Sir.




I have now made my self thy equal, by my rivalship in love; either defend thy self, or by heaven I'le kill thee.
They fight, Phillocles hurts an•… disarms Cleonel; as the Empe∣rour comes in Phillocles thro•…Cleonel his sword, and goes out
Enter the Emperour, Cecropius, and Attendants.



What insolence is this so near us? Cleo•… this posture does not become you in this place.



You will pardon it Sir, when you sh•… know I only drew to save my life, not to offend t•… Prince, who swelling with rage, came like a rui•… on me, because I would not quit my Interest Selindra unto him, to be his wife Sir.



Is this true Cleonel?



You'l find it true Sir, I could have h•…Astella and her Crown for my consent; 'tis so•…  37
sure to deny another, what I cannot get my self.



Has he not hurt thee?



Not much Sir, you came in just as he fell on me.



This must be timely cared for; Cecropius send presently and fetch Selindra to your Lodg∣ings, this night she shall be your charge, to mor∣row let her be sent back to Ciprus to her father; and be you sure Cecropius that Phillocles do neither see her, nor send to her this night.
Enter Ordella, Selindra, with Ladies.



She is here Sir, with the Princess.



Where is my brother Sir?



He is gone hence hurt Ordella, (I wish he were else) fighting forsooth for Love! you now see what mischief your fondness to Selindra has produc'd; your brothers life endangered, and the Empire tottering: Cecropius take Selindra to your care, as I comm•…nded let her be sent home, at∣tended as befits her quality: Ordella come you with me.
All goes off but Ce∣cropius, Cleonel and Selindra.




Leave us a while Cleonel, Madam, you
Exit Cleonel and har∣kens at the Scene.
now see the evils I foretold, are come to pass,
  38
these young fiery spirits will never submit to suf∣fer either to enjoy you: do but consider how hap∣py you may be, by being mine, though I am not so young; yet many men of my years have made young Ladies happy: of my love you have had long tryal, my Power, my Honours, and my Wealth, will prove as pleasant as the smooth chin of Cleonell: Phillocles his wife you cannot be, his M•…striss I hope you scorn to be; much may be said, Lady on this argument, but the time allows it not, to morrow early you must to Sea, unless you will bless me, by being mine.



Is it even so my good father? I shall shew
He peeps in
you a trick for yo•… trick, if my skill fail not!



My Lord, I must now give you the same answer I have ever done, that I can never have af∣fect•…on for you.



No matter, few old mens wives have any.



My Lord, I do submit unto the Emperours commands, pray let me be sent away.



'Tis my humble love begets this con∣tempt

 I must try her another way, Madam, you know the Emperours humour well, and you have heard how eagerly he covets to joyn Hungary to Greece, by Phillocles his match with Astella, and how much he abhors his love to you, is evident: The truth is Selindra, you are this night by his command, to be ravished by my son Cleonel, to that end send thither, which will allay the gal∣lant Prince his appetite to marry you, and re∣mo•…e
  39
all further fears of that matter: 'Tis yet in your own power Madam by obliging •…e, to pre∣vent Cleonells force, who •…or undertaking so base an act, ought to be dispis'd.



Ravish'd, I'le rather dye, then suffer Cle∣onell, or yield to be your wife; the gods will not permit such wickednesse!



Please you to retire unto your Lodging Lady: 
He leads her in and r•…turns.
•…There is no way to win this foolish Girl, I am an∣gerd even to hate her, yet cannot chuse but love her; but why should I lose this 〈◊〉? I may now do, what I only invented for Cleonel I shall curse my self when she is gone, and when no possibility is left, wish it had been so: it shall be; if when I have ravish•…d her, she can consent, I'le marry her, if she will not, I'le poyson her, and being dead at Sea, hi•…e the Marriners to throw her over-board, I will about it while my bloud is high!

Venus propitious be to my design.
I'le offer Insence onely at thy Shrine.






GIven to Cecropius custody! that is to Cleo∣nels embraces; I must see her: 
He knocks at Cecropius's Lodgings, and enter three servants with swords.
 is Cecropius or Cleonel within?







Is Selindra yet at rest?



Yes Sir, long since.



Is it so late? I do believe you do mistake, and she is not; 

Phillocles offers to enter, and they stop him.
 what means this rudeness?



The Emperour has given command, that neither your highness, nor any from you, should visit Selindra; besides Sir, all within are now at rest.



My Fathers command! this is some de∣sign
  41
from Cleonel: are they all at rest say you? whence then is this no•…e I hear?




We know not Sir.



Hark, the same noyse again, 'tis within stand by, Villains give way, or I shall force my pass•…ge through your hearts, 

by Heaven 'tis a Womans voice! it is Selin∣dra's

voice, she calls for help too!



Help, oh help! murther, murther.


Phillocles enters, breaks open a door within, and Cecropius is seen strugling with Selin∣dra, Phillocles takes Cecro∣pius by the Coller, and as he offers to kill him, Cleonel en∣ters and holds his sword at Se∣lindra's brest.



By my Fathers soul, I will strike with thee Phillocles.



Thou darest not be so base to harm such innocence.
Here they look at one another in this posture a while, then Phillo∣cles throws by Cecropius, and runs at Cleonel; he quits Selin∣dra, and meets phillocles; while they fight, the others run out and raise the Court.


Enter the Emperour, with Train and Guard, who part them.




us but your self and now inform me of thi•… Fray, and how he came hither against my Com∣mand.




Mighty Sir, the Prince forced my ser∣vants from the door, and found me threatning Selindra; and frighting of her, as if I meant a Rape, which I onely fain'd; intending to take off Phillo∣cles his affection that way, by which he might ap∣ply his thoughts towards Astella, for if the Princ•… should marry Selindra how can Hungary be yours this Sir, is the truth.



I wish thou hadst done, what thou onely talkest of, •…r this young man will ruine all my
  43
hopes of Hungary, if we do not prevent him! 


it must be poyson Cecropius; I see no less will do it; Selindra must dye, and that presently.



And shall •…ir, if you so direct; by to morrow night it shall be done.



Be it so then, 'twill be the least evil; and the onely way to secure all the rest; let her be poysoned.






Poyson her, my curiosity was to good purpose at this time; was ever gray hairs so wic∣ked? how to prevent this mi•…1chief I know not; Selindra will never credit it from me; yet I will urge her hard, and if I do get belief, and by this means bring my designs to pass! I shall find doors strong for Phillocles to force: Love and Venus guide me.

Cleonel goes out and returns Selindra flying before him, with a knife drawn, which she holds at her brest.



Hold Cleonel, if thou presumest to touch me, this knife shall be my rescue.



Will this distance, with my obedience,
  44
and my humility remove your fears? by He steps back and kneels.Selindra's self I swear, my only business is to save that life you threaten, does my heart and my looks so ill agree? that you can fear harm from me.



Art not thou Ceeropius's son? and does not his wild blood run in thy vains?



No Madam, I am no whit allied unto Ce∣cropius the Ravisher; he was a Man when he made me, and is now become a Monster; such as I dread to see Selindra under his Roof.



My Lord, that posture does neither become you nor me, pray come no nearer.
He rises and comes towards her.



You will pardon my approach when you shall know the cause of this unseasonable Visite, I have by accident o're heard the Emperour give my Father order to poyson you, and he is pro∣viding to do it, this next night.



I am glad to hear they are grown so mer∣ciful, death is less dreadful then his Rape, but how can I credit this from you? and how a∣void it, if I do?



Can Selindra believe my love could ere conceal such a mischief? or that I will omit any endeavour, to preserve her from it?



Were not Cleonel akin to the Ravisher; I might believe he would detect a Poysoner.



If I tell you a false word, may suddain plagues seize on me, and if you plea•…〈◊〉•…ake me
  45
the blest instrument of your escape; the Honour will be ample recompence for any hazard I shall run: I have Madam a strong Castle within the Forest, about a League from hence, thither I can convey you first, and then whither you please.








By our Houshold gods I swear to do it, by this fair hand I will observe my Oath, and
  46
what ever else you shall command me: though it be late, we must this night depart, you must make ready, while I take order for my Ser∣vants, and my Horses.



May I not see the Princess e're I go? will not to morrow night be time enough?



To morrow night brings death beyond all power to hinder; we should be going while we talk: Let no fears disturb you Madam, I can command the opening of the Ports at any hour; all shall be according to your wish.



Heaven grant it Cleonel:
When I remember the strict vow you've made,
It were impiety to be afraid.






Enter Ordella, to visit him as in his chamber, the Guard at the door appearing.



Thou art welcome Ordella, let us sit and talk sadly.



My coming is to divert this sadness which you too much indulge.



Does not my sorrow become me Ordella? canst thou wish me merry, when thou considerest my Condition? who is there now in Greece more scorn'd then Phillocles?





Who more honour'd? thy Victories shine bright upon thee, thy vertues are unparal∣lel'd, thy self ador'd by thy own Subjects, and by other Nations coveted; let not my brother pro∣voke the gods by his ingratitude.



Thou art mistaken my dear Sister, I am not that Phillocles thou meanest; not he that cha∣sed the Germanes out of Hungary, I am one that Cleonel dares Rival, and with a single arm can check my force; a poor contemn'd prisoner I am, a man with half a soul thou seest; do I not become my Goale?



I am sad my self to hear you talk thus; but, my Brother, your affairs do require your present Counsel; pray let us consider how Selin∣dra may be secur'd from farther danger.

Phillocles starts up hastily.



Is Selindra in danger? speak Ordella, what danger? who dares threaten her?



You mistake me Brother, I was about to tell you that in my opinion she will be safe at Ciprus, and do think fit when she takes leave of me to let her know your Love and Resolution to marry her, which will soon dash Cleonels hopes; this I could not yet do, by reason she was so sud∣dainly committed to Cecropius; your looks do fright me, and your unquiet thoughts will ruine you.



Thou art my onely comfort, thou shalt still direct, and I'le obey, prithee Ordella chide me when I do amiss; methinks thy looks speak good success; I do approve her absence for a while at Ciprus, because you like it, and I will have
  48
patience too, because you say 'tis fit.



Patience will become you best, and be•… suit with your affairs.



Thou Councell'st well Ordella but can•… not fancy what a broken heart endures; m•… whole soul labours under the burden of my Love, and to that is added her neglects more weighty, and to this double load, my fathers unjust anger falls upon me, as if I were not sinking fast enough before.



My fathers anger will be soon over.



I wish it not Ordella, may his fierce anger urge him on to my destruction, it will be hand∣somer to fall so, then to perish by Selindra's scorns.



You raise imaginary evills that are not; I am confident Selindra has no thought for Cleo∣nel, nor can I doubt but she will meet your love, with as bright a flame as yours is.



Oh! that I could suffer such a hope, or such a thought possess me, I would then meet my fathers frowns, and blow away his thunder; did Selindra love me, I would wage a second war with heaven to gain her, and be more proud to fall her Martyr in so high attempt, then fit next to Jove, with her neglects upon me.




Madam, the Emperour sent me to see if Selindra were here with you.



What means my Father by this? Is she not a prisoner with Cecropius?





She was, but is now missing, at which Cecropius is half mad.





Madam, I come to let you know that by day-break Cleonel, with Selindra past the Ports, and about two hours after were met on that way that leads to his Castle.



Let them that love me follow me.

Phillocles snatches Antil∣lacus his Sword and runs at his Guard who give way.
As Phillocles goes out, he meets Lascares, and Cecropius▪ and wounds Cecropius in the arme.



Traytor, Villain: stay all; I do com∣mand you stay Antillacus: See the Court-Gates lock'd, that none go after him; Cecro∣pius do you retire and look to your hurt, he meant it at thy heart Old Man; may thy Sons good Sword revenge it on him, if they meet, and he fall under it.



Oh Sir! Let not your curses follow my Brother, he has Afflictions enough without them.



Peace Ordella, thy tenderness doth too much nourish thy Brothers follies, I would rather he should not be, then be thus Effeminate; I have fought many Battles, and done great things to settle this Empire; and think you it will be kept▪
  50
and Govern'd by a heart with a dart in it.



Good Sir, let not my Brothers single er∣rour put from your memory all his great Actions, if you would speak mildly to him of his Love, I do believe your Arguments may move him more, then all this rigour can; he has a Noble Spirit, such as you did like, and I know he Loves you Sir



Let me know when he returns.





Are any gone after Phillocles?






Yes Madam, we think Antillacus is gone with Antenor.



But can they overtake him time enough before he reaches Cleonel?



No doubt they may.
Enter to them Antilla∣cus, and Antenor.




Not yet gone Antillacus?



Madam, all the Court-Gates are by th•… Emperours express command lock'd up, an•… Guards set that no man now can passe.



Is it not madnesse to hazzard him alon•… against Cleonel and his company? My Lords, 〈◊〉 you mean to give obedience to this rash com∣mand? and suffer Phillocles to perish thus, wh•… my Fathers anger is allay'd, he'l curse your m•… desty, if not punish it, in case my Brother 〈◊〉 miscarry.





Madam, we have no way to follow the Prince, unless your self command the Guards to let us passe.



Come then with me; I will stand my Fathers anger when it goes highest, rather then let my Brother fall thus neglected.






Those at the Castle do not hear of Cleo∣nel, nor expect him there; sure Antillacus did mistake them, or I him, which way now to take I know not: Tis strange Antillacus and Antenor stay so long, I must not quit this Road untill they come: Hark I hear Men and Horses within the Wood; my business is to search every where: Love guide me to her Rescue, or my Death.






How is it now Madam? your Spirits seem to be return'd, are you yet strong enough to ride on? we have rested long.



I hope I am, 'twas the blow which the bough gave my head, makes me thus ill, the bushes kept me from the ground, so that my fall could not hurt me.



The day is far spent Madam, and we shall be no sooner mist, then follow'd; pray let us to horse, there is a place near, where we may rest for one night secure.





My head grows diszey with this little motion, I fear I cannot sit upon my Horse yet; methinks you might hide me here in these thick bushes untill night, and when tis dark, find some better means to carry me away.



'Twill not be safe to stay longer so near our Enemies.





'Tis Cleonel; turn this way Traytor.

Cleonel holds up Selindra, and sends his Men to Phillocles.




Take the Prince without harm if you can.



Am I not worthy thy own Sword Ravi∣sher.


Phillocles runs desparatly among the men, passes them, and comes up to Cleonel, they all incompass him, fighting, Selindra runs a∣mongst them.



I beg your patience Sir; and do command thine Cleonel, but hear me speak, I do conjure you both; Phillocles brave Prince, look on me with pitty, and on Cleonel with justice; my life being sought several wayes by Lascares,  53
and Cecropius I have endeavour'd to preserve by flight; you must therefore look on Cleonel as trusted, and imployed by me, being ingaged by Oath to carry me to Belgrade, to my Friends there.



Thou art betray'd Selindra, lost for ever; this is not the way to Belgrade, you are now with∣in a mile of his Castle, this way leads to no other place; thou perfidious Villain, canst thou smile at such a treachery?



Yes Phillocles, and will be my own carver now, I must be first serv'd here: do you two carry her to Horse, I'le soon o're-take you.
He delivers Selindra to two off his Men.



To Horse Cleonel; I'le rather dye then stir a foot that way.



Force her to Horse, we have no time to talk.



Force her! thou cursed slave, I'le Sacrifice thee ere she goes.

Cleonel and his two Men fight with Phillocles while the other two force off Selin∣dra: 



The gods preserve the Prince; help, help, murther, treason, treason: 




Upon her cryes, enter six Travetors, Pollider the Chief.



Let some help those that cry, let others search the wood, I'le towards the clashing Swords: how's this three to one.

Pollider runs at Cleonel and diverts him, just as Phillocles had kill'd one man, at which instant the other man hurts Phillocles in the back, and see∣ing this rescue, he runs into the Wood; Phillocles runs after him that fled, believing it had been Cleonel, whom he could not see, because Pollider having run Cleonel through the heart, was fal∣len himself upon him, who being by Cleo∣nel run into the throat, lay also as dead covering Cleonel.





Curs'd be that Woman, accurs'd our •…ate to loose our Prince thus.
They dress him as they talk.





Now the blood issues at the wound, it may prove not mortal.



The blood only choak'd him as he lay, you see his eyes look chearfully.







What's that he said? was it Pollinesso that he named?




The King will live, thanks to heaven for his deliverance.



They call him King too; Pollinesso's name 
Selindra creeps to look on the hurt man, as they dress him. gives me Strength; but that face is none of mine, and yet that name makes that face Lovely to me; How I fool my self with vain hopes of what cannot be.




How is it Sir, your looks are lively, and your wound though it did at first seem desparate, is not very dangerous.



My tongue moves heavily and painful∣ly, loss of blood makes me faint too; how shall I travel with these wounds? my stay here will be very dangerous, and my Journey to Belgrade, too long for one so weak as I am.



The same gods that have preserv'd you to this day, will not let you fall thus.




They talk of Belgrade too; who can this
  56
be? give me way that I may gaze on this wonder.
She rises, crowds in amongst them, and stares on Pollider.




Away wild Woman, thou Author of this mischief.



He looks up again, those eyes are mine, I know 'um now.




Throw her off, tear her away, she di∣sturbs him, sure she is mad.




Tis you are mad, tis you that love him not; why do you haile me thus? whither will you dragg me? did you not call him Pollinesso?











I think we did.



That name is mine, those wounds are mine then.
She offers to go to him, but they hold her off.



I wish they were.



And so do I with all my heart, pray let me go to him, I can heal him with my tears; I'le suck his wounds well, for I have heard wounds have been cur'd so.



How comes his name in her mouth?



Twas not well done of us to name him as we did, best to stangle her, least she discover us.



Shall I shoot her in the head? though the Act be horrid, tis better she perish, then all we.



Let us first hear what she will say to him,
  57
we shall have time enough to kill her after.



I pray who are all you?



Tis very fit indeed that we should tell you.



We are the hurt mans servants Lady, pray who are you? by whom we have receiv'd such dammage.



If my eyes deceive me not, I may be hap∣py; but am yet the most miserable, accurs'd Wo∣man living.



I think so too: 



What Woman is that weeps so?



Tis she you rescued Sir.



Did I rescue her? loss of blood makes my eyes dazzle, and my fancy work even to a lightness; that face brings to my memory somthing that I have known: why does she weep? and why do you hold her so rudely Tenedor?

Pollidor and Selindra both look earnestly at each •…ther.



In charity to me Sir, though they know it not, for had they sooner let me know that Pollinesso liv'd, my suddain joy had slain me.



What is this she sayes?



She is a Witch Sir I think.



Does not my Brother know me yet? has my sorrows wrought such a change, that Pollinesso should not know me?



Oh! my Astella, pardon my dull sight; for I am very weak.




Would I had dyed, rather then be re∣scued at this rate, so joyful, and so sad a day I have not seen before.





He does but slumber Madam, and tis good he should do so.



But slumber say you, it looks so like death, that I would dye to see it.



Madam, the Joy will out-live the sorrow of this day, the Prince's hurt is without dan∣ger; can your goodness pardon the rudeness which my self, and these Lords in our distraction, used you with?



Alas my Lord, I was not sensible of what you did, my mind was so o're-loaden with my griefs, and so intent on Pollinesso, that I heard you not; Now while my Brother takes this rest, pray make me know how he escaped, when my Father and Barzanes fell, and why he has been thus long conceal'd.



Madam, in that sad day, Pollinesso in vain attempting to save his Father, was with my self, and these you see here, cast on a sandy bank, from whence by good swimming we got to shoar, and have been since disguised for fear of Lascares, in several Princes Courts soliciting for aid, to force the Grecians to quit their stollen possession of Hun∣gary; when in the midst of Pollinesso's preparation, he hears that Phillocles had resign'd the Crown to be preserv'd for you; This made us lay aside all further preparation for War, and thus disguis'd to pass this way to Belgrade: It seems by destiny di∣rected to your rescue.



I shall find some fitter time for my own story, twere good that we removed my Brother he walks how are you Sir, has this repose re∣fresht you?





I am something better then I was Astella, and shall soon be well, now I may look on thee.



And I most happy! my brother you must give us leave to remove you to some place of rest, and safety, and you must be still conceal'd; which these new wounds, with your Perriwig will be disguise enough.



I shall be directed by you.



You must also a little counterfeit your voice, least you be remember'd by it; for should Lascares know who were in his power, all his hopes of Hungarie would vanish untill he saw you dead; I am call'd Selindra here.



Who were those Robbers? and how came you amongst them?



'Twas Cleonell, who did beguile me, after he had sworn to carry me to Belgrade, was con∣veying me to his own Castle.



Was not Cleonell Cecropiu's son? and will not his death, be our ruine if we stay here?



My interest in the Princess Ordella, will se∣cure you, and his guilt was such a crime, as can expect no justice from the law to touch you; be∣sides the rescue you brought the Prince, will mer∣rit a reward, but where is Phillocles? where is the Prince! we are all lost indeed, if he be falln; I have been so much distracted, that I mist him not till now!



What Prince mean you Madam?



Prince Phillocles! 'twas he my brother res∣cued; run, look, search about the Wood, for hea∣ven sake search; unfortunate Astella, and unworthy, that could thus long forget him; now
  60Pollinesso lives, I have no hate to Phillocles; me∣thinks his vertues now look gloriously upon him but how shall I look on Ordella? if her be∣loved brother have lost his life, to save my ho∣nour!



Was it Phillocles that I found fighting with Cleonell and his two men?







'Tis strange I knew him not, but I now re∣member as I came in, he did persue the man that fled into the wood, (let some look that way,) Selindra I must glory in my wounds, that have sav'd thee from false Cleonell, and relieved Phillo∣cles, who my soul thirsts to see, next thy self most dear to me.



And mine trembles at his absence.
Enter Phillocles bloody, and weary, leaning on his sword; he calls beforé he is seen to Enter.



Selindra, Selindra, is Selindra safe? has she any mercy yet for Phillocles?



She is safe and happy too, now she sees you alive sir; my heart is so much disturb'd by
She goes kindly to him.
my fears and joyes, that I know not how to ex∣press my gratitude: good sir, let these strangers dress your Wounds, they have shewed much skill on this hurt man.



My Wounds are but slight scratches when
  61Selindra smiles; my joyes are much more danger∣ous then my Wounds.



My life sir, and my honour you have sa∣ved, I must look on you with devotion! pray be pleas'd to own these our Redeemers, and give them some assurance of your Protection, they fear Cleonel's death may by Cecropiu's power with the Emperour, prove their destruction.



I will be their security, Selindras Re∣deemers shall command my Life; of what Coun∣try are they?



Hungarians Sir, Men that since the late War have sought Fortunes in Forraign Lands, and now on private Affairs were returning home.
Selindra brings Phil∣locles to Pollidor.



Unto you Sir, I have a great Obligation, such as my whole Life shall express my Zeale to serve you, for by you Selindra lives.



Sir, I am rewarded much above my mer∣rit, and shall bless the occasion that gave me power to serve you.
Enter Antillacus and Antenor.




Sir, the Emperours much inraged at Ce∣cropiu's hurt you gave him, and at your departure, staid us till now; Is this Cleonels, or your own blood Sir?



Tis neither, Cleonel fell by that Noble hand, whose timely ayd deliver'd Selindra from a
  62
Rape, and me from death; My Arme Antilla•… is grown weak of late, and thy good Sword so du•… it will do nothing in my hand.



But Sir, how comes it that you thus neg∣lect your wounds?



I have business of more weight to thi•… on, now Selindra smiles: Antenor pray h•… you back unto Ordella, and desire her to be 〈◊〉 first relater of Cleonels death; bid her tell my F•…∣ther of his horrid Treachery, and let her magni•… these strangers sent by the gods to saye the inno∣cent, and to chastise the perjur'd Ravisher; ma•… hast Antenor, and tell Ordella that I am in Para∣dice.



She will be glad to hear that you are 〈◊〉 Sir.



Well Antenor, why thou art well, and 〈◊〉 is he, and he, we are all well; But I am blest 〈◊〉 all my heart can wish for; tell my Sister the ge•…∣tle and the fair Selindra smiles, and let her thi•… the rest; I am all Ayre, Antillacus pray th•…Exit Antenor.

help me to rub my wounds, a little smart may 〈◊〉 me know that I am mortal.



If I mistake not Sir, you'l finde sma•… enough in your Fathers rage, when he hears 〈◊〉Cleonels death.



Some anger will do well Antillacus, to all•… this joy within me.



I have some fears too, least Cecropiu's m•…∣lice may ruine us, you know his power Sir.



Let not my Divinest Mistris have so me•…  63
a thought of my power to serve her, let not a sad look appear on this day, that you have dain'd to smile on Phillocles: Madam, tis time that we were moving towards the Town with our wounded friend; how must I call him?



I think they call him Pollidor; Sir, though my confidence in you be equal to the value you are pleas'd to set on me, I cannot chuse but fear Lascare's anger, when I think on Cleonel.



Believe me Selindra, I will rather dye, then let them suffer.
He leads off Selindra, the rest take up Pollidor.




Thus let us march in Triumph to the Town,
Aloud proclaiming Pollidor's Renown;
While the Arched Heaven does Eccho its content,
To see Selindra freed from Ravishment.








SIr, I beg the due Execution of our Laws on Murderers.



And I Sir, beg mercy for those that have sav'd my Brothers life.



I may not hearken to thy suit Ordella, the Lawes must be inviolable, to pardon such a Murther, would pull down Vengeance on my own head, on thine too, on all our Family.




When you remember Cleonells faith, and his many services, I hope Sir you will not deny me Justice.



Cecropius you shall have Justice; go you Antenor, and command the Provost of the City that he seize Selindra, and her fellow-Mur∣therers, let them be all close Prisoners in the black Tower; by to morrow this time, shall their bloods be shed, as they shed Cleonells.



Did you say Selindra should be Prisoner Sir.









Good Sir, call back Antenor till you have heard me speak.



I may not Ordella.



Who can forbid you to be Merciful, and Just? you break the Laws of Hospitality in this; Selindra is a stranger, she is innocent, and cannot suffer justly; Cleonel was full of horrid guilt, and was cut off by a just hand; the Travellers too have saved Phillocles his life; good Sir, let not Cecropius malice perswade you to do, what you will blush to think on after.



They shall have Justice, and a Legal Try∣all.



Oh Sir! where is your wonted mercy? whither is that goodness fled? how have I lost your favour, that cannot with my Tears, nor Prayers prevail on your mistaken anger.





Is it your Majesties Command that Selin∣dra should be a Prisoner?



Must I aske your leave?



Though not my leave Sir, I cannot chuse but wonder at such rigour!



You have leave to wonder on.



Thus low Sir, I do humbly beg Selindra's
He kneeles.
Inlargement; and an equal Tryal for those that rescued us; 



Selindra as chief accessary, must abide the
  66
Sentence of the Law, in this case of Cleonel: Phillocles thy mean Love has drown'd all my Fa∣vours, and Eclip'st all thy former actions; from this time I shall study to forget thee, unless thou wilt forget Selindra, and Lead the Army to relieve Astella.



I shall obey you Sir in this, and all things else, so you will be pleas'd to send Selindra safe to Ciprus, and set those innocent men free that saved my life.



Degenerate fool, I shall cure this disease in thee; Cecropius send presently for the Judges, Command them by virtue of this my Signet, to put the Lawes in present Execution, upon thy Sons Murtherers; let the rigour of the Law pass on them all.



Ye Gods, to what purpose are men inno∣cent? why is virtue prays'd, and taught us? Good Sir, consider how you do murther these in∣nocents with a shew of Law, and a pretence of Justice.



How dare you talk thus?



You make me desperate Sir.



Do not raise my temper higher, least I cu•… thee off, as if thou wer't no part of me; they shall dye.



Had the Gods so pleas'd, I wish my self the meanest of your Subjects, for I am now a slave unto your passions, and must inherit the cur•… that's due to all your guilts, such as I shake 〈◊〉 think on; 'Tis you Sir, that have murthered Cleo∣nel, 'twas your poyson that Selindra fled from by your confining me, you gave Cecropius first, and
  67Cleonel next the power to become Ravishers; pray let the Law take notice of this; It may free in∣nocent persons.



Who am I tro? Is this Gallant my Son, or my Soveraigne?



Sir I do see fire, and fury in your eyes, and am prepar'd to meet it, 'tis better to dye with those are Noble, then to live thus neglected; by my hand two of Cleonells men fell, 'tis I am guilty of that sin of rescuing Selindra from a Rape: let your Justice and your Lawes grow famous by my blood, 'twill please Cecropius well; by all our Gods I'le not out-live those innocents.



Tis fit to take thee at thy word.

Lascares Draws and Runs at Phillocles to kill him, Ordella steps between.



It will become your own hand best.



Have you another Son Sir, when you have slain my Brother?





Antenor call in my Guard, and carry Phil∣locles to the New Castle; see that he be safe, and close there, as you will answer it with your life; I shall not trust you in the Army now Sir.



Pray Sir re-call this severe command, my Brother has no danger in him, you saw he did not avoid death, when your hand offer'd it.



Antenor, I will be obeyed; by Heaven
Here all Intercede.  68
he dyes that dares dispute my Will.



If I go to Prison Selindra dyes, there is

none can help her, and then I shall have time hereafter to lament her sad fate; Sir, I aske your

pardon for the harsh words I utter'd, I did believe those truths might touch you, and move com∣passion towards those you threaten so much ri∣gour too: but I now see your anger has decreed them dead, and that you have the same thought for me; my last sute is, that since we may not live, we may dye together: I shall submit to any kind of Death Sir; But I have vowed to be no more confin'd.



You of the Guard seize on him.
As the Guard comes toward him he draws.



Against Imprisonment I shall endeavour what I can; command my death Sir, and I will welcome it.



Kill him; Kill the Traytor; dares none stir to do it? Is my breath grown so weak? I'le try my own strength then.

  69Lascares snatches a Partizan from one of the Guard, and wounds Phillo∣cles in the breast slightly, Phillocles holding down his Sword opens his arms and receives the wound; they search his wound set him in a Chair, while Lascares stands amaz'd at what he had done.



Oh, my Brother's slain! how cruel, and unnatural a deed is this?





The Surgeons say the Chief Prisoner will not Live till Morning; I beg Sir, that the Sentence may pass on the rest.

Lascares gives Cecropius no answer, only points to Phil∣locles, lets fall the Partizan till then in his hand, and exit with Cecropius.




'Twas well the Emperours age did not permit his force to act his will, the wound has not past the bone Madam, 'tis but a slight cut in the flesh.



'Tis time that you hasten to the Army, for while Cecropius holds his power, you can not be safe here.





He advises well Brother, untill my Fa∣ther be dispossest of this evil spirit that reignes in him, I wish you away too.



I think it must be so; the Souldiers I hope have not forgot their love to me; My Dear Sister, pray will you o're-take my Father least in this fit he slay all our Friends; say that Selindra did fly willingly with Cleonel, and that she regards not my Love, say any thing to gain alittle time, untill I may do something to relieve them.



I shall do my best: 

Ordella at the door meets Lascares with Selindra in his hand, and Pollidor led in, he delivers Selindra to Or∣della, and points to them to set Pollidor by Phillocles, then goes out with Cecropius and Servants.



What means my Father, by this dumb shew.



Where are we now Tenedor?



Truly Sir, I know not, but I see Friends here.







Those that brought you in were the Em∣perour, and Cecropius; you know Prince Phillocles that whispers with Selindra, that other sure is the Princess Ordella.



Is that the Princess Ordella?



Your presence Madam gives me strength,
  71
and your kind looks give life unto my drooping spirits.



How miserable am I Sir, that am the oc∣casion of all these evils.



Your own sufferings are the onely evils to be lamented, I could curse my self, that brings such troubles on you; but Madam we for∣get to comfort this Gallant man, by whose sword we enjoy our lives: Sir can you pardon me that undertook so much, and can so little serve you?



It was an injury Sir, to think I would re∣ceive my life, ransom'd by your death.



By my wound Pollidor, I have appeas'd my Fathers Rage; by thy Wounds Selindra Lives, and through all these Clouds I see the Tempest ceasing; cannot Selindra speak to him?



I have a heart as full of Gratitude as yours Sir, but not yet any means to shew it; I shall make it my business to serve him.



Has my Dear Sister no complement for Pollidor? by whose valour she enjoyes Selindra and me.



Yes Phillocles, I am studying how to ex∣presse it, for you two have left nothing for me to say: Sir I can only thank you o're again for my Brothers, and my Friends preservation, by which you have obliged me, and the whole Empire, and do deserve some publique Honour, and High Re∣compence.



What honour, or what recompence can out∣weigh this you now heap on me? Madam, if what I have done, be a service that you will own, I have
  72
no wish beyond it; I shall ever on this day keep a solemn Feast unto the Gods, that did direct my course that way, and gave me power to become as happy here, as in Elizium



Let those Lodgings next to mine be made ready for Pollidor, I will not trust him farther from me; Antillacus, go you with as little noyse as may be to the Army, and let the Souldiers know that I will suddainly be with them; some take up Pollidor.






'Twas not revenge, for Cleonel made me press your Majesty to do Justice on his Murtherers, but to cut off Selindra, by which Phillocles might have no hindrance to gain Astella;  But Sir, since you have freed the Prisoner, and are con∣tent the Prince shall marry Selindra, I have done; if you Sir, can lay by all thoughts of Astella; and that Crown, I shall soon forget a private losse.



I must laugh Cecropius to see how thou art abus'd by my feigned shew of kindness, which I only did to heal the wound I gave; had I another Son, by whom I might gain Hungary, Phillocles had found my Force answerable to my Anger; but 〈◊〉 confesse I did relent upon a suddain thought, which made me strike so feebly at him, for now to loose Phillocle, were to throw Hungary away, and to destroy Selindra, were by another kind of stroak to destroy Phillocles.





What other way have you Sir, that I can∣not yet fancy.



A sure one Cecropius, a way that cannot fayle, I will give loose reines to my Sons Love, let him run on, and Joy in his Beloved Selindra, whose sweets once had, and his young Appetite allayed (as most violent passions soonest are) then 'twill be best to take away Selindra by a poyson; then it may be done without suspition, while I urge on the Marriage, joyne in all the Nuptial Jollities, and put on such pleasing looks, as shall make thee doubt my purpose, though thou know∣est my heart.



I see not yet how this can get Astella, or that Crown.



Thou art grown so dull of late, that thou seest nothing; while this joy lasts, Astella may be found, and then Selindra dying, what can hinder Phillocles from getting Astella?



I do submit Sir, and must applaud your purpose, tis a design I do confess much above my reach, and the first mischief I have come short in.






You look chearfully to day Pollidor, we may hope to see you abroad shortly.



I believe I might venture now Sir, though
  74
my Surgeons be not of my mind; but Sir, how do you find the good old Emperour dispos'd?



I like not my Fathers smiles Pollidor, his suddain starts into such extreams, makes me ap∣prehend more danger in his kindness, then his rage; so that to prevent all further evils, I have a purpose to repair unto the Army; and tis Ordel∣la's wish as well as mine, that Selindra would trust her self with me there.



That may secure you both, but will not Selindra's Honour suffer?



Now that Selindra's interest, and his are become one, I see no reason she should fear to go, nor indeed any scruple why their Marriage may not be privatly, and presently dispatch'd, for while the business lingers thus, they give hopes to such Endeavours as would divert it, and do run daily hazzards, by staying here.



Ordella argues what my soul wishes, but Selindra's looks, do not consent to make me so soon happy.



Sir, my looks do be-lye my heart, if they shew ought that would delay a happiness to you, for I have none beyond yours: But Sir, above all other reasons, Pollidor (not being yet able to attend you) if he be left behind, will hard∣ly escape Cecropius's fury?



Most true Selindra, he will be in danger, I shall therefore attend his recovery; without him I will not move; nor will I put a thought in act without thy Councel.



You have both said well, but in my Judgement this is no fit time for such Com∣plements,
  75
when your lives are daily sought.



If you be resolv'd to attend my recovery, I shall propose a sudden fancy of mine, to that purpose, which may secure us.







Suppose Selindra do ask the Princess leave to return to Cyprus, and give out that she onely expects her Fathers coming to convey her thither. Sir, you may court Selindra publick∣ly while she stays, and she seem to neglect your love, and put on a shew of kindness unto me, as in gratitude for my hazzards in her redemption, I will also counterfeit affection to Selindra, and give out that I am of better quality then I seem: This Sir, if well manag'd, will be ground enough to deceive their best Spies, and for some time se∣cure us all.



I approve your thought Pollidor, and if Selindra can undertake her part, doubt not me, I'le put on such a seeming jealousie, as shall puzzle the old Fox Cecropius himself.



I shall easily observe my directions, and soon learn to be civil to a man I owe so much to!



Come Ordella, while they practise love, we will reconcile us to the Emperour, and try to bring him on a present visit to Pollidor, before this fit of his good nature leave him.



Selindra we must find you sitting in a more familiar way with Pollidor then ordinary conversation does allow.





I shall obey you Madam: Now they
  76
are gone, we may enjoy our selves, this happy design of yours, will afford us many hours of freedome.



My soul is joyed to look on thee A∣stella!



And my happiness too great to be exprest by words! that you live, makes this Earth a Paradice to me; my heart can scarce make room for Phillocles, it is so full of Polli∣nesso!



I am all thine Astella▪





It is time Sir, that you retir'd to rest▪ you spend your spirits by so much discourse, which does retard your cure.



You should neglect no means Sir, for your recovery, least by a long stay here, some ac∣cident unlook'd for, may make you known.



I wonder Phillocles does not call to mind that he has seen you.



He believes me dead, as all others do; but I shall observe the best Rules for my recovery however: Now Astella we have time to hear how •…ou were conveyed from Belgrade, pray make me know how you •…ame hither!



That same night that you departed to the Army, and our first Embassadors went to∣wards Greece, to implore Lascares's aid against the Germanes, I was by my Fathers own hand deli∣ver'd
  77
unto Periander, whom I was to call Father; and by him was brought to Ciprus, where the Plague then raging, he transports me with his fa∣mily to this Town.



How came you into the Court then?



On the first Feast-day, I went with Periander to the Temple, that I might see the Em∣perour, and the Princess Ordella, where the Prin∣cess casting her eyes on me, found mine so fixed on her, that I could not remove them, but blush'd, and still look'd on her: by what power led I know not, but she took a fancie to have me live with her, which Periander durst shew no dislike to: thus was I to my great joy call'd to Court, where I became a Companion to the Princess: within a short time Cleonel had affection for me, which did not free me from old Cecropius dotage: of which, with Prince Phillocles his worthy love, you shall know hereafter, for I have now held you too long from your repose.



Dearest Astella thy words are balsome to my wounds;

Pollidor and Selin∣dra embrace.





Your Majesty will not think this ho∣nour too much for Pollidor, when you shall know
  78
he is of better quality then he seems; ha! what do I see?
They embrace and rise disturb'd.



That which should teach thee to have nobler thoughts Phillocles.



How they are disturb'd!



They do it rarely well.




Sir, I am now come to excuse the im∣prisonment you had, and to give you thanks for my sons life; I shall rather endeavour to recom∣pence your merit, then trouble you with words.



Great Sir, this honour, with the many other favours I receiv'd, do shame me to think that you allow me a merit I cannot own; but if the Gods do give me life, my only business shall be to seek occasions to serve you and yours.



I shall contribute what I can to your health, and will please my self with the expecta∣tion of great things from you.
While they talk, Lascares observes Phil∣locles courting Selindra, and she negle∣cting him; Lascares observes Pollidor to be troubled at their Courtship, and is plea∣sed at it.



Sir, you oblige me beyond words to utt•… my sense of your favours.



My purpose is to give you a kind wel∣come,
  79
and a respect suitable to He goes to Se∣lindra.
 your worth, and quality: fair Maid, I know not well how to frame my dis∣course to you, whom I have so ill treated: but I shall no more disturb your joys, I do now make it my suit, that you will defer your return to Ci∣prus, I shall lay my Commands on Ordella, to de∣ny you her consent to go.



Sir, the favours and honours I have re∣ceived here, are far beyond the ills you mention; and my happiness such in the Princess Ordella's love, that I lament the thoughts of my departure; but when I consider the mischiefs past, and fore∣see worse like to follow, 'twere madness not to fly them; when my father is return'd, I shall renew my suit to have the Princess leave to leave this place, and until then make it my care to tend this hurt man, my redeemer! to whom I owe my life and honour!



Selindra if I can add any thing unto thy happiness, I shall do it gladly, for thou art some∣thing more then I have ever found in woman.





What thanks do we owe Pollidor for this disguise! it takes Ordella beyond our hopes; did you observe how my father eyed us, while he talked to Pollidor?



Yes, and do believe Cecropius and he are gone to compare their notes, for that Fox was very vigilant.



Selindra let us enjoy this blest minute.

Phillocles leads Selindra to the Couch, and Ordella sits by Pollidor.






Sir, While the two Lovers whisper, pray oblige me with the knowledge of the occasion of your coming into these parts, by which we have received so great an obligation; and if you please to pass this time with the relation of your own story, unless with your self you would conceal it.



Madam, My story is not worthy your eares, nor my self this honour: yet I have a story, such as will make me blush to ut∣ter, though no crime do belong to it: nor am I what I seem, and yet not fit to appear other, but, Madam, your commands are too high honours to be neglected, my own resolutions shall give way, and my nearest Concerns submit to your will.



I perceive you are disturb'd at my curio∣sity, to know what I believe you would conceal; it may be you have vowed not to discover; truly Sir, for want of what to say, I onely said it.



Madam, I was surpriz'd by your approach, which made my tongue appear less ready then my heart to obey you; your commands, Madam, are sufficient to dissolve any vows of mine, and since you will vouchsafe to hear, I shall re∣late.

Phillocles and Selindra come to them.



How are you Sir, Methinks your eyes do shew some anguish in your wounds, do we not trouble you?


Here Phillocles and Selindra in∣terrupt Pollidor, which puts him into some passion, for he now began to love Ordella.




We have done ill to stay thus long, Selin∣dra 'tis your fault, you should have directed bet∣ter.



No, Madam, my hour to rest is not so precisely to be kept, nor have I any pains upon me, as the Prince thinks; my wounds heal the faster for your company.



You are civil Sir.



Madam, the Prince's kindness, and his care is not at this time necessary: pray Sir, if your occasions call you not, do not take your self away thus hastily.



Pollidor we know your civillity is great, our discretion must not be the less, I see you are disturb'd, and know your pains are great upon you; make no reply, we'l visit you again sudden∣ly; come Ordella, let us leave Selindra to her charge; good rest unto my friend, all joys unto my Mistress.





Beshrew your kindness at this time how like Tantalus was I?



What mean you by this passion brother? shall I call the Surgeons?



No Selindra, they have no skill in my dis∣ease.





You talk, and look, as if you wanted sleep, pray retire to rest.



Rest Selindra! where can I find rest? Phil∣locles has taken all rest from me! did you not ob∣serve how the Princess sat down by me? and how she threw her favours on me! when in the height of all my joy, your approach destroyed me.



If this be all, I must smile to hear you sigh brother.



All Selindra! doest thou mock me? are thy own flames so weak? thou smilest at mine!



I cannot chuse but smile when I rejoyce to see my wishes fall so fast upon me: you love the Princess, and she will love you, she must, she shall, nay, I doubt she does already! and have some fear the work will be too easie, if I under∣take it.



Now thou mockest me more then thou didst before! prithee Selindra be serious, and do not play with what torments me.



What can be more serious? then to make a marriage between so great a Princess, and the King of Hungary? pray where can she make a better choice? or who can better plead your suit then I? Look to your wounds brother, leave this affair to me.




My best wishes do attend thee, she ha•… rais'd in me such doubtful hopes, that they begin to vanish with her, and such fears to lose what•… never had, do throng so fast upon me, that on th•… sudden I am orewhelm'd,
With doubts, with joys, with fears, so strangely mixt▪
My heart is Hell, until my hopes be fixt.





GOod day unto the bright Selindra! Selind. May your Lordship find many such.




Why do you fly me, Madam? I come in dilligence to make known to you, what concerns you more then any other business can, towards which you make such haste from me.



I fled not from your Lordship, nor did I perceive that you had ought to say to me; what is your pleasure now?



My business is to preserve you from a certain ruine, and to set you above the reach of mischief, as high in honour, as you are in beauty, and in vertue.



I were much unworthy such a favour, and not Mistress of any virtue, if I should not return a befitting gratitude;



Know then Selindra, you are design'd unto your grave; your wedding robe will prove your winding sheet, if I prevent it not; the Em∣perour
  84
puts on this shew of kindness, onely to de∣stroy you with less noise; he does consent that Phillocles by a present marriage, should satisfie his appetite; after which you shall be poysoned, that the Prince may have no object between him and Astella: This by all our Grecian Gods is true, and this I have consented to.



Can there be such a wickedness 'mongst men!



Can you doubt it, that have seen so much? or can you think Lascares will consider such a life as yours, when it does interpose be∣tween the Crown of Hungary and him?



If this be so, how can I avoid it? shall I think you will betray the Emperours trust, to oblige me!



Madam, if you would please to look on your faithful servant with equal eys, and on your dangers with judicious thoughts, you'l see that Phillocles his love brings death; and Pollid•…r methinks should not have gain'd an interest where Phillocles pretends.



My Lord, I must confess what you have said, is worthy my most serious thoughts, but my Lord, 'tis not fit that I treat farther in this af∣fair, until my Father doth return; if you please to move him in it, my obedience shall follow h•… will.



Of his consent I make no doubt, my best Mistress.
She suffers him 〈◊〉 kiss her hand.





But how can you secure your self, and me from Phillocles? will not his rage raise a re∣venge as ruinous, as this you would have me fly from?



Good Madam, let not so mean a thought remain with you; I have Lascares Scepter in my hand, and all the Frontier Towns in my Com∣mand; the Souldiers too, since Phillocles forsook them, are become mine; if my fair Mistress would by one kind look confirm my joys, it would en∣courage me to let her see at what a rate I va∣lue her.



Truly my Lord, I blush to think that I have smil'd so much, upon so short acquaintance, Pray Heaven you have not a design to destroy me this way!



Can you think I will destroy my souls onely joy? to remove all such fears, I will now put my life into your hands.



How my Lord! your life?



You have heard, Madam, how the Hun∣garian Army marches towards Greece, it does so: drawn in by me, to my aid they came, to assist me to get Selindra, and to set Lascares Crown upon her head, if she will deserve it: we are in∣terrupted now, think on me, and thou shalt wear this Imperial Crown, Selindra.




Enter Phillocles and Ordella



What has caus'd thy clouded brow Se∣lindra? has that viper vext thee?



He has frighted me, and will anger us all, if he be not prevented, such horrid mischiefs he has in love to me reveal'd, as I shake to think on.



To what tune run they?



To several tunes, some to Love, some to private blood-shed, others to publick War, and in summ to ruine all that's good; The Em∣perour will permit our marriage Sir, and after poyson me, that you may have leisure to gain Astella; but above all, Cecropius treachery must be lookt to; He has call'd in the Hungarian Army to make me his by force: he talked of a Crown too, that I should wear, if I would comply with him, and at that word you interrupted us: good Sir, make it a little more your business to prevent these Devils, and their designs.



There is danger in this worthy our best care, Selindra, I see our stay here will still occasion new designs on us.



And you too late, I fear, will find my counsel good, why may not I have credit to pro∣tect Pollidor in your absence?



I think you may, but yet 'tis not fit to hazzard such a friend to the fury of that Monster Cecropius; besides Selindra is now engaged in ho∣nour to stay for him.





Truly Sir, I think I am in honour bound not rashly to throw away a man that has pre∣serv'd us both; but Sir, when you shall consi∣der that his wounds do now permit him to walk abroad, a few days more will get him strength to ride with us: during which time I can secure all, by dissembling a little kindness to Cecropius, by which I shall also discover his treaty with the Hungarians



Pollidor is much oblig'd to you Selindra, I like well this noble humour in you.



It does become her, my dear sister, it shall be my care to look after Cecropius now, and if ne∣cessity require, I will remove him speedily; I must leave you for some hours, Ordella to attend my Father; Farewel, my bright Mistress, pray, let your care continue unto Pollidor, and let▪ not fall your kindness to Cecropius, he may confess to you what no tortures can draw from him.





It does concern me Sir.



It does indeed, Selindra, thy gratitude to Pollidor looks hansomely; methinks as he recovers health, he grows comely, he shews to me as if he were above the ordinary rank of men, I dare say he has a Noble soul.



Madam, you judge right, did you con∣verse as I do daily with him, you should wonder at such worth; methinks I see greatness in his looks, and do observe that he holds in that lu∣stre, with more advantage, then others shew it forth.



He is sure some great Prince disguis'd,
  88Selindra! and a happy man he is, that has found one that can discover his conceal'd perfections so fully.





Madam, my Master is now awake, and begs the favour of a visit.





I shall follow your Lordship when I have brought the Princess to her Chamber.



Is he a Lord too, Selindra?



Did I call him Lord, Madam?



Ask when you see him next, go Selindra; this Ceremony to me is needless, I shall find the way alone; 'tis fitter that you attend your charge, Pollidors wounds will not heal out of thy sight, Selindra; I cannot chuse but wonder what kind of entertainment you can find for so many hours, with so great a stranger as Pollidor!



Sure she is jealous, and I speaks a∣side. have been too free in praising him; Pollidor and I do spend more hours discour∣sing of Ordella's beauties, then of all other matters; he admires your perfections, Madam; his other wounds are slight, compar'd with those he recei∣ved from your eyes: for 



Hold, Selindra, I delight not in such saucy thoughts from Pollidor, nor does it become you to hear, much less to relate them unto me: I do •…ear, Selindra, you hope by this invention to dazle my eys, that I may not discover your own affection •…o this Pollidor; take heed you fall not from that
  89
vertue you are valued for, if you do deceive my trust, or Phillocles his love, you will be neither worthy his anger, nor my pitty.



Let me fall under the weight of both your angers, when I deserve ill from either of you, your jealousie afflicts me Madam.




I hear my Brother coming, retire that he may not see thy tears, and meet me in the Garden after supper, then I will hear more of this, and till then suspend my Judgement of thee.







Why went Selindra weeping out? and what troubles you my Dear Sister?



I am not troubl'd now Sir: pray how did you find my Father? in what temper is he?



Well Ordella, all is safe yet; but I cannot be satisfied until you tell me why Selindra weep•…; your silence will beget doubts more troublesome, then the knowledge can be.



'Twas nothing but an Argument that fell between us.



That Argument Ordella, if thou lov'st my peace, that Argument.



I may wrong Selindra by it, and trouble you without a cause, when I am certainly infor∣med you shall be so, till then pray do not urge me farther.



I am so weak a man in thy Esteem, thou darest not trust me with my self; Ordella, thy dis∣course
  90
will disturb me much, unless thou lettest me know the whole matter.



My unwillingness to tell you, is now be∣come the onely cause I fear to do it, for I was que∣stioning Selindra onely about her frequent visits to Pollidor, which it seems I put into such Language, as made her weep; this on my credit is the truth, are you now satisfied?



I am satisfied that we have the same thoughts, your judgement on this matter, con∣firms my observations, which till now took no hold on me; If she prove false, thus I can blow her off; But Pollidor, shall pay deare for his Treachery.
Enter to them Pollidor, very weak in Rich Cloaths; a staff in his hand.



Madam, 'tis fit that I visit you before the Temple, and pay my first vowes at your shrine, offering up a Life devoted to your service.



You owe your health Sir, next to the Gods, unto Selindra's care, such a Gratitude I have not seen before, nor such a zeal as hers to serve you.




 Madam: Pray Sir, how does the Emperour, and Cecropius, take this fained love between Selin∣dra and me? how does it work with them?





Since Selindra dwelt with you, the whole Court believes it is a mutual Love; onely my Sister and my self, have other thoughts.



(Those last words came coldly out, I must remove this jealousie;) I am glad Sir that you are secur'd by it, and I am joy'd to have a hand in any thing, that shall conduce to serve you, I do profess my Medicines have not so much wrought my cure, as the joy I have to see such unparalleld Virtues, and Affections meet, as is yours, and the good Selindra's; day by day she tires her tongue in praising Phillocles, and still grows fresh by talking of you Sir; I cannot wish you greater happiness on Earth, then you will have with her, may it last while you last, and my Eternal Curses light on those that wish it less.



I thank you Sir, and will hope to prosper, as you pray for me, and next to Selindra, and my Sister, place you by my heart.



You Honour me too much, and will make me proud, I must take my leave Sir, my strength is not yet enough confirm'd to stay long abroad.





The Gods go with thee, thou Man of Honour.



What think you Brother of this Com∣plement?



I think him really what he seems.



I wish I could do so too, but when I call to mind that Selindra unto me did talk just thus of
  92Pollidor, as he now discours'd to you of her, me∣thinks it looks like a design.



Does Pollidor presume to pretend to you?



So Selindra would have me think, which indeed was the main cause of my anger, and her tears.



I am not willing to be jealous, nor yet so fond, as not to be sensible, when there is just cause; Ordella let us smooth our brows, and observe them farther, such a guilt cannot be long hid, and un∣till we be confirm'd by some better proof, tis un∣worthy in us to suspect them on our surmises only, since what they do, is by our direction.



'Tis not my nature to judge ill of any, and I hope Selindra will deserve better; I am con∣verted, and now we are thus secure, why may not you go to the Army, and leave Selindra with me▪ Pollidor in your absence, may Court her in Pub∣lick, which will confirm my Father in his mistake, when he sees me dislike it.



I like it well Ordella: what will you do this Evening?



I have some business for a while; Selindra after supper will meet me in the Garden, pray come to us there.



Bid your Boy attend us with his Lute then, it may so happen that I must take leave this night, for I hear that the Hungarian Army comes on apace.
Enter Ante nor to them.



The Emperour sends you word Sir, that
  93Cecropius has deliver'd all the Frontier Towns un∣to the Hungarians, and himself advances in the head of that Army towards us.



Dispatch a Post unto Antillacus, bid him advance towards the Traitor, I will this night set forth, and by day-break shall reach him.



Sir, Antillacus retreats before the Enemy, his men fewer in Number, are so disheartned by Cecropius's revolt, they dare not look on the Hun∣garians.



Let the  call Pollidor to my Sisters Chamber presently, we will take leave there, and depart immediately; Come Ordella, this is some∣what quicker work then I expected; bid my ser∣vants make what hast they can to meet me here at my return.





My Lord, since you went hence, the Court has been in daily Tumults about Phillocles his Love unto your Daughter.



Is Selindra so much in favour with the Gods, as to be look'd on by Prince Phillocles?



The Prince seeks no other Heaven but her, and as the World thinks she neglects him, and Loves one Pollidor.



Madam, I cannot raise my Faith to what you say, nor can I joy in such a blessing, until I know the Emperour does approve it; pray Ma∣dam, where may I find Selindra?





She is now with the Princess in the Gar∣den, I shall let her know your Lordship is return'd.








Oh Sir! You are welcome, I have with some trouble, and some fear expected your Re∣turn.



Madam, I stay'd the longer by reason of those Tumults I found at Belgrade, a false Astella was set up by Euticus and his faction, but so soon as I made known that you Liv'd, both sides laid down their Arguments though not their Armes, which I advis'd as the best means to bring you home in safety.



But why does our Army enter Greece?



That's the riddle Madam, the old Fox Cecropius gave notice to the Hungarians, that Las∣cares purpos'd in his own person to invade them, since Phillocles had refus'd it, and would by a conquest joyn that Crown to his Empire; he insinuates also, that if the Hungarians would assist him in his design, he would make Lascares un∣able to harm them, by delivering up all the Fron∣tier Towns into their hands.





And what is his design?



Onely by their power to force Lascares to deliver you, and one Pollidor up to him: This I perswaded Orsanes, and the rest to harken too, and my long stay was to see the Towns deliver'd to Orsanes, which is done, and Cecropius fooll'd by his vaine hopes, Marches in the head of your Army, which comes on apace, only to receive your Commands Madam.



The Gods reward you, for I never can; but here is Newes Seriander beyond what you tell; Pollinesso Lives, Lives here under the name of Pol∣lidor;




I hope I shall live to thank you Sir.



Sir, I am rewarded in the good I have done, if my services do prove such in your Esteem.



My Brother, you must dispatch Periander back unto the Army to give Orsanes and the rest notice that you live; Cecropius has rendred the Towns, and comes on demanding to have me deliver'd to his lust.



We shall order him at leisure, our care to inform Orsanes must indeed be speedy; Pe∣riander, though I cannot command, I may intreat you that know our Affairs to return unto Orsanes, and give him notice that I intend this night to set forth with Phillocles, and will come over to him, with my first opportunity; bid him march fairly through the Country, and take heed that Antil∣lacus  96
ingage him not to fight till I Arrive; if you ride hard, you may be back with us, before we part from hence, for I hear Cecropius is not far off.



By my speed Sir, judge my Zeal to serve you.



As you passe by my Lodgings, pray send all my servants to attend me in the next Room, from hence we shall take Horse this Evening; Now





I can make no certain Judgement on it yet.



Canst thou not procure me one smile be∣fore we part?



'T will not be possible, if you depart this night; I could wish we had more time, because I now propose some pleasure in my woing for you; methinks the stormes that I have rais'd, look mer∣rily now the calm is certain, and so nigh, I have so light a heart, that I could play with dangers, if any were within my reach.





Let me Embrace and Kisse thee, my Dear, Dear Selindra; thou art so great a Joy unto my
  97
soul, that I lament to part one minute from thee; when we meet next, we shall Embrace more free∣ly.




That you must go from me, grieves me; must you needs go with Phillocles? may you not stay one day longer with me?




I dare not, do not weep thus, thy tears will prove ill Omens, and I become a superstitious fool, to fear I know not why.



How can I chuse but lament to part with what is dearer to me then my life; pray do not go this night, bestow this night on me.



I swear thou makest me sad, prethee speak more chearfully, and dry thy eyes, least Phillocles perceive thy tears, and Ordella do discover us, and so unmask us both before we be prepar'd.



No matter for their jealousie, are not we above the reach of malice now?

Phillocles draws and offering to strike, is held by Ordella.




Not yet Selindra, we may be ere long, till then, 'tis not good to provoke any, it is by your advice to, that we should be still disguis'd.



Yes, and tis my opinion still; but when Phillocles is gone who can discover us?



The Gods, who will not suffer such im∣piety to be longer hid? let me loose Ordella, and I will out these twisted Monsters into Atomes,
  98
that their united souls, may so expire together.
The Women part, and hold them.



Why thus inraged Sir?



Canst thou aske false man? we have heard and seen, all that has past between ye.



It may be so, and yet be mistaken in all you have heard and seen too; Sir, if you will have alittle patience, your shall see your mistake, and be sorry for this injurious Language, when you know to whom you speak.

Phillocles offers to run at him, but is held by Ordella.




Good Madam, perswade the Prince to hear us, and there will be no cause to fight.



Thou worst of Women, how dares thy lips move towards me?



For Heavens sake Madam hear us, you will too late repent this rashness else; we are both Innocent.



Brother you may do well to hear them and revenge at leasure; pray lay by this anger for a while, and take it up again when you see cause they are in your power to punish as you please.



I thank thee Ordella, they are so; am tame, and now you may say on.



Sir, if you have heard, and seen what pa•… between us, I do confess you have reason for yo•… anger, and our fondness doth deserve blame, b•…  99
not death; tis true, that we have negligently shew'd, what we might better have conceal'd; necessity therefore now compells us to discover what we yet meant not to do, that our Innocency may no longer suffer.









Madam, the Prince his absence gives me opportunity to beg your pardon for Selindra and my self, who have too long hid our affections from you, and our selves also; for she is my Sister, and will ere long appear worthy Phillocles his best thoughts, and I do hope my self, when I shall dare to be my self, may have leave to say, my life is vowed to serve you.



Sir, you are mistaken, I am not to be deceived by this slight trick; you would gain time to escape my Brothers vengeance.



No Madam, you will shortly see I am above it; and if 
Enter Phillocles with a Guard.



Seize on that Traytor.

Pollidor steps to the other door, and calls alone.



Tenedor, Periander, Tecknor,They Enter, & both par∣ties stand ranged on either side.
Treason; what means this madness Phillocles? a reasonable man should hear another speak; If I do not satisfie all your doubts,
  100
you shall find that I dare meet your fury, and can raise storms as high, as you can wish to see.



Pray unfold this mistery, I do attend you.

Pollidor leads Selindra to Phil∣locles who steps back from her; 



Let this pledge speak for u•… both, for I can have no other interest, then to give her up into your Armes Sir, send your Guards off, and this riddle shall be as easie, and as pleasant, as it now looks hard; Phillocles will blush when he shall know from whom he flyes, and by whose hand offer'd to him.



I understand you not, nor do I care; hark, what noyse is this?
Enter the Emperour with his Train, and his Guard, swords drawn, cry∣ing Arme, Arme, as they enter.



What's this? a War within his our own Walls; Phillocles is this a time for private brawls? when the Hungarians are at your Gates?



I am ready to depart Sir; and shall send them back much faster then they now come on. I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect.





What Newes brings Gillon?



Antillacus sends you word Sir, that you must prepare to receive him with the Army under
  101
the Town Walls, his Souldiers have so many pannick fears, he dares not lead them out to •…ace the Enemy; he also wishes that Prince Phil∣locles would draw out the Court Regimens, to hear•…en his dejected men.



I think 'twere better to receive them with∣in the Walls, until their shame do out-face their fears; Tell Antillacus my old Armes are on, and that I will my self, strike the Traytor in the face.



Hast back good Gillon, and tell Antillacus; If he can defend his Camp till I Arrive, I wish him not to move this way; my looks will send those ungratefull people •…ome, if not, I have a flame within me, which will consume them all. I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect.



Repair it by your speedy succour, I shall take present order for what the Town can afford us.





Ordella I have a War within, that will con∣sume me.



I hope this great Affair will divert your thoughts, and remove your trouble.



For some few dayes it may; farewel my Dear Sister; and when I return, you shall hear from me Sir.





I shall not stay behind you Sir, my wound 
Phillocles is going out. is not so ill, as to keep me from waiting on you;
  102
when this hurry and your anger is over, I hope you will be at leasure to hear me out, and be pleas'd rather to finde you can be mistaken, then me guil•…y.



I will by no means suffer it, 'twill be no charity, to permit you to hazzard Selindra's inter∣est by new dangers.



Sir, your scornes shall have no more power to stay me, then your anger has, I will along.



But you shall not; I do suspect you will betray me to your Country-Men, and dare not trust you with me.



All this will not do, I know you do not doubt me that way? and I do swear, unlesse you break the bonds of Hospitality (and do imprison me) I will along.



And I will rather do it, then have your company, if you desist not.



Phillocles will not so much blemish his great Name! imprison me that sav'd your life; me, that am vowed to stand or fall with you; Sir, I must chide you now, you do too long hold up a causelesse anger, you know not why; too long neglect the great Affair that calls you hence; I will stay no longer for you, but go do the work before you come.





Stay Pollidor, thou hast confounded all my reason, such a mixture of Noblenesse, ne're met with •…uch a Treachery till now; though I do know thee false, and do resolve with my own hand to Kill thee; I will trust thee this way, and
  103
do now intreat thee to stay till to morrow that my Father comes.







Oh! my Dear Sister, once more farewell,
I am now fall'n from Paradice to Hell.



The Gods go with you, and your action bless,
While I retire, and pray for your success:
Exeunt all but Pol∣lidor and Selindra.




We will be gone Selindra, and face Phillo∣cles in the head of our own Army; what news Periander?





Sir, I am come to fetch you to your Ar∣my, I can convey you thither, before you are mist here.



We are ready now, how far off is the Army?



You may hear their Drums Madam, at the City Gates.



Come, let us hasten to our Troupes; 
When Instruments of War, from War release,
'Tis a good Omen, to a happy peace.






Thou art a bold ill man Cecropius, thou
  104
art ungrateful to thy Country, and my trust.



Sir, I have but hid my gratitude under this old Armour, which is onely now put on to obtain what my prayers could not, I demand justice Sir, for Cleonels bloud, which you have hi∣therto denied me, in favour to his Murtherers:



This fained modesty is more impudent then thy Arms are, thou knowest I was more ea∣ger then thy self to do justice on those that slew thy son, and thou seest clearly our Laws cannot touch them for his fall.



Was not Cleonel slain by Pollidor? and was not Selindra accessary? and does not our Laws condemn such murtherers to die?



No; thou knowest they do not, thou knowest thy son was by a just hand punish'd, and that Pollidor deserves, 



Good Sir, spend no more breath on this vile man, the slave is not worthy your anger:  Foolish Hungarians, ingrateful perjur'd peo∣ple: Orsanes I did not look for this from you; but my sword shall speak my ven∣geance.



Prince Phillocles has not in Greece a more faithful servant then Orsanes; Pray Sir lay by this passion but a few minutes, and you shall see that I have labour'd hard to bring your own de∣sires to their wish'd ends: and Cecropius the main Agent in it all!



Why do your actions and your words so disagree? Orsanes knows our Grecian hearts can∣not be compell'd, when we have time to draw our swords.





Great Sir, your actions have enough declar'd your worth unto the World, and to our Nation most; which we shall ever own, though now by some necessity compell'd, we do appear as enemies, in the behalf of this good man, who has ingag'd us to deliver up a Lady call'd Selindra, and one Pollidor to his hands, which he by strong arguments assur'd us, would be for your, and for our future happiness: this done, we are all at Phillocles command.



Those two you mention are of late be∣come unworthy of my thoughts; yet your en∣gagement was barbarous, to undertake you know not what: sound the charge.




The Hungarian Army opens, and through them enters Pol∣linesso crown'd, leading in Astella; Orsanes  delivers them both unto Cecropius.




What Riddle's this? what wonders do I see?



Take away that shadow of a King to pre∣sent death, Orsanes; and now Selindra you are once more at my dispose: and you Sir, that think
  106
you can command the World, shall find this weak old arm can justifie my title here.



Have I now perform'd my oath unto the great Cecropius?







I must then set this Lady free from the danger of our swords, 

He delivers Astella to Pollinesso.




Long live the King of Hungary.







Pollidor! and Selindra! why is he crown'd! how come they there?



They are confederates with Cecropius, on which design they have thus long liv'd a∣mongst us.



Orsanes, lay that Monster at his Masters feet.
They deliver up Cecropius.




Pollidor, what mean these misteries?



All respects to Phillocles.



How comes Selindra then with thee? and that Crown upon thy head? I tell thee Pollidor, if Selindra can neglect me, I can contemn her; and not envy thee that mis-becoming Crown thou wearest, which I will tear from off thy swel∣ling
  107
brows, and trample on it, when 'tis mine by a second conquest.

Pollidor leads Selindra to Phillocles, and he retires.



 Will Phillocles forsake the List? fly from such a foe! send for the Princess Ordella then, that we may meet on equall terms.



You are merry Sir, my gentle temper I see, begets contempt from your great cou∣rage.



No, Sir, you are mistaken still, I am your servant, and do value Phillocles, more then he can contemn me: Orsanes, bring my Standard hither: carry this and my Crown unto the Princess Ordella; lay them at her feet, and if she dains to take them up, tell her your King with his whole people do wait on her Com∣mands.



I understand not what these Riddles mean.



If Phillocles be yet at leasure to hear me speak, I shall soon remove this wonder?



If Pollidor prove worthy, I shall not trust my eyes nor ears for ever.



But when Prince Phillocles shall know that Pollinesso speaks, he will believe no hand has more right to deliver up Astella into his arms, then I: Do you not know me yet Sir?
He pulls off his Perri∣wig, and his patch from his eye.





Nor yet know my self: Antillacus, do I wake? or is this a Phantosm that I think I see?





'Tis as strange to me, Sir.



While my sons wonder lasts, let me em∣brace you, Sir, and obtain both yours and Astel∣las pardon, and chide you both in the same breath; why did you suffer us to walk so long in this unhappy darkness? and run so many ha∣zards, which this light would have avoided.



There was no other way to obtain this light, while Cecropius eclips'd your glory Sir.



Does Pollinesso live? can he forget my crimes? and forgive my blindness!



Can Phillocles pardon my concealment•… by which he was so blinded?




There is but one happiness on earth be∣yond holding Pollinesso thus!



To me too there can be only one above it! and that is Ordellas leave to love her: but Sir▪ have you no room for Selindra in your heart?





I dare not look that way: I dare not have a hope so high as pardon from her. I am so full of guilt, that I dare not live longer to think of my unworthiness.





What have I done Sir, that you should be thus cruel to me! will you not look on me?





I shall blush to death, if you speak thus again.



Will Phillocles turn from me ever?



Yes, Madam, as asham'd to look on you; I have a guilt within, that takes my manhood from me! shall I dare to think you can forgive my unworthy jealousie?



If you can forgive me that provok'd you to it? I can meet you thus.



And I fall as low as earth will let me, to receive your pardon.




I am so much amaz'd at what I see, that I know not which way to turn me!



This way, Ordella, if you will by me be guided to felicity? this is Pollinesso's wish too, if I mistake not.
Lascares leads Ordella to Pollinesso.



'Tis my ambition Sir, my highest hope on this side Heaven.



And my honour, that Pollinesso has such thoughts for me; but Sir, 'twill ask some time for me to raise my wishes to such a value of your worth, that we may meet on equal terms.



Pollinesso's merit, and his worth is such,
  110
that when he says he loves, 'tis argument enough to gain the greatest Queen: Ordella, the Gods smile upon us now: and you, Sir, I hope con∣cur with Heaven in our felicities.



My prayers and my blessings shall not be wanting: let Pollinesso give sentence on Cecropius before we go unto the Temple.



Let him live for ever banish'd from this happy Climate, which he has so long polluted with his venomous breath.



Antillacus see it done.





Madam, can you pardon my disguise?



I cannot well tell what to answer! to find Selindra worthy, is a Concern greater then Astella can be to me; and that you now are Astella, does not more raise my wonder, then that you were Selindra does confirm my love, and my respects to you, Madam.



I have a heart too full of joy to keep this distance any longer!




We now lose time that might be better spent,
In sacrificing for this blest event!



Lead on then to the Temple, and proclaim
A publick feast, in bright Astella's name;
While we do march in a triumphant state,
That all the City may participate
Our joys, now Phillocles captivity
Is chang'd into a triple Victory.

