
Cloakes over their Rich Cloaths, with Sanga
and Geta, two Lacques carrying Lanthorns,




COme Geta, our Lords have no
more use of us, we may go sleep!



Tis a fair time indeed to
sleep, when day begins to break?
 this is a lew'd life, that our
Lords do lead.



Why man? the Night was made for
labourers to rest; and for great Lords to Revel in,
come away.



My Lord, is not half so ill as thine.



Whats that to thee, or me, come away;
we'l go to Beggars Hall, and be as merry as our
Lords.



No, no, I will no more sully my credit,
in thy company; I converse with our •all Dary-Maid,
who a•••rds me Honours, thou canst not
guess at Sanga! Oh the great Fe••cities! that do
belong to chast imbraces?



I like •mbraces well.



I mea••y Wed-lock man.



A Cox-comb thou art, and a Cuckold
thou 〈◊〉 be; a•••w Fool.






A noyse within, Re-enter Clearcus, and Lonzartes,
in the Dark.


•otts on thy •••ppery heeles; we are
undone!



Let us draw, and stand upon guard,
I hear some call within!



What was that strange noyse, you made?



At the bot•om of the ••••rs, I fell, which gave
the Al•rum to the doggs, and they wak'd all the
Fami•y!




Oh my Lord! what have you done?
all the House are up, pray stand close a while, 
are you alone?








Thou art a very Villain Clearcus,
thus to betray a poor Wench, that loves thee; and
to force me accept a Favour, • a•hor to think on.



Be the blame mine, I have no joy in
any thing, unless my Friend Participate; if I
have any skill in Woman; you will thank me for
this favour, and say, you never had the like of
Angelica.



Suppose she will not consent? must I
ravish her? you say she knows not of my com∣ing



I swear she does not.



Would I were out again, these Romances
please not me; pray how must I proceed?



Thus, she is in Bed, the Room is dark,
I'le entertain her with discourse, while you un∣dress;
then I'le retyre, and soon return with
Light, to let her see my friend and I, must be as
one man to her.



I wonder all women do not hate thee,
thou dost abuse all them that trust thee.



You are deceiv'd Lonzartes, such silly girles,
do take it for a complement, to recommend them
to a Noble Friend!



Well, I must now be subject to thy will,
and do submit to do, what I detest! me thinks
this is a kind of Rape I undertake; thou
art too wild for my Converse Clearcus.








Hist, hist, my Lord!







Give me your hand, softly, softly, follow
me.




Enter the Old Prince of
Syracusa, with Silvander,
Aristonicus, Clothero,
Ormuseus, and •rain.


How does Lonzartes bear his Suppression
Aristonicus? now he is full-man grown.



Like a w•se man s•r, that will not seem to
see, what he cannot remedy



I have better thoughts for him, then he
has for himself; if Clearcus spoyle him not!



When more years have overcome some
evils, incident to youth, I hope he will be worthy
your highest favours Sir.



Some of you should advise him to a little
more sobriety, then Clearcus will allow of; I
app•ehend Silvander, that the Corinthian will
quarrel, for my refusing to treat his Marriage
with Theodosia, whom I design another way; 
 she has a•ersion to him.



The Princes may be excus'd for her dislike,
unto so sierce a man, the Corinthian Prince, is all
fire, and fury, which does fright, not win •ffection.



If Theodosia will be advised by me, I shall
provide be•ter for her; you know Lonzartes
right Silvander! if he were reclaim'd, I would wish
him to my Daughter.



I have some thoughts Sir, that Lonzartes
does Consort with wild Clearcus, and complies in
all his Vanities, onely to avoid your Jealousie, of
  5
his higher thoughts of interest in the State! he is
no fool Sir.



I wish it prove not too much his Nature, to
be so debauch'd, for he has not higher thoughts of
State interest, then I have for him; he has been
wrong'd Silvander, and I will endeavour to do him
right if he'l be worthy of it.





Why, this grave face to me Lonzartes?



Thou are so wild, that I have lost my cre∣dit
by conver••ng with thee, which I must redeem,
by keeping •etter company hereafter.



Wisely resolved, and in good time decla∣red;
 I have indeed observ'd, that you of late
converse with Ladies, and delight in rich lac'd
Sattin, and in •ilver Petticoates; as if you meant
to turn Apostate, from the freedom we have 〈◊〉,
and now seek your game in secret, my Lonzartes.



If I should, pray which is most Honourable?
And most sutable to my Quality? The dayly ter∣rour
of getting such diseases, as •nhabit your dark
houses, has frighted me into better purposes.



Your Quality! I with your Prince sh•p
had all the Ladies you desire, so I might have like
freedom with their Maids.



I shall not spoyle your Market, but leave
you those cheap •attel, at your own price.



See the difference now, between your
Pride, and my Humility; you have studied, learn'd
discourses to such as must justifie your conversion
(as you call it) but have never weighed the differ∣ence
of our crimes; such thoughts Lonzartes,
do move, my tender Cons••ence, to take what •  6
can find, for ready money; which I freely enjoy,
without those frights you daily feel.



Thou dost mistake me, and exclaimest
against crimes, I never understood.



You can counterfeit I know, and may
cozen all the World but me! I will not give my
freedom up, to such follies as you serve, to be
Master of all your wishes.



I shall not labour to convert you, but will
take leave to dispise your mean waies, while you
envy mine.



Envy! by Violin•s eyes, I do dispise you,
and your wayes, and will wager any thing you
dare, that I enjoy this night a beauty more exact,
then any cloath-of-Gold-Dame you treat with, I
en•y you! no, I pit•y you Lonzartes, that after
such experience, at your years, you should be
fool'd so; confess now seriously, if you have
ever met a better shape, a softer, or a whiter skin,
or any more sweet, or more bewitching fair, and
lovely, then my Ang•lica.



If I have not! what then?



Why? she shall be Fine, and rich a•aid,
when I so please! I can call her S•ltaness too! and
by my fancy, raise her above those, the World
allows of.



I do believe thee, and thy fancy, alike
Extravagant.



But why so serious on the suddain? and
so dull? you shall have good Chear, and good
Company to night, at the old place.



I shall •et an ill Conscience by it!



That sauce, agrees not with the Dainties
  7
we must feed on, pray lay by your Conscience,
untill morning.



I wish I were well rid of thee, all thy Rhe∣••rick,
shall never ingage me, to meet such com∣pany
again.



Why pray, how can you spend your time
better?



I do begin to hate my self, and will love
thee no longer



Very good; Are not you the most
debauch'd man in Syracusa? (except my self!)
how come you by this Impudence? to blush for
going to a merry meeting? Is not your own
Lodging, beyond a Scandal? are not all the
Wenches in that Street, your Pentione•s? 
not love me! I will study to scorn you, and your
love for ever; I dispise a man that does forsake his
Principles.



I begin to hate thy over-much lewdness,
and to see my own Deformities.







Come, I do love thee, too well I love thee,
shall we go home, and put off this meeting?



Lonzartes, though I do love your Friend∣ship,
I do hate this Humour in you, that thus
would lay a blemish on me.






See Lindamira, the two wild Princes are
in our way, how shall we get by ••m?



Put on a confidence beyond theirs, and
〈◊〉 will amaze them!







I'le be your Forlorne Hope, do but second
me, and I'le secure your pass this time; You'l
see them start, shoot aside, as from a Baza•iske!
the honest woman!



Barbarous! I have heard indeed, they
shun all virtuous women!



They alwaies look over us, as if they saw us
not; but where they have an interest, or hope to
gain it, they can like subtil Serpents, humbly
creep, to flatter and betray.

He n•w sees the Ladies.


A prize, a prize Lonzartes, each of us one;
let us reconcile for this booty, and dispute at
leasure; you close walk invites; which
will you assault?



Neither, they are both virtuous?



Who knows that? have they done sucking?



Dost thou think there be none virtuous,
beyond their infancy!



Yes, much too many, but I hope better of
these; give me the woman, and keep her virtue to
your self: I'le charge 'um both, there may be
a Critical minute for me; fair Ladies.



Hold my Lord, you are out at first, one of
us is very brown I assure you.



You do not think your self so, or if you do,
you think brown the best Madam.



I do indeed, think my beauty such, as may
prejudice your Lordship, if you dwell on it;
which gave me boldness, to interrupt your set
Speech; least you engage past retreating; our
〈◊〉 is to find the Princess.



And ours, to entertain those, who have
nothing else to do.



How would you entertain us my Lord?



As young Gallants, use to treat fair Ladies;
with love, and our best service.



I have no imployment for so great a
Servant as your Lordship, and for love, I under∣stand
it not.



That you may do is my ambition.



Nay, if you be come to ambition already!
I guess your love will grow to such a Monster, in a
moment, that I dread the thought on't.



You cut me off so short, you ••nnot
apprehend, what I would say.



Therefore I do it, because I do not care to
hear.



What have I done Madam, to merrit this
neglect from you?



In the behalf of all our sex, I am the chosen
Champion, against all men, who do believe, all
Women do admire 'um.



When shall I have leave to speak? that I
may inform you better.



When I have done.



When will that be?



When I am gone.



How can you be inform'd in absence?



As much as I desire to know, I know al∣ready;
 my good wishes shall attend your
Lordship; come Teretia; we may finde the
Princess in the other walk•.




Now Sir, how do you like this Ladies
mettle?



Why well, I like her, and her humour very
well.



You thought her a sure prize.



I did but hope so at the first, now I am sure
of her, she is my own, if ever we do meet alone; 
by this severity, she has cozen'd Teretia, and yo•,
and confirm'd me.



I must laugh, to think how thou art
mistaken, in this innocent freedom virtuous
women use, and would give a good summe, to see
thee but conver•e a moneth or two, with persons
of Honour, which I believe would reclaim thee,
and fix those virtues, now •ost in a Chaos of wild
actions.



I marry, if you could shew me a woman,
that would not be won; I would fancy 〈◊〉
delight, to pass away an hour or two, at ••de
times, but all that I do meet with, are mine,
before I wish it; so that I am alwayes forc'd to
stand upon my guard amongst 'um.



Thats no wonder, amongst those women
you converse with; shall I chuse you a mistris?
and if you get her! let the reproach be mine.



Shall she be worth my pains? if so! I will
think on't, when I have time to throw away; 
come will you go with me yet?



I'le stay here a while.



I'le go before then, and make ready for
you.
Exit.



What pitty tis, such parts should be so
drown'd! 
Though I resolve to quit, I'me gui•ty still
If longer I do countenance his ill.








Lonzartes I have been laughing at
Lindamiras relation of Clear•us humour; she 〈◊〉•he has abus'd him his own way, in the 〈…〉
all honest women, whom he declares against.



The encounter indeed was pleasant, 〈◊〉
the successe is beyond her guess! for the 〈◊〉▪
that her neglects, have dash'd his hopes, by which
he is grown confident, that her seeming scornes,
were onely to dazle our eyes, while he doubts not
to gain an interest.



I wish him joy my Lord, of his quick
Victory, the next encounter, will decide this
difference of Opinions.



But how dare you Lindamira, enter the
lists of wit? with young Clearcus, who has the
sharpest tongue in Syracusa.



There is no contest so easie, his whole
discourse to women, is ever of love, or something
like it! and does believe that all our souls, delight
in nothing else, which makes me interrupt him
still as he begins, and never hear him out.



I• that civil, to a person, of his Quality?



Is he not angry, when you slight him so?



No Madam, I am his m•rth, and he is
mine.



If Pandora would permit! I do fancy his
conversion might be wrought by her, and his
Eclips'd virtues, made to shine brighter then his
vices do



'Twill be a noble undertaking Madam.



I wish he were with•n my cure.



We'l joyne our forces Lindamira, for I
shall easily consent unto so good a work, as may
reclaim so great a person as Clearcus; a man so
near alied unto the Duke! but how must this
Charitable work be done?



If you Madam, will admit his visits? for a
Moneth or two, the cure of course will follow;
for he who never yet convers'd with civil woman,
will surely be concern'd when he shall see the
harmless mirth, that virtue does allow, to persons
of your Quality!



So, I be obliged no further then to civil
visits, his birth does require that for him, which
I deny to no man.



Leave the rest to me.



How happy are you Cousin, that may
dispose of your self as you please! I must speak,
and look, and move, as my Father, and the State
directs me.



Great Princes ••deed, are bound to some
strict Rules, most Subjects understand not?



Your Highness complains without a cause,
we hear the Duke will leave you to your own
choise, only he will recommend.



When Parents recommend, tis so like
command, it frights me to think whom it may be.



Now you are safe from the Corinthian,
have no fear untill you see occasion for it.



I wish my dear Cousin, you would marry
too, I should then like it be•ter I now dread to
put on that yoak, by all the World so much
desired?



Will my being in the pound, get your
Highness out off it? why would you have me run
the hazzard, to loose that happiness! now am
sure of? by a single life▪ If men did ever
appear in their own likeness! we might chuse
someone, amongst many, worth the having, but
in our sights, they are alwayes disguis'd in such
shapes, and humours, as they believe we like best,
and so cozen us, and themselve• too; for if they
make us unhappy, it seldome failes, but we make
them so.



No Oracle ever spoke truer; I am of your
Sect Madam, (as to matters of Faith!) yet I
would gladly have a Husband, though it be
dangerous to put my heart into anothers keeping
(And as my learn'd Author saves,) to give my
freedom up, unto I know not whom! (nor ever
can do, 〈◊〉 I have him) this were a sadd
condition Madam▪ if we had not the same Arts to
cozen them, that think to cozen us.



Would! could get a merry heart, like
yours Lindamira.



I'le present your Highness with a piece of
mine, I have enough for both.





Madam, The Prince calls for
you;



I attend him, pray Cousin go with me to
my Father.




A few such Excellent women would make
this World a Paradice! how have I walk'd in
the dark, till now? how strangely been misled, by
my affection to Clearcus? that have approv'd, and
acted in all his ills; begun upon design, and led
on, till custome has almost chang'd my nature,
but will no more.




How now Lonzartes? walking alone? take
heed the Devil find thee not at leasure.



A greater then thy self can hardly find me.



Very gravely replyed, if I mistake not, you
are whimpering a•ter some great lady, and now
practizing to play the fool wisely, to spend your
time, adoring you know not who, nor why.



Thou are still ith' wrong.



Let us meet then, at the old place to night.



That's a freedom, I shall never take more,
you have converted me, beyond all the Homilies
I ever read, you have made me ashamed of my self
for being so long like you.



Oh Hypocrite! what new piece have you
  15
got? that I must not be trusted with; come tell
me, and I'le cry up your Austere purpose, and rail
at your conversion, as if I did believe it.



VVhen you see me next in ill company, I
am then that Hypocrite you mention.



Out upon these tender Consciences, they
spoyle more mirth, then they are worth; let old
folks hear Homilies, while we enjoy the time we
have, and not whine away our youth, on dreams
of virtue, which signifie we know not what.



Peace Clearcus, thou art not half so ill as
thou appearest; but dost glory in talking worse,
then thou canst be.



VVhat should we talk of more then what
we most delight in?



Of nothing less, because we often do
delight in what we ought not own; Is't not
enough to offend the Gods through frailty, which
perverse nature does invite us to; but we must
provoke Heaven, beyond sence, and appetite, by
our discourse, as if we studied to de••e those
Powers, we ought to tremble at.







And I abhor to aggravate my crimes, by
such unnecess••y boastings, as thy wild brain
delights in; when I offend I am sorry for it, dost
thou all honesty dispise, all virtue slight?



How Lonzartes, will you confine honesty,
and virtue, to the fruition of one woman only?
Fie, what a scandal is this to man-kind, as if
there were no honesty, nor virtue but in such
chast breasts as yours? what an affront to this
good company, pray speak Gentlemen, is any here
  16
of his opinion? can you Lonzartes shew me one
young man, that looks as he were guilty? or any
so old, who would be thought so weak? Is this
a fit design, to set up your Title to the Dukedom?



I see this is not the hour for your Conver∣sion.



Nor shall ever live to see that hour, I hope.



Nor you I fear, ever live to tast, and
relish the tr•e felicity obtain'd, by such a conquest
on thy self; but I will pray for thee, and thy
conversion.



I had rather your Lordship were at Ieru∣salem,
then see that day of my conversion; what
have I done Lonzartes? to deserve such ill from
you, do not provoke me to a revenge.







Can you aske for what? suppose the gods
should hear your prayers, and turn my heart, how
miserable a man were I, how should I spend my
time, for forty years to come; Is it not enough
to forsake your cause, but you must seduce me
too? Lonzartes, if you pray for me, I shall curse
you heartily; I dare stay no longer with him.
Exit Clearcus.



If this brave man this humour could expell,
His virtues would his vices far excell.
I have put on this Cloak of wantonness onely
to avoid being thought a serious man, least the
Duke grow jealous of my pretentions to his
Crown; while the Duke is civil and I am
safe; he shall be so too? But if I finde
  17
designes against me; I have Friends, and force
enough, to gain my right by this; Oh but
Theodocia does unman me quite; when I look
on her, all these high thoughts do vanish, and
I become the humblest creature in the Court: 
I have no Title, that I ere shall owne,
Vnless she daine to raise me to the Throne.





Clearcus hearkning at the
Door.


OH Cloris, Cloris! what stange unwonted
pains I feel? what fears? what new
disease conceales my blood? if it be love,
twill not offend the gods, because my soul does
now rejoyce to find, Beauty and Virtue so divine,
that both may be well worshipp'd at one Shrine.


Clearcus chaps him hard
on the Shoulder.


Are you talking in your sleep Lonzartes? or
is it some divine meditation, thus transports you?



You are too rude Clearcus.



I cry you mercy Sir, you can be angry then
I see; I thought your conversion, had set you
above such passions, as we wicked men are subject
too.



I do confess thou didst make me start,
and speak hastily, but I am not angry, nor can be
with thee.




I'le try your temper presently, Oh!
Beauty and Virtue so Divine, both may be wor∣shipped
in one shrine; Ha, ha, ha.



What of this, you heard me repeat an old
Song.



An old Song to a new Tune Lonzartes:
dost thou pray for my Conversion this way? must
I get a Cloris to sigh after? as thou dost; 
I have heard all, and have observ'd thee too, I
and do guess who Cloris is, come, tell me
quickly, that way to oblige me to silence; for if
by my own skill, I do discover her, I'le lay thee
open to the World, tell me who Cloris is, least I
tell thee; Adiew.
Exit.



How can he discovee that I love, when I
know it not yet my self? Yet I may admire
her, and by my adoration of her virtues 
Be by them, from all meaner passions freed,
When this new virtue, shall my vice exceed.
Exit.





What the Devil ailes my Lord? his
wonted mirth is changed into hey•oes, and twenty
times a day, he sends me on sleeveless Errants,
that he may be alone; I think Lord Clearcus will
prove the wisest man at last; I have been five
times this morning to enquire, if the Princess be
in health! if she be stirring, or if near ready! if
she go to the Temple! And after dinner I
must enquire, if she have dyned! if she comes
forth in publick! if she ride abroad; and thus
twenty times a day, he tires me, with the•e silly
Errants, when I might aske them all at once, and
save much labour; I'le try if I can find some way
to contract these Embassies; tis well for my
Lord, that his man is wiser then himself.
Exit.






Do not my looks Lindamira enough express
what I would say?



Yes, to me, who do discern your passion
thus suppressed, more clear, then by those loud
noyse•, which some Lovers most delight in.



But how shall I be assured, this is not
•aliery?



Cannot you judge by my looks, as well as I
by yours? what kind of security do you require? I
have no Citizens that will be bound for my good
behaviour!



A serious word or two, with a kind look
confirm'd, will secure me against the World.



Will this look serve? and I am yours,
suffice for words? with this hand given from my
heart! ingage beyond your wish.



It does, may I be 



Nay, no strange lines I beseech y•u, make
me not jealous by professing more then I expect.





He Kisses her hand.


I shall try your temper, if my merry
humour hold!



'Tis that free Innocence, I most adore.



And that I can afford enough off, at an
ea••e rate.






Your Lordship was going another way,
pray let not me divert you, my lodging is far off.



Madam, I have long sought an opportu∣nity
to kiss your hands there.



You may do it here, and save the labour
of going so far for nothing.



Do you call that honour nothing, which I
do prize above the World? and would give all
my interest on Earth, to purchase one kiss of
your fair hand, by a free consent.



The World is little beholding to your
Lordship, for so low a value, that will give all
your interest on Earth, for a kiss of my hand, and
this I must in civility, look, as if I did believe.



I'le swear it Madam.



Thats as easily done, as said, but I am
hard of Faith.



How shall I obtain more credit?



I'le shew you a short way; bring me a
conveyance of half your Land, and you shall have
two kisses of my hand, three if you please; and
as you like your Market, you may have more, for
the other half of your Estate! and this is much
cheaper then to give all the World for such an
honour.



Why do you mock me? who truly love,
and honour you above all women! by those 〈◊〉
eyes I do.



How can I believe it? when I know you 〈◊〉
thus to every woman that you meet.



May my hopes nere prosper, if you are
not the only object of my heart.



No touching good my Lord, my Affairs
calls me away, I must be gone.





And I must wait on you home Madam.



•le rather stay here this Twelve-month,
then give your Lordship that trouble.



Am I such a Monster, in the opinion of all
Women, as you make me?



I must take care you make not me one; 
Oh happy deliverance!






This is such a piece of nic••y, as I nere
met before; these are no company for me.
Exit.



Stay (learcus, I would speak with you; 
my Cousin Pandora tells me, you Court Lindamira,
which her self does not much deny.



I am pract•zing I must confess, how to talk
to Ladies, and have learnt some Speeches to that
purpose, whereof Lindamira has had her share.



You have mocked her then! and intend
her onely for your 〈◊〉!

He makes a legg.


Methinks his silence, and that legg, shewes
more love to me, then I know what to do with.



Excellent Girle! how she playes with his
wanton humour!
Aside.





Nay, if Lonzartes fall on me too? I shall be
over-whelmed with wisdome.



Now there is some hope of him, his look
is Civillized already.



Are you not pleased Clearcus? to see the
whole Court concerned for you? to see your self
so valued, methinks it should stir up the Noble
Blood of your great Ancestors, to set you on to
such actions, as may out-shine their stories, and
not loose one day more, in your wild waies.



Madam, Your Language, and your Looks,
agree with your great soul; I can be proud to be
so taught, when the Princess Theodocia, and you
direct, twere great stupidity to shew neglect; 
but in my Opinion Madam, one of a Family is
enough to be a Saint; •twould take from great
Lonzartes credit, and render his conversion no
rarity; if I should become virtuous too.



Pandora, and I, are much obliged to you,
for your good opinion of us, I wish all our Sex
were so too.



My opinion and my practise, differ very
much Madam; I do honour virtue in your Sex,
as much as any man; but my Tallent lies the
other way, Lonzartes does enough Illustrate the
Platonnick Name, and Eminently maintain, that
high Serassick flame, which is above my reach.



Tell me now Clearcus, is there not more
  24
relish in this Conversation? then with your
Getinas, and your Angelinas! that blush shewes
well, there is some hopes of grace in that blush



Hold your pratling, my conversion does
not belong to you.



I hope I may direct you to a Lady, that will
work that wonder.



Hold your peace then, till we be alone.



We'l be gone Pandora, and not hinder so
good a work; you shall neither of you go with
us, but if you please Clearcus, Lindamira may
walk with you a little longer.



No Madam, I have enough of her already,
she out-wits me; we shall nere agree.



I have got credit enough for a young
Souldier, by my honourable Retreat, from so
hot a charge.






Let us now persue our Argument, for thy
Conversion.



It comes on a pace; what a fine
Gentleman are you grown, since the Spirit of
Chastity has possest you? and I must live chast,
that I may have the Honour, and Felicity to be
in love! to be a fool! to intangle my self in
〈◊〉 that I shall nere get out of! I'le none of it.



Let my old Friend-ship so far prevail, that
on my request you will sometimes converse with
Pandora, if thy visits do ingage her to undertake
thy cure! and she do work that Miracle! she
〈◊〉••lue what her self has made worthy of her
  25
self; for so wilt thou be, if thy wandring fancy,
were once fixt?



So then all this bussle, is to make me in
love; though you know, I have been a thousand
times in love already.



I Clearcus, I know thy thousands, but I
would have the• once in love.



I never will be mad, as you are; yet to
give you, and the World satisfaction in this point;
I will condemn my self to one Months pennance,
and make experiment to look, and talk as idlely
with Pandora, as you do with your Divinest Cloris!
 If I were sure Pandora were not to be won; I
could fancy a pretty kind of pastime, by raising
my desires to hopes of what I cannot have! but I
could never meet a woman yet, that was impreg∣nable;
and my nature is not capable of being
converted, by any that I can conquer; Pray
Sup at my Chamber this night.



I will not fayle, if you will go with me
unto Pandora? 
And visit her, while this good motion's warm,
'Gainst all your feares, I'le fit you with a charm.








and Ladies in her
Chamber, and Silvander.



Lindamira you must be my second, they
will be two, to one else.



Gladly Madam, I cannot wish a gentler
Enemy, then him that thinks he has me at his
mercy.



But if you be over-sharp upon him, you
may hinder the great work, we undertake! and
make him hate all honest Women for our sakes.



I shall use him with more Art, and lead
him on with hopes, that all our Sex do scramble
for him; if I can fit his Fancy, and his Wit,
T'le ingage him in a concern for you, and then
mannage my young Gallant to my will, till I
confute his common places, so often urged to the
prejudice of Ladies, I cannot fancy better sport,
then to see him mad in love with you Madam.



The gods forbid, I would not cure him
at that rate, for my own sake, and his; least that
prove a greater evil, then he now has; I shall be
very careful, to give him no incouragement, for
thoughts of that nature, my undertaking is not
beyond a common civillity, as to all others of his
Rank.



That will do it, if I mistake not; and
catch you both I hope, here he comes?







Madam, I have brought my Friend to kiss
your hand.



Thus far Madam, in order to my ingage∣ment,
I have given you the trouble of the first
visit, I ever made against my will.



Your Lordship, does me honour; came
you now from Court?



Yes Madam, and left the Princess Theodocia
in great complements with her kind Father, who
has now declared against the proud Corinthian,
and given Theodocia her free choice where she
please.



You tell me News, beyond my hopes,
this will raise the Princess drooping Spirits again;
I wonder she is not here by this time.



The Duke and she, are not yet parted
Madam; how now Lindamira, are you tongue∣tyed?
no welcome for my Friend, to encourage
him to like of civil company; You look as if
you feared to loose your Gallant.



No, no, she knows she has too fast hold of
my heart, to part so easily.



•Tis Honour enough for me, to be in the
number of your Martyrs Sir.




How long have you two been acquainted?



Ever since last night Madam.




And dost thou sigh already?



'Tis onely to give you warning, by my
harmes.



I thank your care, but I am arm'd against
the World.



That's good News Lonzartes, there is some
hope, she has made firm resolves against Wedlock;
that I may assault her with security. 
Aside.



You may, you may.



Madam, You speak, as if you held man∣kind
at a defiance.



By way of Marriage, I do, but I can value
all men that I see worthy.



He must be a bold man, who does designe
beyond the favours you a•low, but have you made
vowes against marriage Madam?



No vowes, but such resolves, as are un∣changable.



You are severe to men.



If all Women were of your opinion Ma∣dam?
how should the World be Peopled?



I marry Madam, that was well urg'd.



I thought Lindamira you would have been
on my side.



So I am, when you are in the right, this
is our common cause; Suppose you bring these
two Lords, and they bring twenty more, to be
of your judgement, and this Heresie should spread;
what will become of us, who think of nothing else
but Marriage?



She tells you true Madam, when her own
concern is at stake, you may excuse her.



I do, and will make good my argument
alone.



Never to Marry Madam?



Never my Lord, is my full resolve.



You are the happiest, and the wisest Lady
living! and I the joyfullest man, if you'l permit
me to adore you at this distance, for I am of your
own opinion Madam.



Two Fannaticks well met.



So long as your respects be free from love,
my house is open to you.



You are all witnesses, that this Lady does
adopt me her avow'd Gallant, on the conditions
before mentioned: you give me leave Madam
to talk of love, and to carry up this jest, as high,
as he who really does love.



I do, so it be ever in Publick; all private
visits, and all whisperings are excepted.



'Tis enough Madam; This is a pretty
kind of Entertainment, I never thought of: Lon∣zartes
thou art in the right, this will be sport be∣yond
my hope.



But how does Lindamira like, to see her
new Gallant, thus taken from her?



'Tis her •wn fault, she might have fix'd me
another way, if she had been wife.



Indeed Lindamira, I thought not of your
concern, and did conclude too rashly, but I will
use my interest on your behalf.



'Twill not be needfull Madam, I know all
his professions to you, are meant to me.



Very prettily contrived, This is a
new kind of wit▪ I never heard of; so then you are
to love me, in spite of your teeth, and I you, in
spite of mine; what will this come to at last?



Mirth man, all the year a constant
mirth: Is not this better then spending your
time in a smoaky house, with your old Acquain∣tance?



do converse while the
others talk.


I cannot tell you that, till I have tryed
this, as long as I have the other.



Pray my Lord, do not perswade your
Friend, all this earnest is a jest, I allow you as
much mirth as you please, so the conclusion be
serious.



We leave the success unto the Fates; 
Clearcus may in time have pitty on you Lindamira,
he does not yet believe, you are in earnest.



Nor ever shall do Madam, till I see her
heart break, and then 'twill be too late.



He dissembles well, for so young a Schollar
Madam.



We have done all well me thinks, and now
tis time that we retire.



How soon may I make my next visit to you
Madam?



As often as you please my Lord, at pub∣lique
hours.





How did I perform my part Madam?



You fell too soon into your humour, he
sees you mock him.



That's all I ayme at, he has too much wit
to be abused; my onely business is to let him see,
that he cannot cozen me; I believe you will
see this Scene changed, at his next visit, if I have
any skill, you will be troubled with him.



I am arm'd at all points, against all men,
and him most.





Oh Cousin! I am freed from all my fears,
and come to rejoyce with you.



I have rejoyced already Madam, and have
begun a Scene of mirth, will hold us long; 
Had your Highness come a little sooner, you had
sound the late Convert Lonzartes, and his Friend
Clearcus here, who is become my a vowed Gallant,
and looks as if he liked our company already.



Then you have hopes to cure him; 
Pray order it so, as I may come to your next
meeting, my heart is now so light, that I could
play with any thing; Can I have no part in
your Comedy?



For two reasons, your Highness can onely
be a looker on •tis petty Treason to make love to
you, though in jest; and then your beauty is too
dangerous to be dallied with; these be edge-tools,
too sharp for us to play with.



Why may not Princes participate in such
innocent mirth? we make stricter Rules then
need; true virtue will shine through such thin
clouds without a prejudice, and be above the
reach of vile tongues.



I Madam, if you could shew a rule, to
distinguish between Innocence and Guilt; But
we often see that Angelical virtues are aspersed,
by malicious tongues, and no quality exempt,
from rude censures.



I differ in opinion, Princes may enjoy
harmless mirth, as freely as we; to be too much
reserved, does look like disguise.



I would be so merry Lindamira. as should
defie all scandall, and with an open face justifie it
to the world; to wear alwayes a stiff-state face, is
intollerable.



Private persons may be bold that way,
when few eyes observe, But Princes are 〈◊〉
on Pirameds, for all to see, an • immitate.



You shall not fright me from your mirth,
with this grave lecture, are they not, both my
near Relations, whom you endeavour to reclaim•
why may not I share in so worthy a designe? 
I fear Lindamira she doubts least I may gain her
Gallant from her.



She may well be jealous, if your Highness
undertake him, I shall have small hopes, if you
two quarrel for him.



VVhy Lindamira? is Silvander vanished?



No Madam, the more Trophies I can fairly
get by Victories on others, will raise his Conquest
higher, who gaines me from the rest.



Thou art safe, and m•yest say any thing,
Silvander is thy security against all scandal, though
you carry it thus unconcern'd, the secret spread.



'Tis time it should do so, now we do own
Our love, tis fit the secret should be known.

  33Your Highness may assist, while you look on,
Though onely we, the active part do own.



Let us retire to council then.






What is thy business honest Geta? How
does Lonzartes thy brave Lord?



My Lord is in good health of body
Madam, his brains are only out of order.



How meanest thou Geta, has he got a blow
on his head?



Only some fumes from his heart Madam,
makes his head addle, tis call'd the Spleen of
late, and much in fashion; his Lordship does desire
to know the Princess mind this morning, what
she meanes to do all day?



This will be a hard question to the
Princess fasting, why would he know all this now?



Because he has some great affairs for me
to mannage, and cannot spare me to ask, so often
as I use to do



Of what nature, be thy particular queries
Geta?



He would know how she slept last night?
in what health now? by what hour she will be
drest? when to her devotions? and then, where
she walks this morning? and if she dine in pub∣lique?
then how she intends to pass her time till
night? else I must come twenty times, for
  34
what you may at once dispatch me.



And does Lonzartes send thee, to enquire
all this at on•e?



These women are so silly, they
Aside.
cannot reach a deep design; No
but he does every day make me trou•le my self,
and every body that I meet, to ask these questions
severally, which I would do at once, to shew him
I am a man of quick dispatch.



Oh! is that the matter? I can fit thee
with one answer to all these; Tell thy Lord,
the Princess did take cold last night, and will
keep her bed all day.



I like it well, and wish her Highness would
do so this moneth.



Out Traytor, I'le make thy Lord braine
thee for that wish.



Why Madam? I meant no harm, 'twas
but to save you the trouble, and me the same
questions to morrow, and so on till Dooms-day,
I think.



Well Sirra, for this time, 'le not complain
of you, this Jest shall excu•e your knavery.



This wil• be a play day for me, I like this
lying a Bed well.










TEll me then who Cloris is?



I dare not trust thee yet.



I will know now, or break all Friendship
with you.



I swear I must not yet.




Te•etia, and Ladies, and
Silvander.


Then look to your self, least I discover
Cloris.



Where did you leave my Father Lonzartes?



I have not seen the Prince to day Madam.



I was told, that you were walking with
him just now.



That may well be Madam, for his braines
do crow of late; do ye see how he stands; 
Lonzartes the Princess speaks to ye.



To me, does your Highness command me
anything?


Silvander, and Lindamira en∣tertain
themselves in whisper.


Did not I tell you Madam, that his brains
are turn'd he neither hears, nor sees of late; 
The Idea of his Seraffique love, takes him wholly
up, from all converse with us mortals.



Hold your prateing, or I shall be angry.



What has made you so grave of late Lon∣zartes?
all your wonted mirth is gone.



No man is alwaies in good humour Madam.



He's in love Madam, on my knowledge,
o're head and eares in love.



In love, Lonzartes, I thought you had not
been at leasure, to be in love; Tis your fault
Clearcus, that have not councell'd your Friend
better.



Thus am • chid for your follie; who reject
all my councels, and refuse all my approv'•
Antidotes, which do preserve me against that
Serpent (you call love) while he convers'd with
me, he was safe Madam.



Thou hast fool'd enough Clearcus, the
Princess and al• the company are weary of it: 
If your Highness allow him this freedom, he wil•
grow troublesome.



Is it Love Lonzartes? or is Clearcus onely
merry with you?



Your Highness▪ knows him too well, 〈◊〉
credit all he sayes this way, he is at thi• time, very
angry that I have chid him for his lewd life, an•
have with-drawn my self from his ill company▪
which he imputes to my being in love.



I say he is in love, most seriously in love•
shall I unmask this grave Reformado, and 〈◊〉
you the Lady now?



If Lonzartes be content, I would gladly see
her, whom he thinks worthy of his heart.



No matter for his consent Ma∣dam
so you like it. And thus I begin
my tryal; By your good leave Lady 
Tis not here; nor is it this; nor
is it you Lady?







I lament the losse of such an honour.



Thou art become a pretty fool Clearcus,
dost thou not observe how all the Court do laugh
at thee?



Yes, and shall make them laugh at you,
〈◊〉 have done; if Pandora will make the next
tryall.



I am content to try, what this will come to.



Now Sir, have at you; Tis not your good
fortune neither Madam.



How can you make Lonzartes an amends,
for all this abuse.



I will give him present satisfaction, if your
H•ghness will permit me to bring him to you?



To me! think you Lonzartes is in love with
me?



Tis a Cloris in the clouds, one much above
his reach, which you onely are Madam.



With all my heart, I sh•ll be proud to
own his conversion, as a Trophie of my honour.



See if his guide do not make him avoid the
tryal; stop him there; Lonzartes the
Princess calls you.






I'll cut thy throat.



He threatens me, guilty I'le 〈◊〉; 
now Madam, do you see no 〈◊〉 in his
  38
face? no change yet? 
speak all, you are all assi∣stants
in this Judgement.



him off in anger.


It will disturb a Saint, to be thus subject
to the fancies of a fool.



Be not disturb'd Lonzartes, you take this in
earnest, which we look on as a jest, only to pass the
time; Clearcus has more wit, then to be in earnest.



I hope your Highness will not prefer his
follies, before my professions, who disclaim such 〈◊〉
presumption.



If you turn this jest to earnest Lonzartes,
I shall believe Clearcus; I take it now as R•l∣lier•;
 I wonder Lindamira you get not hold
of some young lovers heart?



I have twenty in store Madam, more then
I know what to do w•th.



Then you allow as many lovers, as you
can get, and mean to chuse the best.



I think tis credit for women to be admir'd
and honour'd by worthy men; it shews a value,
to move so many to a general Esteem, and must
•e the womans 〈◊〉 if she deserve a censure.



You are in the right Lindamira, men may
designe, •ut wo•en may destroy, faster then they
•an 〈◊〉; my thanks unto Clearcus for our mirth.




Mirth ought to be our business Madam. 
The an•ry gods aff•rds cross Fates to give
Vs 〈◊〉 enough, and troubles while we live.






Lords, who meet the
Ladies going off.


We were now discoursing of your
Gallant Pandora, have you hopes to work this
miracle?



This Lady and I, have ventred our credits
on this conversion Sir.



To recl•im him, were a good work;
but suppose he fall in l•ve with either of you.



At his pe•il that, let Lindamira look to her
self, I am safe.



I have a sure retreat Sir, tis but see•ing to
comply, and 〈◊〉 give ore; for he can love none
that he can conquer, and I am resolv'd rather to
be vanquish'd, then not to be rid of him when I
see my time.



Could all her Beauty with my love expire
Her flowing Wit, would s•ill create new fire







You two I know, come now from
exercizing of your •roopes.



No Sir, we went hence just now; I wish my
Troop hereto guard me.



Have you an Enemy in view Clearcus?



I have many Sir, that have •ob'd m• of
  40
my peace; I cannot sleep of late, but have a thou∣sand
fancies, which do set my brains on fire.



Take heed it prove not love.



That is the danger Sir, for if Pandora do
keep her resolve for single life; I may be in love;
for I do feel strange alterations that I know not
what to make of.



Have you no affection left for me my Lord?
can you so soon forget your last nights professions?



Now Sir, you see how I am assaulted, I shall
be pull'd in pieces presently.



Si'vander and I, will secure you from
Lindamira.



If I were assured you could Sir, I should
like her wit, and humour well, but I fear, 
if I should be in earnest, she would be so too.



You see his inclination is for me Madam,
so that what ever he shall say to you hereafter, is
meant to me.



Nor so, nor so, sweet Lady, I do respect
Pandora, above all her Sex; you throw out hoocks
to catch young Gallants, the neglects those are
laid for her, thats my danger.




What riddle is this •learcus? dost thou
desire, that thy desires may not be answered?



Yes Sir, from some persons, for if my love
•e return'd, all ends in the fruition, (as most
••amples shew,) But if Pandora keep her resolve
for single life, then I can raise my fancy while I
live▪ to •doration of her beauty, and that virtue,
with a continual delight, which will last while I
last.



You are then my Lord, the happiest lover
  41
living, for you will find my Cousin, just as you
wish.



Pray Madam, answer not too fast for me,
for if I find Clearcus a person of such Noble Nature,
beyond what I did ever hope to meet in man; I
may change my Opinion of men for his sake; and
therefore 'tis best to find some other sport, least we
destroy each other.




Look you now? I am Treypand.



Start not Clearcus, she but mocks you, you
are both ingaged for this month to Entertain us,
and your selves, no going off now.



I shall not break Covenants.



Nor I Madam, though I do sometimes
reminde you of your resolve against Marriage,
whereon depends my bliss, secure me but of that,
and I am ever yours.



I shall endeavour what I can, to give you
that satisfaction



I kiss your fair hand on that word, which
has given new life to my doubtfull heart, and
now I do de•ie Lonzartes gravity, to put his heart
in a more loving dress, then mine shall be here∣after.



If Lonzartes can love too, my wonder
ceases.



He is my servant Sir, and has a chief part
in the Comedy.



I like your pastime well, but me thinks
Lonzartes looks as if he were compell'd unto his
part, and will do it s•urvily.



That's the sport Sir, and will afford the
more variety.



I shall be glad Sir, if I might be excus'd.



By no means Servant, what an affornt is
this, that I must beg your favour, in the face of
the whole Court to own me?



You must not be so grave Lonzartes, all
is for our mirth.



Now Sir, have not I done your work for
you?



Would thou wert hang'd, hold thy peace.



Give me better words, or I'le talk aloud.



Was ever man thus hamper'd, between
jest and earnest?



They are comparing notes in private;
there's Treachery in their faces; I'le play no
more.



When begins the love Clearcus? this is
only talking of it.



It is begun already Sir; if I had not
valued this Excellent Lady above the World; I
had not •aine this care to secure my interest to a
perpetuity.



Madam, you are not to believe a word of
this, for he has with the same grave face, sworn
the same to me but Yesterday.



That was in jest Madam, but now every
action of my life, shall justifie each syllable I utter
unto you.



I shall endeavour to believe it my Lord,
and yet allow you the same Christian liberty with
Lindamira, and the rest, as you had before.



Madam, you speak, as though you did not
  43
value my respects, now my whole soul is set to
serve, and honour you alone.



I must confess, I cannot change my faith,
so fast as you do your discourse; And then
as I remember my lesson, is to keep my distance,
least I loose my lover.



True Madam, as to comply, but you are
to see, and credit my ambitious love, and to
admit it with the same Esteem, I serve you.



How can I do that, and not return you
love for love? and then you will dispise me; pray
my Lord, at your next visit, bring my part in
writing, that I may not erre in it.



She is in the right Clearcus, you now seem
to seek such contradictions, as all the Court will
laugh at; consult with Lonzartes against your next
visit.






If he will follow my advise, he may do well
Sir; now we are alone, tell me what crotchets
next? prethee make me understand what thou
wouldest have Pandora do?



I think you were best release me the residue
of my mon•h, that I may go se•k my wits, where
I last left them; must I see none of my old
Friends, untill this month be over?



If you consider your promise, not see one
of them.



Then shall I be lost, if those preservatives
be all forbid me; I do find already love will be
Predominant.



The better for you if it be; let us
now talk seriously; suppose Pandora may be
won, can you fancy a happiness on Earth, beyond
having her?



Yes, I do fancy that having twenty, is
better then any one in •hristendom.



Thou dost not love then, else, that one
belov'd, has more variety then a thousand.



Make but that good, I'le marry her to
morrow.



You think then she is already at your
dispose.



When she once sees that I am in earnest,
she will be, what I will have her; and the truth is
Lonzartes, I do like her best of all I ever talk'd
with, and have great fear that I shall be like other
men, who never value what they have, which
makes me cover what I cannot get.



Suppose some other do obtain her, while
you are thus long resolving?



Nay, I am resolv'd no other shall ever have
her.



And you resolve for her too.



Yes, she cannot in Honour ingage to any,
while I pretend.



Art thou turn'd fool, to think thus? be
more serious, or thou wilt be dispis'd.



Why do you not allow me some relief then?
to live a whole month honest, will put my blood
into a flame; I have tempted all I meet, and all
within these Walls prove honest.



By your own Experience then, you will
find that Courts are Nurseries of virtue, and are
  45
onely scandaliz'd by such vilde persons, as would
have the clearest innocence aspers'd, that their
own guilts might be no wonder; you find few
virtuous persons, amongst Centurers.



That's true, but take heed Lonzartes, you
do not lead me into snares that will destroy me,
for I already find some inclinations towards Pan∣dora,
which I am asham'd to own, least I be laugh'd
at.



You have reason, for there can none of us
believe thee.



You have made me a fine Gentleman in a
few dayes; if Pandora be of your mind, adiew
to your Philosophical love.



I hope thou art too fast to free thy self. 
Thou playest with flames which undiscover'd burn,
Vntill they do thy heart to Ashes turn.




Did ever man betray himself as I have
done? by putting setters on in jest, which already
are become so fixt, I cannot shake 'um off; but
must humbly beg to be allow'd to worship that
Divine Nature I so much dispis'd in virtuous wo∣men,
and must now confess: 
If I do neither Faith, nor Favour find,
The god of Love is Iust, though he be blind.
Exit.

Not•, that all the Play through, when Sil∣vander
and Lindami•a〈…〉







If your Highness do consider Lonzartes's
Worth, and his great Birth, as it deserves; whose
Ancestor was not many Ages •ince, by yours put
by this Dukedom, on a nice point. (as I have
heard;) so that to me Lonzartes's love, looks like
a Divine direction, to his Restauration.



I am of Pandora's mind for single life, and
have as sm•ll a value for that idle passion you call
love, as she.



Your Highness may as well judge what
they do in China, as guess at our Felicities that
love? I can kiss the ground that my Silvander
trea•s on, with more re•sh, then all other joyes
can bring me.



You have high fancies that lead you on to
hopes, which you may never find.



These hopes are more delightfull then an
Age of dull life without them; if your Highness
did converse as much with me, as with Pandora, I
should convert you.



Why do you not then change her severity
against men?



I had not the Honour to be known to her,
before her heart was set another way; but yet l'le
try what I can do.



I wish Silvander may answer your expecta∣tion
Lindamira; but if such honour, and such
bliss accompany your loves, why thus long car∣ried
on ith' dark? and why not yet avow'd?



Tis now avow'd unto the Duke, though
I took time to know my Gallant, before I did
admit his love, and on long tryal found his silent
looks, did speak more truth, then such loud
noyses, as most passions make



You praise Silvander as if you meant to
sell him.



He is no Prince Madam, and is therefore
safe from you.



The less safe, if I so pleas'd; do you
believe his virtue, and his love so great, that I
could not win him from you for a Friend of mine?



I do, and shall not think him a loss, who
can be won from me, by the greatest Princess of
the World?



If I could once see such a man, I might
change my opinion.



Why don't you try •onzartes?



He is too much concern'd to be play'd
with; you dare not venture your fine man
then?



I dare, and do desire it withall my heart,
and do voluntarily ingage, not to work against
your Highness.



And I am resolv'd to try his faith to you,
it may cure Lonzartes to see himself neglected,
when anothers chosen, though but in jest, for I
can pitty, though I do not love him.



And tis my desire to have Silvanders faith∣full
love, made Eminent by this temptation.






In what humour le•t you Clearcus〈◊〉
Lords?



In such as does become his greatnesse Ma∣dam.



Most brave men are often puffed up with
vain glory, that does Eclipse those virtues, which
themselves do over-value.



Your Highness is severe to men, but all are
not so vain.



Most are, when we do value them too
much; yet I confess I am well pleased, when
I find men worthy my Esteem.



How does that appear? when your High∣ness
does dispise mankind by your resolves against
them.



To shew how much you are mistaken;
unpin this Jewel; wear this Silvander for my
sake; I'le own it to the World, that I do value
men of Worth.



Madam, I understand not what this kind
of favour meanes; I hope your Highness does not
chuse me for mirth.



Do you Silvander raise mirth from my
Favour? come with me Lindamira; 
I do command you to stand near us within
hearing; I will not run the hazzard of
any Censure, by this tryal to satisfie my curiosity
concerning lovers, such high Romantick lovers,
who soar above the re•ch of all temptations.



I shall obey you Madam, though I desire it
not.






Can you guess Lonzartes, what this tends
to?



'Tis a Riddle far beyond my understand∣ing.








Wake, wake Silvander, the Sun shines
bright upon thee; Theodocia dotes on thy virtues,
and will advance thy youth, much faster then thy
own wishes can propose.



How Lindamira, have you so mean thoughts
of me?



So high thoughts, why may not the Prin∣cess
neglect the Corinthian for you? such things
have been in story.



You speak, as if you wish'd it.



Can I wish you well, and not appla•d
it?



You cannot fancy me a greater curse,
unless your own heart be turn'd against me.



The Princess desires your Company in the
next Room; I can stay no longer.




I have so much to think on, that I know
not what to say; the Princess unexpected
  50
favours, with Lindamira's no concern, begets such
wonder, as does amaze me I will not go; 
and yet I must, or make my self Ridiculous, by
judging what I cannot guess at.
Exit.





Have I thus long ador'd the Princess?
and still approach'd her with the same trembling,
I draw near the Altar, for this scorn at last, 
before my face, to court a man, she knows ingaged
unto another, a man of so much lower quality
then I; this I confess does make my Faith stag∣ger;
 Silvander was as much surpriz'd as I, 
Lindamira too was out of Tune; If Theodocia
can go less, this change will be more my admira∣tion,
then her virtue was.


passing in as by him.


Now Madam, whither so fast?



To see which way the wind blows; 
pray my Lord, where is your heart now?



In th• Princess lodgings, with yours; 
or can you tell me better, where your own is?



I change my mind so often, that I know
not where I left my heart last.



Are you no more concerned? Suppose
Silvander change his opinion? Princess have
mighty power to overcome mens hearts.



Why then his opinion will be chang'd? 
I cannot value him, that leaves to value me; 
  51
methinks my Lord, the Princess favour to Silvan∣der,
should abate your passion for her.



My desi•es go no higher, then to look, and
wonder at her perfections! my Esteem cannot be
call'd love, beyond what Duty, and Obedience
does allow; but how does Silvander receive
this great Honour?



They are now in private; you may judge
by his exalted looks when you see him next; 
I am glad your Lordship is no more concern'd.



This is a forc'd discourse Lindamira, pray
do not mock me, who have a true value of your
worth.



The truth is, the Princess often angred at
my confidence in Silvanders love; onely now
tryes if she can shake his faith, by higher proposi∣tions;
 and my hope is, that his virtue may
beget in her, some better thoughts for men,
which will do your business, and confirm mine,
for Silvander is above temptation; and I think
Lonzartes does deserve what he desires.



You oblige me to say, your confidence
does merrit the greatest faith from man; but is
Silvander of your Plot?



No, 'twould then be none, nor I no tryall
have of his sincerity.



These are dangerous sports, and we too
late may find them so; the Princess and you
are both too bold, and do too much rely on your
own beauties.



If Silvander can be won, I can smile at such
a loss.



'Tis ca••e to say so, when you fear it not;
  52
but I have seen stout hearts fall to pieces by such
a blow; you have setled my heart again, and
I advise you from these dangerous sports, lea•
they blow up your joyes, when you are mo••
secure; we know our present minds, but canno•
fore-see what we shall like to morrow: 
Our Nature with such frailty is indow'd,
'Tis well if present moments be allow'd



Silvander, two Ladies at
a distance; Lindamira
is seen near o•serving
them.


Is your heart my Lord so fixt on Linda∣mira,
that no Person, nor any Argument, can 〈◊〉
preva•• with you to change?



Our Souls Mad•m, are so united, that
hope death can onely ma•e that separation.



Can no Fortune, nor any Q•ality 〈◊〉
you to Honours, and Happiness, beyond what you
can ever hope from •indamira? Nor a greate
beauty dis-ingage your heart from her?



None can ever move me to a thought 〈◊〉
change Madam.



What if she have chosen higher, and give•
way for your preferment also



I can smile at all this, when your Highnes•〈◊〉 mer•y; •indamira and I Madam, do un∣derstand
a happiness, can never be dissolv'd; we
are above temptation.



Suppose my Father be her choice, will you
pretend to love, and hinder her advancement,
by your claim? Suppose my Dear Cousin
Pandora, have like affection unto you; and puts
on this severity to others, in design onely to gaine
you? will you let such a beauty, of so high vir∣tue
and extraction dye for you?



Your Highness sure does fancy what is im∣possible?
 but if all this were so, I could dye
in gratitude to serve Pandora, but do prefer
Lindamira's love, and virtue, above the brightest
beauty, or greatest Empire this World has.



Can there be such worth in men? how
have I been mis-informed? Princes who do
not converse, know not the World they
Aside.
live in, but take all on trust from
others; You believe that I am now in jest
Silvander, and do not deal so freely, as I expect.



By all thats I am fixt, past
a•ering; if your Highness knew the joyes,
which do accompany united hearts, you would
sooner undertake to pull down Sta•s from Hea∣ven,
then hope a separation, where true love Tri∣umphs.



I am fully satisfyed, that •indamira has
what she deserves, a worthy Lover; appear
now •indamira, and call in Lonzartes with the
rest: I am converted.





Here Madam, you are co•pled by the gods,
Silvander does deserve your confidence; 
  54
Now wear that Jewel, I before gave you in jest Sir,
as a mark of my Favour, for your approv'd virtue.



Has your Highness any better thoughts for
Marriage, then you had?



I have found an honest worthy man, be∣yond
my Expectation; Lonzartes you look sad.



My heart is not so full of feathers as it was,
but is of late become a lump of lead.



We have indeed been all too serious of
late; come Lindamira, let us find some Entertain∣ment
to refresh us on the 〈◊〉 this Evening; Lon∣zartes,
you, and Clearcus may go with us▪ if you
please?





Your Highness does honour us; what
these various fancies tend to, is above my un∣derstanding;
 As Nature has fram'd Women
of a more refined matter, then us men, so she has
given to some, Souls so much above ours Excel∣lent,
that their Intrincique purity, dazles our
Judgements more then their brightest beauty does
our eyes; Theodocia is cetainly without blemish; 
yet may have some notion of my love, which
she thinks not fit to cherish, because she likes not
me: And yet may have a virtuous concern for
my birth, and sufferings, such as her good Nature
is unwilling to destroy; 'Tis Theodocia's Excel∣lencies
makes me thus humbly seek my Right, as
her Gift; Else my Sword should make my way to
ascend this Throne, which is my own; but no
more of that yet: 
 For if I can be rightly understood,
My love may save the expence of so much blood.







are seen sitting on a Couch;
Enter Clearcus to them,
they rise.


MAdam Tis a felicity to love you, though
neglected; by what Name then shall
I call my Joy? Now you allow my Love, to what
height raise my thoughts? Shall I dare to
enter upon such a state of bliss? To be thus
snatch'd into so much •ight, from the long Chaos
I have liv'd in, may prove more ruinous to me,
then that Hell I came from.



My Lord, you speak a new Language I un∣derstand
not.



Alas Madam, I have this night seen Visi∣ons,
and do •ind my passion, growing much above
my own command; For when I look on your
eyes, I forget that there are god•, and shall do such
Idolatry to you, as will provoke them, to make
me more miserable, then you can wish me
happy; But when I consider how vast a Chasme.
your resolves have made between us; I sink into
such an abyss of misery, that I can ne're get out
of.



I understand you less, and less; The
more you say, the more you do confound my
Judgement.



All this Madam, is onely to let us see how
he could talk; if any Women were worthy of his
real love; pray my Lord proceed, I shall
take Notes and Edifie.





Your mirth Madam, is now out of season,
when every word I utter flowes from my wound∣ed
heart.



Why do you not speak to me then? who
can change my mind as often as your self? I was
made for you; this Lady is impregnable.



I yield Lindamira, let not your wit destroy
a man that does submit to mercy; I beg quarter.



Oh! do you so?



'Tis enough Lindamira, that he does con∣fesse
himself 〈◊〉 come, let it be Registred amongst
our Vict••ies; And now my Lord, what is
your next desire?




My next Madam, I have scarce begun with
this, you d•〈◊〉 all I say for mirth; Does not
my looks and Language shew an Alteration? 
All 〈…〉, that did possess my idle head
are vanished, and I become a serious man: 
Your 〈◊〉 is already wrought, and I now see
the onely way to my 〈◊〉, is to gain what I
so much 〈◊〉.



Ex•ellently well Acted, this might cozen
twenty that did not know him.



You shall do well my Lord to persue this
new path, untill you do obtain a general opinion
of your virtue; But I hope you would not have us
〈◊〉 it at 〈◊〉•ight.



Though my love cannot yet gain credit in
your Esteem, do not deny me the joy to think
that you see how much I love, and honour you.



This is too serious for our Comedy my
Lord.



Nothing can be too serious Madam, to ex∣presse
my love, by which the gods are pleas'd to
bring me to them; thus by forbidding what
might intice me to slight Paradice, by having had
you here: 'Tis fit then that I submit, and
raise a joy from what I am now too apt to repine
at, for 'tis a blessi•g to be so fixt, as Antidates my
Elizium here on Earth; this Souls joy will endure
like its own nature, unto Eternity.



You are cured then Clearcus, and will
unto the Prince confess your conversion, if we call
you to it?



Propose away for my acknowledgement,
and try.



Let us take time Madam to consider of it,
least we loose half the Entertainment by our hast,
and so spoile the jest.



Madam, let not this Ladies mirth prevaile
with your good nature, to afflict a man, who can
live onely by your smiles.



I must confess I have some pain to hold in
my smiles thus long, for this serious way of fool∣ing
I expected not from you my Lord.



Why Madam, do you take all this for jest
still?



Yes indeed do I.



By all the powers above, I do Adore you,
next to them I Worship.



That's no Oath Madam, for he Worship•
none.



I have the same thoughts Lindamira, and
am safe.



What a Monster am I grown, give me credit
Madam, or give me death? If I do not love
you, let Iove strike me with suddain Thunder; or
I will gladly seal what I have said with my be•
blood, if nothing less will satisfie.









Oh! let him alone, he'l not hurt himself,
he onely hopes to fright us.



My Lord you fright me now, and since you
think fit to turn our Commick Scene into a Tra∣gedy;
I shall quit my part in it; and from thi•
time, admit no farther visits from you: Let us
retire Lindamira, his converse grows dangerous.




This had been my fate, had I ingaged a
little farther, and this the fruit of chast, virtuous
love; what a folly 'tis, to give our freedoms up,
unto the will of Women, so humbly to obey, those
we are Created to command: But I am safe
yet, and will now play with 'um, at their own
game; and through a seeming sorrow for my re∣jection,
laugh at them, who think to laugh at me.





A good day unto my Friend.



You speak too late Lonzartes, this is a fatal
day, and I am studying how I may make it more
  59
Eminent by death, then by my sufferings.



Why what's the matter man? have you
visited the Ladies before they are drest, and made
'um froward.



Thy love Lonzartes has ruin'd me; yet
I thank thee for my conversion, I shall now dye a
sober man.



Thy looks speak some disaster, tell me the
worst, that I may joyn to find a Remedy.



In a word then, I do love Pandora, as she
deserves, and did so to the life express my love;
that in spight of Lindamiras mirth, she did believe
it, and has forbid my farther visits.



'Tis not possible that she can be so fool'd,
she forbad thee in jest, come let us go to her now.



I'le swear she did forbid me, and in great
anger turn'd from me, I dare not go.



This is pretty, would'st thou have me
believe thou lovest?



Lonzartes, I am not in humour to be play'd
with.



Nor I in humour to be fool'd; what
would'st thou have me say, when thou talk'st thus
to me? thou in love! H•, ha.



What shall I say? what do, to beget faith
in thee? Pandora's resolution against Mar∣riage,
which I so much rejoye'd at, is fatally be∣come
my scourge, and I must dye, or have her.



That's the only way to obtain belief; do
but hang thy self, and then a Printed Ballad (The
Dary Maids greatest Faith;) will make them swear
thou dyedst for love.



Do my looks agree with so much jest?
  60
does not my face declare, my heart does love?



No, nor ever can do to me, would'st thou
have me belye my self, that thou mayest laugh at
me? these shallow Plots are lost on me.




This is right, had I been fool'd into the
Platonick pound; I might have knock'd my head
against the walls, and never been believed; 
Thus I blow away those bubles, those 〈◊〉
Lectures of chast love, which lead silly morca••
into slavery; Ha Sanga.








Go presently, and summon all that merry
Crew, (who danc'd the other day,) to Sup with
me this Night; and bid the Musick come.








I will retreat while I am safe, and be
Arm'd against my Wife, Virtuous, Chast Friends,
with their Cob-web Netts, so subtilly laid to
catch me; Thus I throw all their Inchant∣ments
off; And now like the Grand
Seignor, after some great Victory atcheiv'd; 
I will retire to my Seraglio.





Teretia, and Irain: 
and Silvander.



You tell me a story beyond belief Theodo∣cia, Clearcus
playes with you all this while; he love?



If Pandora be mistaken, he will triumph
over Women kind for ever.



I wish it were no worse Sir, tis I who now
am to be pittied, who for the common sport, and
for his good, have brought an evil on my self, I
cannot bear.



Why Pandora, he is descended of our own
blood, and his Estate proportionable to his Birth?
so that if you can raise his virtues above his vices,
you'l have no cause to murmur at his love.



True Sir, if I were not ingag'd to a
single life, much might be said, to set Clearcu's
merrits above mine.



Is there no dispensation for such resolves
Madam? when it may be disputed, whether the
gods approve them? They give us Lawes
enough, we need none of our own making.



My heart will ne're consent to alter my
resolves.



We shall have enough to do then.



•et us all agree to laugh him out of it.



You will find little cause for mirth, when
you see Clearcus next Madam.



Can so few hours alter a man of his temper,
so much?



He is asham'd of his first Principles, and is
angry at that shame; He hates himself for loving,
and loves so much, he dares not wish it less; This
  62
mixture of passions, does beget such a confusion
of thoughts, that makes him look as if he had se•
on nought but sighes, and tears this twelve
Month; and I fear we shall have cause to turn our
laughter into sorrow for him.



I'le give him Commands that shall divert
him; come with me Theodocia.






Tis great pitty so brave a man should be
so lost.



Tis so Lindamira, but how can it be help'd?
must I become mad, because he is so; 
'Twas not a rash word, by chance let fall,
but on debate and mature judgement, because I
saw none so happy after Marriage as before; 
Why may not I then live and dye as free as I was
born?



You see why, because the gods do not
allow so great felicity on Earth, as might keep us
from ever wishing to be with them; pray who∣ever
heard of a pair of true Lovers, that desir'd
to be in Heaven, if they might stay here till
Doomsday? Tis therefore for our good, that such
united hearts are so rarely to be found on Earth;
take heed Pandora, that you bring not more evils
on your head, then you fore see.



I must now bear my Fortune as I may.



Though you have not met with many
happy Marriages, I have heard of some, who all
their lives have had a constant spring of love;
their passions so high, and joyes so great, each
  63〈◊〉 to raise the others happiness above their
own; this I believe and hope for; Methinks
till I am married, I am a thing laid by, as if for∣gotten
by the gods.



Tis not high passions, nor great joyes, I
doubt to find, but their continuance; suppose
the Gallant Lovers to the Wars be sent, what
〈◊〉 will possess their frighted Ladies, till
their return? and if miscarry, what will their
whole lives have to joy at after?



Those who stay at home, may have equall
dangers, these are anticipated dreams of evils,
that may never happen; then you conceive not
the joy those dangers bring when they are over;
this world affords us nothing to relish our delights
by, but such accidents as love, with some fears
and dangers bring; Tis sharps make sweet the
sweeter.



But if I am satisfied with less joyes, with∣out
those pains you find so useful, why must I try
to gain more happiness, then I do with for, when
I have joyes enough already?



Joyes enough Madam; there is no such
thing in Nature, as enough of what we love.



I am weary of this idle talk.



And I know no better Entertainment.






How think you Silvander, is Clearcus what
he seems?



Lonzartes knows him best Madam.



I do believe he loves, though I seem not
to credit him, and am now resolv'd to play with
his passion, as he has done with mine; 〈◊〉
entertain the Princess rarely, to see how I shal•
anger him.



Is he enough fix't? to be so abus'd, for 〈◊〉
neither Men, nor Women have any faith in hi•
budding love, he may fly off for ever.



I am now going to see what humour he 〈◊〉
in.



I'le wait on you.



Pray do, and let me know how I must be
have my self, that would not hurt him.



I can direct you best, if you'l trust you•
self to me.



I shall trust you as far as any in this affairs▪
let us consult within.







Welcome my dear friends, I will be no
more seduc'd by grave Lonzartes fooleries; this
night shall re-unite us while we live: Is the
Musique come.







I have broke through their Nets, and now
the day and night are ours to Revel in; we will
be so merry, that our hearts shall seem much
lighter then our heeles.





Lonzartes, and Silvander are without.



They are come as I could with, I'le entertain
'um as they deserve; they are my kind, chast,
virtuous, well-wishing spies; pray retire all
Exeunt
Dancers.
into that Gallery, while I dispatch my Court-Friends:
 Sanga shut the windows close, then
call 'um in, and say, that I am grown sad of late,
Exit Sanga.
monstrous sad; Now for a grave face to suite
with my disguise; I have some fear my sides will
burst, with holding in my laughter.

He sits in a
sad posture.
Enter Sanga with
Lonzartes, and
Silvander.



Softly pray; for a strange Melan∣choly
has seiz'd him on the suddain; He is
now talking to Pandora.



She is not here.



He entertains her Idea in her absence with
the same passion, he would her; the only sure
way for a lovers happiness; hark.



Blessed Angel, turn not away; these
tears must be my daily •ncence, offer'd at your
feet; if you refuse this Tribute from my captiv'd
heart; you'l turn the Elizium I enjoy, to Hell:
Oh stay! and take my Soul with thee; that
gentle look! that: 



Why so sad fond lover? let not one re∣pulse
dismay so great a Conquerour; thy next
charge may prove more prosperous; we come
to councel thee Clearcus, and to raise thy droop∣ing
Spirits by new hopes.



Or to laugh at my affliction, whose Soul i•
sunke so low by my dispair, that all my Spirits are
vanished; I must submit to my Captivity Lon∣zartes.




That sigh had almost blown me over, yet
I am glad to see this, and am now fully satisfied
thou art in love, in love Clearcus: let me Im∣brace
my fellow-Prisoner, we will now shake our
shackles, to the same sad tune.



I know you came to mock me; but I
must bear it.



Oh no! who can have so hard a heart?
we pitty you, and have some fears Pandoras heart
will break, when we relate your mighty suffer∣ings;
 but if I should sit thus in the dark,
wo•ld it create the like Angelical Idea in my brain
Clearcus?



This is barbarous, to catch a Lion in your
Toyles, and bait him like an Asse; thus to
render my passion Rediculous, will beget Pandor••
scorn, and may prove my destruction.



If she discern not your passion, how can
she proportion her favours to your merrit?



Do I deserve this mirth from you, thus to
highten my affliction?



Do you not? all that I can do this
Twelve month, will not bring me on equal terms
  67
for thy abuses: remember how you held me
to the Ladies, and made me your mirth, by which
scandal you destroy'd my credit with the Princess,
this is my revenge.



'Twas a great scandal indeed to procure
you the Princess leave to love her; by my means
you have obtain'd a happiness beyond your hopes,
which all your whining Poetry, or your Eternall
sighes could ever reach; for which speciall
service; prethee good sweet Lonzartes spare 〈◊〉Hangs on him▪
me; by our old Friendship I do beg; by
thy own virtue, and unparalel'd chast heart, I do
conjure thee not to raise a publique mirth out of
my souls sorrow, which you have brought me to.



Well then, if I find you do continue thus
humbly penitent, and truly thus afflicted, I will
shew more mercy then I found from you; 
come chear up; we will •igh, and condole to∣gether,
Embraces Clearcus.
and if possible, so order our sad hearts, that
both may the same moment break, and infect the
world with such a sorrow, as may fright the female
Sex from like rigour unto men; so shall we become
a Noble Sacrifice to love, for the good of a whole
Nation; or if you please, we'l send for some of
our old Gang to dance, and drink these Melan∣cholly
vapours from our heart•, to let the Ladies
see, their beauties are not so destructive, as we
make them believe.





I marry Lonzartes, now thou talkest like a
Phylosopher, now thou prescribest the onely re∣medy
for our disease; Sanga, bid
the Musick strike a chearfull Ayre, and then call
in those Friends in the next room; Nay, if you
allow this way of cure, I shall soon expell loves
venome from my heart into my heeles.




What is all this Clearcus, art thou mad still?





I am wise, and do not mean to quit my
cool, pleasant, flowry paths, for your consumin•
flames of restless love, who walke on tops of
Steeples, and at that height, plead that your chast
desi•es are pleasing to the gods; But I, who
know the end of such fair flathes, as at first appear
with such folded Armes, and down cast looks, are
but steps to approach the Ladies fingers ends; 
 Then by degrees grown bolder, you aspire,
Till nought but ruine, quench the subtle fire.




What doest thou mean by this misterious
language?



I mean to follow thy advise, to sigh only
when I make love to Ladies, (their backs turn'd)
I mean to dance, and sing as often as I can, that
their neglects may pieice no deeper then their
  69
eyes discern; here Lonzartes, this Girle
will cure the bite of a Tarantula, and drive the
poyson from thy heart.



Out Hypocrite; is this thy love
unto Pandora? was all thy passion counterfeit the
other day?



No, 'twas fairly growing up to equal thine
in all sincerity of Noble thoughts; But the nice
Lady would not permit it to take so deep root as
yours, before she blasted all my hopes, and in a
moment let me see, that love is like a bitter po∣tion,
which many tast, and flying away, rather
chusing their disease, then so ill a relish'd remedy;
This made me return to my old Antidotes Lon∣zartes;
 what think you of a heat or two
before you go? call in the Musique.



Pandora was to blame, to throw him off so
rashly.



Let us retyre Silvander, this Ayre is in∣fected.





Go whine fond lover, go whine, I say, go whine,
While we chear our hearts with We•ches and Wine,
I say go whine.









I do not wonder that he is fallen off, twas
what I feared, when his passion went so high, I saw
Pandora was concern'd, but we will bring it on
again.



You are mistaken Madam, all he said then
was jest, for he is now as mad as ever; I left
him Incirculed with six wild men, and as many
wanton Girles, prepar'd to dance and Revel all
the night.



There is no harm in dancing my Lord,
unless they do catch cold; you judge Clearcus by
what is past; but when I see him with Pandora
next, I'le give my opinion of his concern.



By what means may their meeting be pro∣cured?










I am sorry Lonzartes that Pandora has cast
off Clearcus, which has occasioned his relapse,
when a little patience would have setled him in
the way of virtue.



Tis every way what I expected not; his
love was as strange as his rejection, and his relapse
in the old humour, beyond all the rest; I
  71
know not what to think of him.



Let us bring them once more together, and
I'le undertake to guess at both their hearts; 
it may be govern 'um.



I Madam, but how shall they be brought
together? when both would rather see a Basaliske,
then one another.



You may be mistaken my Lord, who
judge by what you see, when tis our business, and
our virtue, not to shew our hearts till a full tryal,
that men are worthy of them; then you for∣get
that Clearcus conversion, must be by one he
cannot conquer.



But if he will neither conquer, nor be sub∣dued,
how can his conversion follow?



If your Highness can contrive an inter∣view,
I have a fancy in my head, that may re∣concile
them, and effect what we all with.



I will send presently for Pandora, and in∣treat
my Father to pretend some business to call
Clearcus hit her.







Let him come, no matter what he suspects.



Do you Lonzartes, once more see what
humour he is in. 
 We must endeavour, and not fear to try,
But trust the Event, unto their destiny.








I ever thought Clearcus did but mock,
and laugh at their designs; his brains is not yet
ripe for serious love: But how does Theodoci•
look on Lonzartes?



With much neglect Sir.



That is not well, have you Silvander in∣str•cted
Lindamira, that she may inform Theodoci•
of Lonzartes Title to this Dukedom? and how
much better then a Forraign Prince, her Marry∣ing
him, will be applauded by our people, who
are not ignorant of his pretence.



I have Sir, and the Princess gives a serious
ear to it, though she yet makes no reply; a little
of your Councel and Authority, I believe may
incline her to a better value of him.



That shall not be wanting; Lonzartes〈◊〉
all that I can wish in a successor; and his love
looks so without design, that I will cherish it, and
try to win my Daughter to comply.



Your Highness will gain a double interest
in all your Subjects hearts by this honour to Lon∣zartes,
who has merrits proportionable to your
favour, and his birth, all which his love gives
Lustre to.



I see it Silvander, and will recompence his
Faith, and his Humility, with my advice to Theo∣docia,
who yet knows not his story.



The Princess must needs hear what every
body talks, and all do with.



I shall now inform her fully of Lonzartes
Right, too long held from him: bid him meet
me at my Daughters Chamber; I will no longer
hide my purpose for him: 
 His Birth and Virtue, with his constant love,
Declares he never can unworthy prove.










NO, I'le never see her more.



Do you not love at all?



Nor ever will; methinks love is like a
smooth water, that Invites men to Bath, and
tumble in it with delight, untill they be destroy∣ed
by Serpents, which in the bottom undiscover'd
lye.



What means this •imilie?



This Serpents bite, has Metamorphized
you into a whining lover, into the shaddow of a
man, of late become a shape without a Soul;
why must I busie my head with such Chymers,
when I can please my self to my hearts wish, my
own way? Prethee sweet suppress'd Prince,
do not forsake me thus, for specious shewes of
happiness, or vainer hopes of better dayes, thes
you will ever find in Court; You are now
safe, but when you grow wise, and serious, it will
in the Dukes head great jealousies create; and to
let him see your virtue, may be dangerous, and
your pretence appear worthy of his fear.



That hazzard is better, then what I now
suffer, in the opinion of my best Friends, who
  75
believe this wildness is my Nature, or such as
may beget a habit in me, which I can ne're put
off; and thus my security in this disguise, may
become my ruine; I wish I could perswade
you Clearcus to shew forth that virtue, all the
World would wonder at.



To what end I pray? if the good Duke
would give me imployment fit for his Kin•-man,
and worthy of my Sword, I could soon be my self:
But now I have nothing else to do, and therefore
play away my time in folly; and tis a hard que∣stion
which is best, for we know that too much
wisdom does undo more men, then it advances,
or else begets eternal slavery to State Affairs,
where the wisest ever walk on needles points; 
I have weighed these things, and do believe 'tis
better to maintain the peace, and the security I
now live in, unregarded.



But you will loose the Dukes favour, and
become contemptable to the whole Court, if you
continue thus Extravagant, what designe can I
have, by my desire to see you great and glorious?



Have I not tryed, and been misled? yield∣ed
to your wise Maximes, against my own better
judgement, and been rejected in the height of my
Endeavours, to be (as you call it) great, and glo∣rious,
is not this true?







I will no more of your advice, till you can
cure your self.



I have an Honourable Argument for my
love.



Who has not, untill he be dispis'd?



Was it not your own desire to be negle••∣ed?
did you not declare against all women, 〈◊〉
you could conquer? you left Pandora no way 〈◊〉
victory, but by rejecting you; so that I can co•∣clude
a good success from what you raise di•∣paire.



Ha! think you Pandora did reject me, 〈◊〉 compliance with my humour only?



What else? can she be angry with you, 〈◊〉
loving her too much?



You do surprize me with a discourse I look•
not for; but I will be no more abus'd; 
will not see her.



How can you be reconcil'd then? shall 〈◊〉 make love to you?



No, I abhor that thought beyond 〈◊〉
anger, a woman Wooe, that were preposterous.



Will you treat by Embassadours, and 〈◊〉
by Proxie?



Nor so, that's only fit for Princes, who can∣not
meet to treat.



Will you have her; if she declares 〈◊〉
would have you?



I shall never like her change of mind.



Can you tell whether you would have 〈◊〉
or not?



That's a harder question▪ then the other.



Will you have her by compulsion?



That were a Tyranny, would make her
hate me ever.



•hall the Duke by his Prerogative Power,
in spight of both your teeth, compel you both to
compliance?



Let me think on this a little, at first fight,
•his looks likely to agree us: if two im∣•ossibilities
can make one possible, this might
do our business.



Well, what do you resolve?



Nothing, why do you tempt me to farther
evils? I know not what to resolve, nor what to
say; but will no more of love, my heart
•hakes at the thought of my last tryal; I blush
to think how much less then man I was, and how
much more then woman I created her in those
few hours I lov'd; 




The Duke calls for Lonzartes.



I'le attend his Highness presently.



I take you for my Friend Lonzartes; 
do not discourse me into a Ruine, you will share
in.



I have no Rule for friendship above my
desire to see you happy.



I believe it Sir, and beg your pardon for
my distracted language; I must attend the
Duke to.











You tire me Lindamira, and chide me for
a fault I cannot own; I had no other way to free
myself.



You might have check'd his approach••▪
with somewhat less severity, your rigour may be
get dispair in him.



Dispair of what? my undertaking 〈◊〉
only on the Dukes command, to afford him 〈◊〉
visits, which I have done in hope of his conver∣sion.



You did give o're, before the work 〈◊〉
perfected.



You speak as if the design to set him 〈◊〉
were to inslave me to the humour of a 〈◊〉
man.



The wildest young men, do often pro••
the soberest at the last; and the truth is Mada•
we do all desire to see you and •learcus conve••
one another; so to beget that unity of hearts
which the World seeks most.



Do you believe that I who have a preju∣dice
against the best of men, can e're esteem the
worst?



If Clearcus were under that notion,
should have other thoug•ts; but when I con•ide•
such men reclaim'd, do often make good Hus∣bands;
I have hopes of him.



If his wildness were his only fault, time▪
and experience might reclaim him.



If these be your only Exceptions M•∣dam,
I wish you would trust me to mannage this
affair.



You m•st not talk me into an Intr•••
which • avoid; I do not love him.



You will do, when you have him, I know
many have done so after Marriage, who did not
before.



That is too bold a venture for me, who
have no faith in men; and those Examples you
mention so rarely to be found, my courage dares
not undertake it; pray no more of this.



The Princess desires your company at
Court this Evening.
I did intend to wait on her.








I have given you Arguments enough on
his behalf, which his dejected looks you see de∣clare;
 Your favours Theodocia should not be
restrain'd, because his adoration is so great, he
dares not beg'um; come near Lonzartes.



Lonzarte's Worth is understood beyond
the weak Rhetorick of flattering words; he can∣not
wish to be more valued, then he is by me.



Nor will I ever Sue for favours beyond
these you now afford me Madam; may I con∣firm
my hopes, by understanding what you say
my own way?



You may, for since my Father does so
much advise for Marriage, I may alter my opinion
when I find just cause to value men, above my re∣solves
against them.



For Heavens sake Madam say no more, my
breast cannot contain these spreading joyes you
give me, my hopes increase too fast for my dis∣pairing
heart, to comprehend these honours you
allow, without an Extacy.



Theodocia, I shall ne're revoke the free∣dom
I have given, to make your own choice,
though I direct you to Lonzartes, to whom 〈◊〉
Ancestors have done wrong.



This your indulgence Sir makes me mo••
cautious how I proceed; Marriage is a conce••
so great, I dare not at once resolve it, and the
same day chuse the man: I can yet only say
that I have alter'd my opinion in favour of Lon∣zartes.



My Amazement, and my concern are too
great to answer Madam, my felicity is above the
reach of a reply.



Theodocia, I have given you my be••
councel, and my full consent to please your self.



I thank you Sir, and will endeavour to
Regulate my heart to your advise; and to Lo•∣zartes
wish; give me but time to examine and
approve what I am willing to submit to.



to them, with Silvander.


How is it Madam, that you quit the
field? before your undertaking be perform'd.



I have done my part Sir, which was on
your command to allow him civil visits, and to
entertain the Princess, I complyed with Lindam•••
to try how our Raleary would work on him, which
did produce so unlook'd for an effect, that I was
forc'd to quit my part, to save my self.



Were you in danger to be lost then? 
I did not think Clearcus had prevail'd so far; but if
he be reclaim'd, he will be worthy your esteem.



Your Highness did mistake me, I was in no
danger to be lost through love, nor at all con∣cern'd;
for a man who does declare against all
worth in women, where he can get an interest:
pray Sir, make me understand what you would
have me do?



We would have you marry Clearcus.



Whether he will or no; If I consent,
can you prevail with him?



Do you comply, we'l try what we can do?



I would not be Treypand into a Marriage
I am so much averse to, in confidence of his old
humour, think my self secure, and be so lost.



You may ventute safely Madam, you see
he is so great a Coward, that he only dares persue
them that fly him, do but charge and he will run
away.



If I were sure of that, I would seem any
thing to be freed from farther trouble.



Trust me Madam, he is now worse then
ever.



Lonzartes, pray use your interest to bring
him to us now.




Do you think Cousin, we have a design to
harm you?



No, but your Highness disputes me into a
condition your self does not approve; pray shew
me the way to this felicity, that I may credit what
you say, by what you do.



Will you then ingage to marry Clearcus,
the same day I marry?



Shall I chuse your man, as you would
mine?



Suppose I have already chosen.



I thought your Highness had been of my
opinion; But if provided, I give you joy.



Now you run too fast the other way, I am
onely towards marriage.




That journey seldome proves long Ma∣dam,
when we look towards it.



That was said like a sage Sibell, the quin∣tessence
of truth in few words, tis but a willing
mind, and then.



Prethee Lindamira help me to be rid of
this uncertain man.




I know no better councel, then to be is
love with him, or to seem so; for if he should ta••
you at your word, and marry, that may do you•
work; for I once knew a •ady, who chose to mar∣ry
an importunate `utor, that she might be rid•
him, and was so; for soon after marriage they pa••∣ed.
and never met more.



You are alwares in jest, I would have se∣rious
councell now.



You have had my store twice over to 〈◊〉
purpose.



By all my observations, I cannot judge
whether Clearcus, or you Pand•ra, be most extra∣vagant.



Your Highness may do well to put 〈◊〉
into the Colledge of half mad Folks, where 〈◊〉
will either 〈◊〉 one another, or become qu•••
mad to•ether; when their discase is known, fo••
remedy may be found; ••is now past judgment
what either of them ayle.



Lindamira saies well, 'tis very strange you•  83
will not declare so far, as to let us see how we
may serve you.



Do but leave me to my self, and I am well
Madam.



Many sick people are of that opinion, when
in most danger, and must therefore by their
friends be govern'd.



As many healthy people, think themselves
sick when they are not, and by seeking remedies
for nothing, do create evils, they never can finde
〈◊〉 for; such high passions as Lindamira's, do
never let us rest in peace, but do create perpetual
storms.



You argue well Madam, if a dull calme,
were the onely happiness appointed us on Earth,
then one degree from being asleep, would prove
our greatest bliss; sure no age did e're produce
two such Icy-hearted Ladies, as the Princess & you.






Here comes a Homely, and a Jigg hand in
hand; now for the second part to the same
tune, Of love me, and love me not.



Clearcus, it troubles me to see you delight
in a retired darkness, or else to walk in such clouds
as we cannot see through; I would perswade you
to regain Pandora's good opinion.



Is the mistery of love to be discuss'd in pub∣lique
Sir?



With us, who are so near ali'd unto you
both; I think it may, because we all know what
you both profess in private, and now des••e to
  84
hear, what you will face to face avow; and we in∣treat
you Pandora, first to shew, why you threw off
Clearcus.



You do amaze me Sir, to examine me as •
Criminal!



You have no cause for this displeasure
Pandora, but mis-judge our love and our respects;
we know your worth, and would to the World
Illustrate that virtue you design to smother by ••ingle life; I allow your purpose did become your
younger dayes, and did express an Angelicall
innocense; but I question whether now, on ma∣ture
judgement, you may not do better for your
self, and us, to reclaim Clearcus.



You demand impossibilites from me, for 〈◊〉
I should change my mind, he will change his 〈◊〉
Pray shew me a rule to reclaim him by, before you
do condemn me.



We onely desire you will afford him the
same civility, as did first induce him to adore that
virtue he dispised before.



I have done this.



You did begin, but you gave o're too soon.



And all her kindness but in jest too Ma∣dam,
which he discern'd.



How do you answer this? Lindamira〈◊〉
of your councel.



I 〈◊〉 him but in jest, and was by
him injoyn'd to such seve••• as I perform'd, and
'twas then thought the only way to vindicate our
Sex, and to work his conversion, which he at first
did counterseit so well, as to deceive, and fright
me from his farther visits.



Was his love so terrible?



To me it was, who thought him uncapable
of ever having Noble thoughts for any of our sex.



But when you found him growing wor∣thy,
why did you not cherish that virtue, as your
own Creation.



Because she fear'd her Virgin-vow might
be defil'd, by owning such a Man-child of her own
begetting; for he began to aske her blessing, till she
laugh'd him into so great anger, that one day he
proffer'd to kill himself, which gave end unto our
Comedy.



If his cure had lain within the reach of
Raleary I had gloried in my part, but never shall
consent to inslave my self unto the humours of a
man, who cannot be a minute in one mind; his
imaginations are beyond the Moon, and would
have he knows not what.



Clearcus you have heard your charge; 
Guilty or not Guilty?







I shall never want your good word Madam; 
Lindamira tells you true Sir, I am guilty.







Of all the crimes, that offended Lady does
object; pray Sir pronounce my doom, and put
me out of pain.



Will you submit then, and obey it?



If it can put me out of pain, I will?



I doubt it not; my Sentence is, that
you revive that love you shew'd unto Pandora lately.



Oh Sir, the very name of love, puts me into
a shaking fit; for Heaven sake, give me Halter•,
Poysons, Daggers, any means to let out life, ra∣ther
  86
then renew those torments which I felt that
hour I lov'd.



Pray Sir, give me leave, to put him some
Interogatories.







Your Lordship has confest, that you have
lov'd one hour, and must have some reason why
you lov'd no longer; shew us that reason, or for
ever hold your peace, and submit to judgement.



How Clearcus, nonplust by a Judge in Pet∣ticoates?





Why Madam? many of our Sex have
pussled the wisest men; give him leave to think
a little; but if what I have said, has struck your
Lordship dumb, hold up your finger, tis
He holds it up
enough; He has nothing to say for himself, but
submits unto the mercy of the Court; I under∣stand
him Sir; and have now found a remedy
for both their evils; If you will trust me with
your hand my Lord, I will not harm it: and
Clearcus gives his hand.

if I have credit enough Madam to be trusted with
your hand too, pray lay it without fear on mine,
that I may try a charm I have, to conjure out the
evil Spirits that possess you both; you may at
your own pleasure, take back your hands; 
only let me hold 'um, while I pronounce my
charm within.





Pandora I intreat you to try Lindamira's
charm, give her your hand, she deals not with the
Devil.

Pandora gives her hand



The Devil I work by Sir, is truth, drest in
her rich robe of Innocence; if truth do not
convince both these Delinquents, my charm will
have no power on them; My Lord you have
in this great Assembly, often said, that you could
never value any woman you could win; if now
you have found this Lady as impregnable as you
can wish, she is your fate; hold Sir, remember
He proffers to speak
you are dumb, till I have done; Now Madam,
I must speak serious sence to you, who stand here
the expectation, and the wish of all the Court; 
yet I know you must not consent to give your
hand to him, nor in a look, or word comply, with
what I say; for if you yield, Clearcus will for sake
the Field; I shall therefore onely put your
hands together, no marriage, nor no contract
make, only desire that you will thus hand in hand
retire a while with me in private, to apply my
charm, who now do pr•y, that all the evils which
ever did befall the most unh•ppy lovers, may light
on him, or you, that shall their hand remove, be∣fore
my charm does wor••, now come with me.




What the issue of thi• will be I cannot
guess; Now Theo•••ia, I must remind you 〈◊〉Lonzartes, who da•es not approach you on 〈◊〉
own behalf, who is, what you can wish, to make
  88
you happy; and I do again invite you to Crown
his unparalell'd humility with a bliss, he presumes
not once to mention, least it offend you; I have
also a State Argument you understand not Theo∣docia,
your two interests in this Dukedom, thus
united, will make it flourish; Lonzartes has
been wrong'd.



I know his wrong Sir, and have observ•d
his sufferings, or I had never dallied with his love;
I onzarte's clear soul is adorn'd with more glories
then this Crown will bring him.



If then your hearts agree, give me your
hands; here Lonzartes is the best reward I have
to incourage modesty and worth, when they do
in one heart combine, as now in thine.



Great Sir, I am so much surprized, so over∣loaden
with my joyes, that I have nought but
blushes to express my gratitude; nor know
how to welcome this unlook'd for honour from
the Princess, who dains to raise her humblest Ser∣vant
from her •eet, to set me on a Throne, incir∣culed
with more joye•, then that you now resto••
me to.




Keep still your Character Lonzartes, as I will
mine, high transports in love are not long li••d
fear.



I shall be Madam, whatever you direct
though this unlooked for happiness, do raise my
heart above my own command, for such an excess
of joy, is hard to mannage.







I may now with your Highness Joy!
  89
hope, now your Fannatick love, conforms
to the Law of Nations; Now you may talk
your pleasure against high passions Madam; and
me thinks you Sir, do look as if you lik'd this bet∣ter
then that wise Sect of ayrie lovers, whose Phy∣losophy
doth teach not to desire, what they can
never reach.



You are Madam the best Phylosopher I ever
met and do deserve to have a Golden Statue in
Love•-Temple set.



•ut how have you disposed of your Fan∣tastick
couple? 'tis that great work must Crown
all your undertakings Lindamira.



That goes on excellently well Sir, I have
left them sitting on a Couch, with their hands
still fixt, eagerly gazing on each other eyes, as if
through them they could discern the inside of
each others hearts; by their no motion, and their
stedy looks, I can foresee they will be of one mind
suddainly.



Why could not we see this Experiment?



Oh Madam, my charm will not work in
company; lovers will seemingly dispise, what they
like most, onely to deceive observing eyes; I be∣lieve
they held off thus long, for shame to owne
what they had so publickly declar'd against, and
to themselves will hardly dare to let their hearts
appear these two dayes; they must look them∣selves
into an Argument, for no words can ever
reconcile their first Principles.
If their hands, do not their hearts discover,
I'le no more pretend to charm a lover.



May we not peep at the hanging, and stand
unseen.



Let us not turn this serious work into a
jest, unless Lindamira do approve it; none shall
stir that way.



I can place you so, as you may see and hear
too.



Pray Sir be pleas'd to look on them, our
Testimony may be of use.








Your Highness must stand silent, or you'l
hinder my Projection.



We will, we will.



They all Re-enter behind the Couch, and stand on
each side of the Stage; then is discover'd Pandora,
and Clearcus holding hands, and sitting on a Couch,
a while silent, looking on each other; then Clearcus
pr•ssers to kisse that hand be holds, she puts him back
with her other hand, and turns her •ace from him, 
He sighes: 


Turn not away those beautious lights have
guided me to Heaven, nor look as if you were in
pain to see my heart thus charg'd from a rude
Destraction, to an Extasie of bliss; from a desor∣med
Satyr, with a confus'd Chaos of dark thoughts,
and blacker actions, by your glorious beauties,
and brighter virtues, new form'd into the Figure
of a man, Emulating, those Excellencies I admire
in you: Oh turn this way, and own what is
your own Creation, by your perfections rais'd
from what was worse then nothing, to something
now, too worthy to be cast away; I should this
happy hour believe my self were in in Elizium;
didn•t this fair, soft hand, and those bright eyes
  91
assure me I yet live; from whence some divine in∣stinct
teaches my rude nature to adore, what I
never understood before.



I do not like to be thus long left alone, to
be expos'd unto your passion, and the worlds cen∣sure;
Lindamira has deceiv'd my trust; I now
see your plot, and her design descover, but will
no longer suffer the abuse.




Be not so cruel unto your self and me, think
on the curse hangs over us, if we remove our
hands till she return.



'Tis too much foolery, to give faith too.



Remember we complied to what she said;
by which her words are Registi'd in heaven, and
have ingaged the gods by our consent.



'I was rashly done, and I repent; when
will this subtle Sorcerress return? my innocense
will justifie my blind consent, to which I was mis∣led
by my fidelity and trust, and will no longer
fear to take away my hand.




Oh take nor your hand away untill the
holy Charm have rectitied your heart, and there∣in
created so much charity, as in a moment may
remove your scorns, and reach you love; for I,
who so long slighted your neglects, and fied all
civil favours from your Sex, do now tremble at
the thought of parting hands, untill our hearts
like them, become united.



Do you believe I indamira〈◊〉 of such
Magick? that her words have power to reconcile
dislenting hearts, live ours.



Yes, I find them work on me, and hope
  92
same effect on you, else why sit we here obeying
those commands she left? why fear we to offend
those powers she did invoke? when you con∣sider
this, I hope you dare not stir a finger towards
such impiety.



Though Lindamira's virtue be approv'd,
I was surprized by her inticing words, and by the
Duke compell'd to do, I know not what; and
therefore will no longer now obey.




Stay, oh stay, and let the fatal curse strike
me alone; my guilts have merrited what e're can
fall on me; Do but command me to remove
my hand, and I'le obey; that you may see how
much your power prevails, above my fear of Lin∣damira's
threats; If so, I may divert your harms;
I will against my Nature and my Faith destroy all
hopes of future bliss, to pull this ruine on myself,
which else may light on you; Say, must it be?




If I command your hands remove, and her
curse should after follow you, my unblemish'd
Innocense may suffer more then all your crimes
can mer•t; I have no faith in charmes, nor
cause to apprehend her curses can reach me; and
yet; 
 My doubts an• fears, my reason does dismay,
I know not what to do, nor what to say;
The Wonder is so great, I am afra•d,

Some 〈◊〉 this Serpent, has an Angel made,
And now indow'd him with 〈◊〉 Art,
In force of evidence from my stubborn heart.



'Tis worthy your consult, before you do
destroy a body and soul; here a ready Sacrifice to
set you free, for now I find that Lindamira's charm
does higher work.
And now again, that dazling light display,
Which did my heart inflame the other day:

•o gods, I do implore your power to move,

The bright Pandora, to allow my love;
'T will be the same, if now Clearcus dyes,
By Thunder Struck, or by Pandora's eyes.



Lindamira's virtue, and her wit, are much
more powerful, then her charms; (which I
contemn,) but you my Lord, have now by chance
thrown out such words, I shake to think on; 
Your body and your Soul are now at stake you
say; and by your looks I read, you think our
Fortunes and our Fates, depend on my reply; 
and so do I; this is then too great a work, for
so few minutes to dispatch; we must look up Cle∣arcus,
and from above seek ayde: 
'Tis piety, when we our hearts submit,
To undergo, what e're the gods think fit.



'Tis so, let us hasten to the Temple then,
there Celebrate: 

This happy issue of so strange contest,

〈◊〉 rought by the gods, must by the gods be blest.

He Kisses her hand, three
or four times in Joy.


Where is this powerful Sibell gone? whose
  94
Sacred Charms do dis-inchant fantastick hearts.



I am here Sir, with witness enough, to hold
Pandora to her word.



Let me adore thy Divine virtue Lindamira?
who hath shew'd such skill, to raise dead folks to
life; for we were dead in follies, and are now
become true converts Sir.



This is great News, you are both well
come to your wits again, which does declare Lin∣damira
a great Artist.



What sayes Pandora for her self?



I have both waies done too much, eitherto
excuse or justifie my self; silence becomes me Ma∣dam.



Let the clock strike twice, before we credit
what they say, or else ma•e all sure, by I Clear•••
take thee Pandora, &c.



Lindamira is my Orac•e; give me your
hand Pandora, and yours Clearcus
May they most wretched live, and cursed dye,
Who shall this knot endeavour to untye.



My prayers concur with yours Sir, and
now dear Cousin, what I wish'd is come to pass,
that you and I might on the same day be Married.
Thus for our good, we see the Gods fullfill
What they designe, though much again•t our will.



Your great Example Madam, is sufficient
to lead me from all my own resolves to follow
you, and if now Clearcus be reclaim'd, we must
own all our happiness to Lindamira's wit, who has
conquer'd both, when neither of us could subdue
  95
the other; And now Clearcus I hope will seek occa∣sions
to shew the World by his own actions the
Noble Stock he is Descended from.



By your permission Madam, I shall set my
heart towards my Prince his, and my Countries
Service; I beg imployment Sir, on the next
Gallies you send out, least idleness corrupt my
busie brain.



Mark that Sir, he is already wavering;
Madam take heed how you take the spirit of un∣certainty, (in the habit of a man.)



You speak too late, the uncertain man, is
now my certain fare.



Some diversions are necessary Madam, to
look on the same objects ever, dulls and tyres the
best eyes; but Lindamira can say nothing, I dare
contradict.



You shall command in Chief Clearcus, to
shew the world the vigour you have too long hid.



Joyes on joyes, light on Clearcus head.




May those joyes be Multiplied on yours
Sir; my Redeemer, and now become my Prince.



We must conclude this happy day Lin∣damira,
by joyning Silvanders hand with yours, if
your mirth will give us leave to be so serious?



That is a serious jest Sir, I have long look'd
for.



Come near Silvander; which of you
two is most pleas'd now?















This is a good Omen to a joyfull like
may you be both as happy as ever love made any



We are happy to our wish Sir.



He speaks for himself Sir, on hopes of more
then he may find.



We'l Celebrate these weddings sudd••∣ly,
and see that Lindamira's praise be in loud Hy∣menealls
sung through all the City, to incourage
the like Virtuous, and Noble undertakings.



I thank your Highness for your good opi∣nion,
but shall love you for this gift of my Silvan∣der,
above all your other favours; Now Silvander
Let us dwell Arme in Arme, and dayly show
Our loves increase, that all the World may know
Our hearts: Now the fair Princess does confes•,
That Wedlock may afford True Happiness.



LADIES, our Author has so great Respect
To Your Fair Sex, he fears some gross Defect
In his best Characters, may prove so short,
Of Your perfec•ions, he needs pardon for't.
If such sad fate, do now attend his Play,
In's Cloak, thus muss•'d, he will sneak away;
But you like't, he will on tip-toe go,
That all the World, may the proud Author know.
