



THis Rumor through the Town of Prince Phillocles being Crowned King of Hun∣gary is beyond cregit!



Who is Author of this dis∣course?



It has no Author, a Packet to the Emperor is brought by the com∣mon Post, who only said, the last Post told him so.



And that last post, might hear it from another;   What does the Emperor declare?



We shall know now, his Letters are in his hand.





Have you yet Learnt Cecropius, from whence this Rumour comes concerning Hungary?



I can by no means find the Author Sir; yet the whole Town is full of it, 'tis in all mens mouths that Prince Phillocles is Crown'd King of Hungary, yet none know why they say it?



It cannot be, these Letters are but three dayes old, in which Antillacus only mentions Phillocles return'd to Belgrade, having cha∣sed the Germanes home:  






Daughter, I sent for you to partake the Newes these Let∣ters bring; they speak Phillocles his Victories over the bold Germanes,  2
by which we gather, he will be shortly here;  We will welcome his returne Ordella, with a solemne Triumph, to raise his great thoughts to higher Actions;  To this end I sent for you, to think of some new way to entertain the Princess Astella, who no doubt your Bro∣ther will bring with him.



Sir, I am so pleas'd to hear my Brother's well; I cannot yet enjoy his Conquest.



Cecropius, be it your care to see these Triumphs ordered for Phillocles, as they were for me, when I return'd Victorious out of Asia; And Cleonel thy charge is to Summon all our Young Nobility, unto a Royal Turnament, and be thy self the Glory of our Court.



You make me blush Sir.



It shall be as you direct Sir; but how soon does the Prince write his motion will be this way?



My Letters are from our General Antillachus in hast; who by the next, doth promise a full relation.



Have you no Letters from my Brother Sir?



Not yet Ordella; which I much wonder at?

He kisses the Emperors Hand.




 What newes Armanthus?




Sir, the Prince sent me before, to give you notice of his approach.



His approach! how near?



He is about a League behind Sir.



Is this habit, and thy sad looks, the signes of Victory? are Phillocles and you alone return'd? Is all lost Armanthus?



Your Army is safe Sir, the Germanes have quitted Hun∣gary as you have heard, and that Crown also has been offred unto Phillocles.



And by him received I hear; why then is this sad shew? why such sorrowes in thy face? while we were ordering Triumps to receive Phillocles, thou hast surpriz'd us with such sadness, as be∣comes ruined States onely.



'Tis for no lesse a losse I mourn Sir, for by your Victo∣ries, so sad a fate is befallen Hungary, that all Noble Hearts will feel some sorrow for it, though they merrited no less!



Make me know it.



When we had freed Hungary from the Germane Warre, and while the brave Prince Pollinesso, with Phillocles was Conquering, and returning from the Germane Confines back to Belgrade, the old King Trebellio, and his Eldest Son Barzanes, repented the Conditions made with your Majesty, for the re-delivery of Moldavia; they forgot the benefit received by our Grecian Swords, and prepare to send home Phillocles, loaden with Scorns, instead of Trophies.



Strange insolence! and as high a perjury as ever provok'd Heaven! what followed! how did Pollinesso bear himself?



The Young Prince Pollinesso was a firm Friend to Phillo∣cles, and endeavour'd what he could, to divert his Fathers, and his Bro∣thers wicked purposes.



I'le make the whole Nation shrink under my just Anger.



It will not need Sir, for as they securely sought to seize on Prince Phillocles (who lodged in the same Castle with them) it so pleas'd the gods, that he by a quick securing of himself, the same night the Plot was laid, did accidentally occasion all their ruines, though he intended no harm unto their persons.



Their ruines! are they dead? all dead!



They are Sir, and their crimes, not worthy of that sorrow the Prince has for them, had not the innocent Pollinesso fallen with them!



By what accident fell he?



Pollinesso to do Phillocles Service, was that fatall night con∣ceal'd, where he in a by-Room, might discover his Fathers wicked Councells, unto which he was never call'd, by reason of his avowed love to Phillocles; So that when we from the Princes Lodgings sur∣priz'd the Castle Gate, the Alarum rouz'd the Hungarians from their close Couucil, and discovered Pollinesso where he stood hid, who being in that amaze, compell'd by his Father and Barzanes, to fly with them unto a little Postern Gate, (to us unknown) that led unto the River, where all entering a small Fisher Boat, they hasted down the stream to their own Camp, which they found newly destroy'd by our Army: (a mischief they designed that night on us;) frighted by this ruine, they all return into their Boat, and by a suddain wind that arose, were all drown'd in the rough Danube.



Why had not Pollinesso notice of your purpose?



We had no time, nor could we come where he stood Con∣ceal'd, if Phillocles had delay'd, he had been lost; and then, our designe being only to seize on Trebellio, and Barzanes persons; we could ap∣prehend no danger towards Pollinesso.



Where is Astella? how did she escape? how does she bear her Father and her brothers losse? how does she look on Phillocles? and how become the Crown, and Throne, now they are her own?



After this sad accident, Phillocles was inform'd that Astella was convey'd away before the Warre, on purpose to abuse him; but where conceal'd, none knew but those who were with Trabellio drown'd.



But how has Phillocles despos'd the Affairs of Hungary?



The Hungarians much amaz'd at Astellas absence; did urge Phillocles to accept the Crown, as by the hand of Heaven thrown on him, but he without delay, delivered up the sole power and trust unto Orfanes, and five more, untill Astella might be found; and then by the consent of all, he did command Antillacus in his return with the Army, to take possession of Moldavia, which by a double right is now again rejoyn'd unto your Empire Sir.



My Sonne has been two quick, in ordering so great affaires!




He kneels and rises.


Phillocles, the gods are just, they have blest thy undertakings,
  4
which thou shouldst not grieve, but thank them for, they have sa∣ved me a labour too, in punishing those ingratefull perjur'd Princes.



Had not Pollinesso fallen, I had not cast away a sigh for all the rest, for him, my whole Life spent in sorrow, is not enough, he was as Noble, as the others were unworthy; he and I, contracted such a Friendship, you would have thought but one heart had given life to both.



Thou hast done ill Phillocles, so rashly to dispose so great Affaires without my Councell; I hear you have given away a King∣dome, in a Complement.



Sir, what I have done, will not abate my interest there; I have also made a promise to search for Astella, in our Neighbour Islands, where 'tis most like she is concealed.



That will be near as great a folly as the other: to what pur∣pose will you run such a bazzard? rather meet our Army, and return with it to Belgrade, there let Astella find you securing her interest, in her absence.



I cannot with my Honour do it Sir, Astella may then be∣lieve, I sought the Ruine of her Family, to gain the Crown on my self.



What if she do? you may at leisure inform her of the Truth;  I do Command you, to lay by your further thought of this fond Journey, to search for Astella; is this a time to act Romances in? when the whole whole World is in Combustion round us; think better on it Phillocles.



I hope my Brother will not throw himself on dangers, with∣out a good Argument to justifie his Actions; this new Journey, gives me new fears for you.



I shall consider ere I go Ordella, and at your Lodgings this night, expresse my joy to see you.








Selindra weeping!   has the sad tale of Hungary, drawn these tears from your fair Eyes Madam?



Good my Lord, spare me a while, I am not sit for Court∣ship now.



I cannot with Honour leave you in the power of such an Ene∣my, as your sorrow is.



You cannot deliver me from a greater then your self this time.



That is not kindly said Selindra, scarce Civil, if you consider my long Love, and my Respects.



My Lord, you know I ever shun'd your Love, and as much as in me lay, avoided those respects, you now upbraid me with.



I do confesse you have, tis therefore I now come, to presse you to declare, if I may ever hope to gain more favour from you; my sute is present Marriage, may I hope for such happinesse at last, if not now!



As I never have, so I shall never give you cause to think it.



So Fair, so Innocent, so Gentle, and so severe! I never saw be∣fore; but I shall hope to find you in a better humour, at some other time Selindra; your Father interrupts me now.







Unhappy day that I was born, and more unhappy this, that I
She Weeps.
have liv'd to hear such mischief on. Oh Periander! my Father, and my Brothers are all Dead, Murther'd by Phillocles, Betray'd, and Slain by Phillocles; Pollinesso's dead, my onely comfort is for ever gone, and yet I live to tell it!



Madam the Crown of Hungary is now yours, and Phillocles but the Instrument sent by the gods to punish your Parents crimes; their perjury pull'd this Judgment on their own heads.



It does not become you my Lord to tell me so, nor yet to think it, if you consider Lascare's covetous nature, and Phillocles ambi∣tious spirit, you might with me, see all this was design'd to ruine my Family, and so to get the Crown unto themselves; but I shall soon revenge it on dissembling Phillocles, and bring such a Ruine into Greece, as no time shall parallel;  here to Pollinesso Ghost, I vow Phillocles his Life, if ever I can safely reach it!



Madam take heed, least you like them, do pull a second mis∣chief on your self; Phillocles you see is Noble, he leaves the Crown
She kneeles.
to you, when offer'd him by all your Subjects; he lov'd Pollinesso! you have no Argument against Phillocles, he Laments him, as much as you can.



I Periander, and in sorrow seeks me too; no doubt, but he would gladly have me in his power to murther.



I cannot think so; but Madam you should now consider where you are, and in whose power; in my opinion, you must keep this disguise, with all the Art you can; and lay by your sorrow for a while, not practice any thing towards revenge, nor by a look discover such a thought, untill I can go to Belgrade, there make Orsanes, and the rest, know that you live; that we may find some way to fetch you home with safety; where you may with security prosecute your re∣venge.



I shall take your advice my Lord, now you comply in my re∣venge, and study to disguise my grief till your return, but can admit no thoughts, but my revenge on Phillocles; Pollinesso my dear Brother, I will Celebrate thy Funerals, in such a manner! as shall speak my Love to thee; and hate to him that murther'd thee 

 No Roman Pile, e're made so great a flame;
I'le Sacrifice this Empire, to thy Name.




Madam, this passion will piscover, and destroy you in spight
Weeps.
of my Endeavours.



I have now done my Lord, indeed I have.



I can have no Faith Madam, unlesse you will now promise in presence of our gods, to hide this anger, and not to discover your self till my return, unlesse some Eminent necessity require, for you will be lost, when known unto Lascares.



I do ingage as you desire, and shall 






In tears Selindra! what cause hast thou to weep?



My present departure for Ciprus, makes her thus Childish.



Will your stay there be long my Lord?



Not many dayes Madam.



Come Selindra, thou shalt go with me, i'le divert these Tears, by shewing thee my griefes, which thou wilt be Concern'd for, if thou dost love me!




Re-enter Ordella, and Selindra, in Ordella's Chamber.



Madam, I am very sensible of your Greif, and do not approve of the Prince his journey, to search for Astella.



You must not only not approve it Selindra, but with me con∣demn it, as a rash, and hazzardous undertaking; besides the folly of seeking one he never saw, one that he hath no ingagement to! What madnesse will it be for Phillocles, to put himself within her power? before he knowes how she resents her Friends deaths? for if there were such affection between Astella and Pollinesso, (as is said) the sight of Phillocles, must needs raise a passion in her, such as may destroy my
(aside)
Brother, before his innocence can appear;  (How's this? can these Tears fall for her Fathers absence a few dayes? or is it for what I utter?
Selindra Weeps.

I hope she is not so much concern'd for Phillocles;)  Selindra I do take it ill, that you thus lament your Fathers absence, who runnes no hazzard? above my sorrow, for my Brothers dangerous Journey, in search of Astella.



Madam my tears were re-call'd by your Highnesse sighes, by your trouble for the Prince his Journey, your favours have been such to me, that I were unworthy, if I should not weep, as well as smile with you.




'Tis handsomly put off,  I thank thee Selindra, and do so little doubt thy Love, that I do beg thy best Arguments to assist me, that we together may convince my Brother, and prevail with him to stay.



Madam, I shall obey your commands; and observe your di∣rections, as farre as will become me: but I do fear, the Prince will condemn me of much rudenesse, if I shall interpose my vain opinions, against his purposes; good Madam, do not put me to do, what hereaf∣ter you will blame me for.



Fear it not Selindra, I love thee better, then to throw away thy credit so!  see where my brother comes.








I have a hard taske on me! (to complement the man I hate to death.



Why so sad my deer Sister; your looks speak a sorrow through your smiles!



Can you aske? and know your self to be the cause of it, can Phillocles be in danger? and Ordella, not be sad! can you think smiles would become my face? when my heart shrinks to think of your rash journey, to seek Astella you know not where; I can no more put off my feares, then my affection for you.



Dearest Ordella, let not a mistaken cause of fear for me, beget such a trouble in you; there is no danger in my purpos'd Journey, I shall onely search the Grecian Isles, where none dares do me harme, you know I am engag'd in honour to performe, what I have so pub∣liquely declar'd, and I am sure you love my Honour, equall with my Person.



I do so, and could I see the necessity you urge, to search for Astella, my passion should submit to your reason, and that I may not flatter my own affection, I shall now submit unto Selindra's opinion, who has no reason to be partiall to either of our arguments; I pre∣thee good Selindra, speak freely, what thou thinks't of my brothers Journey.



Truly Sir, if I may judg! the Princess tells you what you should better consider of, then I think you yet have; not that I do ap∣prehend any dangerous hazzards in the Journey, as she does, nor can I finde any arguments fit to perswade you from attempting dangers, when your Honour calls you to them; give me leave Sir, only to aske, how your Honour is concerned to make this search? why do you in∣tend so great a trouble to your self? from whence is this value of A∣stella? who you never saw; why does your Highness seek a Woman that has never oblidged you? nor you her, but by the ruine of her Fa∣mily, incens'd her.



'Tis true that I have never seen, nor oblig'd Astella in parti∣cular; but I have by many hazards of my life endeavour'd both; the Fame of her Excelling Beauty, and greater Vertue, begot in me a desire to serve her, and her whole Family, which I did faithfully, in freeing Hungarie from the Germane yoak: 'twas an unhappy Fate befell her Parents, by themselves pull'd on them, not by me intended; in which sad losse, I beare so great a share, that I have no peace within, untill I have made my Innocence unto Astellas self appear, that she may see, that I had no design to hurt the Princes persons, nor to Conquer Hungarie.



What you have bravely done in that Warre, deserves a Tro∣phie, and from Astella no lesse value, when she shall be well enformed of all that past there; 'till then Sir, the Princess thinks it not fit for you to Visit Astella, because we often see Great Princes Vertues, does not answer the report Fame gives them.



Most true, Selindra, my heart presages a Ruine if you goe; could I lay by my affection to you, and put on Astellas cause, I would undertake to confute those Arguments, you so much trust in: Methinks I see you kneeling, and the inraged Astella deaf to all you say, swel∣ling with anger, for brave Pollinesso's losse, and ready to sacrifice your Life! come Selindra if ever I have deserved love from thee! shew it
  8
now by assisting me my own way, by thy best Language: do thou stand forth, and as Astella, receives my over-confident Brother, spare him not Selindra, but suppose you had a Brother as dear to you, as Polli∣nesso
was to her, and that beloved Brother, by Phillocles his rash at∣tempt, sent to his untimely grave: let loose some Teares, to accompa∣ny those I have shed, and for my sake, put on a look so mixt with Ma∣jesty, Grief, and Anger, as may present her Part thou play'st: (I, that look will do it.)



Madam, You see my ready Obedience to your Commands; but will the Prince permit such boldnesse?



Yes Selindra, since nothing else will satisfie my Sister, I am content for once, to beare a part in this Childs play,  on conditi∣on Ordella, that you put off your sadnesse, if I prevaile!



I shall, so you will stay at home, if she do get the better of you!




Content:  can Selindra frown in jest? methinks she looks as if she would do it to the life Ordella?



Yes Phillocles, I can frown when I have just cause! and will make thee repent this rash attempt to visit me, thou hast beyond my hope, put thy self into my power to punish.



How that angry Cloud spreads! Can those bright lights suffer an Eclips, and not portend some fatall Ruine? what if they do! shall I shake at Thunder, that cannot reach me? be concern'd for an unjust anger! no, not though the gods did threat:  But Astella will not nourish a thought mis-be-coming her Vertue, nor so much lessen her great name, by a mistaken passion, to harm a man, whose endea∣vours were to serve her.



A mistaken Passion Phillocles! are not my Father and my Brothers dead? though not by thy hand butchered, yet by thy at∣tempts they fell; is not the glory of our name extinguish'd? the ho∣nour of men fall'n? all lost in Pollinesso's death!



Astellas self is not more free, then I was, from intending evill to her friends; they forc'd me to secure my self; by which they were all lost, their Plots, and Perjuries, pull'd this Ruine on them: onely Polli∣nesso was not Guilty, he would not comply with fierce Barzanes envi∣ous designes, nor with his Fathers blacker purposes; Pollinesso was a witnesse of my hazards in that Warre, and did partake an equall share in them, and in the Victory; we often seal'd our vowes of Amity, in our best blouds together, which did beget so mutual a Love, that our Soules moved ever one way; I would rather have Dyed with Polli∣nesso, then live thus to lament his losse; by these unfained Teares I would.



Thou speakst a Language so pleasing to my Eares, that I could wish my vow to Sacrifice thee to my Brothers Ghost, had never past my Lips, for I can see, and value all thy Noble actions; and judge the guilt of my own friends that fell, and can beare the losse of all, but Pol∣linesso!  he you say dyed Innocent, free from the other Crimes, full of Honour, rich in Vertue, in the Blossome of his Age, my onely Joy fell:  and you, my onely hate, shall dye so too! your Worth, your Youth, and your Innocence, will make
  9
my oblation acceptable to those powers I have vowed you too;  vain man, canst thou think Pollinesso's ghost will be appeased with words? or teares! if thou wert ever worthy my brothers love, shew it now, in couragious dying to his memory, for by all our gods thou dyest;   a guard there!




'Tis bravely done Selindra, thou madest me start, and shake to see thee look, and hear thee speak, with such awfull majesty!  how is it Brother? how do you think Astellas selfe will receive you? when one so unconcern'd, can use you thus! do you yield yet? have we the better argument?












I think I shall.



My deer, deer Selindra, let me kisse thee, thou hast oblidged me beyond my power to gratifie, beyond my expression to acknow∣ledg;  the Emperor, and the whole Empire shall thank thee for Phillocles his safety;  come my brother, let us now finde my Fa∣ther; this change will please him.
Exeunt ambo.



How near lost was I, on his fresh mention of Pollinesso's death! how dangerous a work did I undertake; and how happily brought off, by the Princess Ordellas timely interruption!  I thought my selfe within my strengths at Belgrade, and Phillocles in my power to punish; I must no more of these games, 'tis my disguise preserves my life, and I do care only to live to be reveng'd on Phillocles, the Author of all my sorrowes.  Oh! but the Princess Ordella sits too neer my heart, to suffer that; she is my friend; if I destroy her beloved brother! I wound her to death; at lest give her the same intollerable grief for Phillocles, I now suffer for Pollinesso.   Oh! horrid ingratitude! Oh miserable Astella! my Obligations to Ardella, do infringe my vowes to Heaven:  ye gods, direct me so; that these differing passions may not distract me; I would do, what should become me best, and please you most, though my own life, in the attempt be lost.







WHat think you Cecropious, of Phillocles his Love?



Mighty Sir, what you have said, was my thought, when I first heard of the Prince his stay, and had been now my Councel, as the best way to secure his Interest in Hungary, by which Astella must submit unto the will of him, that has allready woon hearts of all her people.



Sir, you know I have long lov'd, and long sought Selindra's Love; and Lovers Eyes are quick to discover the like looks in o∣thers; 'tis my duty (as well as my own Concern) to tell your Maje∣stie, that I have observed Selindra's good looks, to be the Orators, that have put off the Prince his journey, not his kinde sisters importunity, and when your own observation, shall informe you better, your Majesty will finde this, no causelesse jealousie in me.



What he tells you Sir, is the whisper of the Court, but I look on it slightly, the Prince may have a minde to a Wench, and Se∣lindra is a pretty one; but Sir, in my opinion, you should take no notice of such youthfull passages; the Prince cannot think her a fit Wife, and then, no matter who is his Mistress.



Cecropious I do think it worthy my care, to prevent an evill; the Crown of Hungary can be no way mine, but by Astella; we see Se∣lindra is rich in Beauty, and more rich in Virtue; if not by Birth great enough to be his Wife; she is too good, to be his wanton Mistress; Phil∣locles is young, and young men are apt to be in Love! He is as gallant, as great, and if his affection should meet a repulse, (as 'tis most like from Selindra;) these sparks we now see, may grow to such a flame, as neither we, nor he can quench: I will observe him, and set spies on them,

some of my own spies, Cleonell may be jealous without a cause! I will sift Ordella too!






Daughter, you have wrought a good work on your brother; thy Interest I see, has prevail'd, beyond my intreaty, or my Command, I thank thee for it Ordella, and am glad Phillocles, to find that your Eares are open unto reason, indeed the journey would not have suited with your other great actions; I like well •hy gallant spirit; but I like not to hazzard a Kingdome for a Complement.



Sir, I do thus low beg pardon for my first disobedience

to your commands, and do confesse, my sister wrought my consent to stay; yet I must tell you Sir; 'twas because her Arguments complyed with your commands, nor was your command her least Argument.



Thus let me imbrace the greatest comfort of my life, thou

shalt set ever next my heart;  give me thy hand Ordella, and thine Phillocles; What wealth is there beyond these? what joyes beyond those I feel? thus supported! I am the envy of Princes; may all the blessings Heaven can bestow, fall on you both for this love, and this obedience to your old dying Father;  tell me Phillocles: how stands the aff•ires of Hungary? I have had late intelligence, that some Com∣motions do appeare there; if so? since you have thus discreetly laid aside the search of Astella, in my judgment, 'twill be next best, that you repaire to Belgrade with your Army, there by your presence, to keep the people in Obedience, untill Astella be found; we know the Hungarians are a busie headed people Phillocles.



Sir, I have left the Government of that State, in those hands
  11
that will neglect no meanes to invite Astella home; they love her Sir; and do want no power to secure the Kingdome for her; my presence at Belgrade, would rather deterre Astella, then invite her home, and may be justly thought, I meant to force, what I yet doubt to sue for: In my opinion Sir, I ought to hear more from thence, before I stirre that way, but my opinion, and my will, shall submit to your Commands.



Thou art still on thy Complements, but my gray Haires are not convinc'd by such Arguments, think better on what I propose, though I do not command, but onely wish it; while I instruct your

sister with my reasons, that she, and you may consult together.




I shall obey you Sir, and weigh well what you have said, I shall not be wanting in my care for Selindra, nor in my love unto my Brother.



I am satisfied Ordella, and do only wonder why he will not lead the Army into Hungary! where such apparent need is of his pre∣sence.



He will go, if you will have him Sir.



I will think further on it a day or two.


This while Cleonel Courts Selindra, she shewes dislike to him.



Cleonel I see loses no time, in the Warre he makes, ply her hard young man, those knit browes do often prove the Cipher to a smiling heart, and yet Cleonel I must tell you, that I approve not this whining way of Wooing; most Women like to be approach'd with such Alacrity, as shewes the mettle men are made of; where is thy heart young man?



Mighty Sir, one frown from bright Selindras Eyes, has power to shake me into Attomes, to unman me quite!



I think so, and must my selfe Wooe for thee, how is it faire

one, that you neglect such honour? and such Wealth, as Cleonel brings with him? he is a man in my Eye worthy the greatest subject of my Empire:  Or is it the nice Lovers part you thus do act in Publique, while your united hearts delight in private? say Selindra, when shall our Court flourish in triumphs for your Wedding?  while Ordella provides Ornaments for you, it shall be my care to set forth Cleonel like himselfe, and fit for such a Mistresse:  tell me when Selindra, when shall this jolly time be? come I must presse you for my Friend.



I am very sensible of this Honour you now do me Sir, yet cannot chuse but wonder why your Majesty thinks fit to presse me to a publique Answer.



You have delayed it long enough, 'tis a good time to de∣clare now.



I obey Sir, and do confesse that I have ever had a true value of Cleonels worth; I have also observed your favour to hm, and do be∣lieve that he may make the best of Women happy; but yet I think
  12
not fit to entertain his Love, I have more Noble thoughts, then to in∣courage him with hopes, of what I never can afford him, such a returne, as his merit may justly expect from one more worthy then my self; I must declare that my purpose is not to marry, but to attend the Prin∣cess so long, as that honour may be permitted, and her Highnesse favour shall continue to me.



May all thy wishes be ever on thee, happy will that man be, that gets such a Treasure, as this fair Cabinet containes: I am vanquish'd Cleonel, and I advise thee to teare this Serpent from thy heart, before it be too big for thee to graspe; (observe you this Ordella?)  Phillocles are thy thoughts yet for Belgrade?



They shall be Sir, if you Command it.





Ordella can you guess, why my Father does now urge my absence? that so late inforc'd my stay?



Does not the Affaires of Hungary require you there?



No Ordella, I should not then wonder at his pressing me to goe!




Madam, the Emperor calls for you.



I'le o're take him presently;  I have much to say to you Brother, pray stay my returne: good Selindra entertaine him in my Chamber, with Cleonels last Melancholly Song, I like so well.




Cloris we see the offended Gods,
At first do shew, and shake their Rodds,
That they may rather threat, then strike,
So we foregoe, what they dislike:
These faulty streams, shall flow no more
Above their banks, as heretofore:
Nor swelling tempest from my breast,
Henceforth thy Virgin cares molest:
All shall be fashion'd to thy will,
So thou wilt let me Love thee still:
My Lips shall not a word let go,
That may offend to tell thee so:
But to dissemble, or deny
That I do Love thee were a lye,
Would staine my soule: 'twill prove a spot,
To look as if I Lov'd thee not.


This charity becomes you Madam, and Cleonels lines I see are smiled on, though himself be not, but why did you with such seve∣rity, in publique disclaime his interest, and seem to reject a man so wor∣thy, when the Emperor himself woed for him?



'Tis the Princess Ordellas pleasure, that I should learn his Song Sir, and not my fancy to the maker of it, though his love, and re∣spects, may challenge a greater complement from me, for I shall ever acknowledg obligations to Cleonel, yet not think fit to treat a Marriage in my Fathers absence, by whom I shall be wholly rul'd in that matter, if he think fit to make that choice for me, I must submit.



Give me leave Madam so farre to interest my selfe in your Affaires, as to aske if your thoughts for Cleonel be such, that you will
Phillocles takes her Hand, she shewes dislike.

not admit the like profession from another; For though my Father cannot match him in his Dominions, I believe that I can find you a Servant, as faithfull, and as full of Love; one every way as worthy your favours, one that will out•bid Cleonel, to gaine Selindra, do but 




I beg your Highnesse pardon, for some time.





Thus to leave me while I was speaking to her, is a scorne I look'd not for;  Selindra was not wont to be so rude, nor I so foolish, sure my looks and Language rendred me Ridiculous, so slight, that she blush'd for me, which to hide she thus withdrew, leaving me to wonder at my self, that am of late become, what I want a Name for;  If this be Love, and this the effects of Love, I'le teare the Monster from my heart, and be my self againe, before it grow too mighty for me;  my hands cannot reach it, no force can touch it, 'tis a subtile foe, not to be compell'd; 'tis reason onely must prevaile;  Selindra loves, and dis∣sembles her affection to Cleonel, neglecting me;  how unworthy then am I, that seek to separate united hearts; how fond, to Covet what ano∣ther does enjoy; how much am I now fall'n below my self, by this passion?





When went my brother hence Selindra?



He sits there Madam.



My Father I fear has too much cause for what he said; Prethee leave us a while Selindra, and let none disturb us.








She is not here, why do you stare thus on me? are you not well?



Onely a little dull for want of sleep Ordella; but why sent the Emperor for you in such haste!



To tell me that Phillocles does love Selindra, and to enquire my thoughts of it; I answered boldly, that you were too Noble to dishonour Selindra, and too wise to neglect Astella and a Crown, for such an idle fancy;  I have confirm'd him that you have not such a thought, because I saw him troubled at it;  but what is this that thus distracts you?



Ha! what sayes my dearest Sister?



Ye Gods defend that I be not mistaken; Brother what have you done with your self, since I went hence?



My head is full of the Affaires of Hungary, I was contriving how I should secure Astella in her Throne, and thinking of a thousand other things; but why did my Father send for thee?



This is very strange, I told you why, and you regard me not, it was about Selindra.



About Selindra; prethee Ordella let us talke of something else,  thou weepest!



How can I chuse but weepe! to see you thus distracted, and all my hopes of future joyes dying in me?  Phillocles has left to love me, he dares not trust me with his heart! he Loves, and by dissem∣bling seeks to hide his love from me, that can dye for him.



I am guilty Ordella, thy charms o'recome me, and I do sub∣mit to thy severest judgment, I do love Selindra, and would do more then thou canst fancy, to gaine her Love; now my heart lyes open, thou wilt find the wound is deep Ordella, touch it gently my dear Sister.



'Twill not be cured then Phillocles, I must launce it to the quick, and you must indure to hear, that Cleonel, and she, have been long contracted, and onely do disguise their Loves, because Cecropius seeks Selindra for himself, 'tis only untill her Fathers return, they thus dissemble it.



Contracted Ordella! thou hast blasted all my hopes, destroy'd me in the twinckling of an Eye, the Gods have not a greater curse in store to throw upon me, is this thy cure? I shall sink under the burthen of this remedy! fare-well Ordella, fare-well for ever! for I am undone for ever!




Stay Phillocles, I can cure thee yet; I'le stroke thy wound, and try how that will work, they are not contracted, that I ever heard, it was my pure affection that thus abus'd your Ears: by my Fathers command, I was in the bud to crush your love, which by their pretended Contract, I thought best to do: can my Brother pardon my Zeale to serve him this way? and yet trust my love.



I can do both Ordella, now thou hast restored me to life againe; come let us sit, that I may at large declare my purpose concerning Se∣lindra,   do you remember Ordella, that day you made Selindra act Astella? how I was then convinc'd, and overcome by her; how she spake then! and with what Majesty she appear'd! Methought then, if Selindra were not borne a Queen, yet she was design'd to be one! from the hour I lov'd her, (and you the occasion of my love,) I have since observed her strictly, and well weighed all her perfections, and considered Cleonels hopelesse suit to gain her: if she can afford me love Ordella; I would wade deep in blood,  it would look like vanity, to
  15
tell thee how great things I would do to win a value from her.



When I consider Selindra's Beauty, and her worth, I cannot blame your admiration of her, truly Brother, I do wish your desires upon you, but know not how I can comply, or how to serve you this way?



I have weighed all kinds of Arguments Ordella, and do allow them to be good worldly thoughts, fit for Princes that have no other heaven on Earth then their Wealth, and their Dominions!   I tell thee Ordella to be Emperour of all the World! is poverthy, without Selindra! if thou lovest me, thou wilt use thy interest to perswade her to cast off all thoughts for Cleonel, and receive me, who she yet shuns▪  now my Sister, speak comfort to my soule; that must languish untill you ingage for me.




I have been thus long silent Phillocles, to consider how I might comply with your desires, and not break my Fathers trust, do but shew me an honourable way, and I will serve you with the same Zeal you wish it; but if I should consent? how can you avoid Cleonel? or how disguise your love from my Father?



Wee'l think of twenty wayes to blinde the old mans eyes, and as for Cleonel, I will so overload him with Wealth, and Honours, that he shall gladly give up his interest in Selindra, (if he have any!) but if he refuse! I will become his Rivall publiquely, I will either carr• the faire prize, or loose my self Ordella; say now, will you strain a Co••plement with my Fathers trust to save thy brothers life and honour▪



Pardon me heaven! if I offend by varying from my 〈◊〉thers trust, to save my Brothers life and Honour! Phillocles now I am yours, imploy me like a Sister that you love, put me not to use ar∣tifices unworthy of that value, the World now holds me at.



By all our Gods, I'le rather perish, then permit thee to act any thing unworthily: Dearest Ordella loose no time to make known my affection to Selindra, while I seek Cleonel, to make him mine.



Since no argument can prevaile against your passion, I am con∣tent to be directed by you.



Thou wilt make me happy then Ordella! beyond all the State arguments.  

 The greatest Polititian can invent,
Or brightest messenger from Heaven's sent.






This falls out well for my designes upon Selindra, the Prince his absence, will give me opportunity to effect, what his presence might prevent, for 'tis now most evident that Selindra slights my Professions in hope of Phillocles, who is become my Rival; by subtil∣ties I must therefore compasse, what my power and credit cannot reach: the Prince is too mighty for me, to contest with? but this new


Warre, will do my work,  see where he comes, how full of thoughts he is of late! this love transformes us all.



I'le share the Empire with him if he consent! if he will not! I'le force my way.  




Sir, The Emperour sent me to signify unto you the Newes from Belgrade, that Astella is arriv'd there, and is rejected by those you left to govern; 'tis his pleasure Sir, that you prepare to march, with all possible speed to her reliefe.



I have just now received an express from thence, which in∣form me of a Faction there, that did hope to have set up a Counterfeit Astella, but those Tumults are allayed, the plot being discover'd, all the partakers fled the Country; I therefore hold it fit to hear again from thence, before I stirre: but if my Father will needs have his Ar∣my march into Hungary, I shall advise him to conferre the honour of that Warre, Cleonell on you.



On me Sir, I am neither worthy, nor capable of so great a charge; your Highnesse does me much honour in this thought, but I must not presume to accept the favour, lest the Emperor do think me so vaine to seek it.



Why Cleonel? thy forward youth promises great things, and I know the Emperor will be pleas'd to see me joyn to heap ho∣nours on thy deserving head; I will undertake it with my Father, and shall not doubt to say, thou wilt deserve the sole Command of all our Forces.




If the Emperor consent, I am cozen'd; your Highnesse does 〈◊〉 load me with your Favours, I shall not live to expresse my Grati∣tude, much less to merrit such honours.



I tell thee Cleonel, 'tis in thy power to lay an Obligation on me, such an Obligation Cleonel, as half my Empire cannot recom∣pence;   Say, may I hope such kindnesse from thee? but if it be not in thy heart, do not flatter me into a hope of what I shall not find.



Sir as you are my Prince, my duty binds me to serve you with the hazzard of my life, and fortunes.



I thank thee for thy Love, as I do all that will like thee, say, and do as much, but I would have ingagements unto thee, beyond the com∣mon complement of other Subjects.



Your many favours Sir, have so much obliged me beyond all others, that your commands (what ere they be) shall make me happy.



Take heed Cleonel, do not ingage too fast; for I shall demand, what thou hold'st dearer then thy life; darest thou hear me now?



Speak boldly Sir, I am yours, and all that's mine is so; I hope

he will discover his love to me.



Thou art indeed my fate, or I am thine,   I would have thee give up to me, thy interest in Selindra, dissolve all ingagements, be∣tween her and you:  my dearest friend; thus thou mayest bequeath

an Empire to me, that I prize farre above this I am born to,  start not at it, for I will wear thee in my bosome, thou shalt be the greatest, and the richest man in Greece!











What is all Greece worth? without Selindra! good Sir, give me leave a little to consider on this matter;   sure he has solicited
Selindra for himself, and receiv'd a repulse;  it may well be, that she has express'd to him, some value of me, beyond what I my self can yet discern; he would not else thus rashly, nay thus madly tempt me! 'tis so:   Sir, do I mistake, or you did demand, that I should give my in∣terest in Selindra, up to you!



Thou doest not mistake, 'tis only that can make me happy.



And onely that I cannot grant, I can no more consent to part with the hope of such a happinesse, then with my interest in Heaven; pray Sir, finde some other way to try my Faith.



The Gods cannot give thee a means to oblige me another way, themselves cannot blesse me with a gift, that I can prize beyond Selindra!



And you would have me debauch this young Lady, for your private pleasure?



By all that's Holy, I would marry her.



Marry her! what shall then become of Hungary, and Astella?



Thou shalt have that Crown, and her; I'le woe her for thee, I'le fight that Conquest o're again, and give it thee, if she refuse!



Will you get the Emperors coment, to this exchange?



Yes, or I will do it without him.



(All this shall to the Emperor,) but if you can do neither? this

inestinable jewel you would have me throw away.



Will it be thrown away, if placed on me?



I might have put my words into a Courtlier phrase I do con∣fesse; but I can never mould my heart to such a forme, as shall consent to make my tongue bettay it: I swear by all that's good, I never can relinquish my interest in Selindra; I do prize my weak hopes there, above all the Wealth, and Honours, you can lay down to purchase it.



He has abus'd me all this while; to get the secret out, which shall now consume him; since he will not consent, this base treachery, shall be my first step to climb unto Selindra▪




I shall now perswade Lascares to believe, that the Prince loves Selindra:  while he is musing, I'le steale off, lest a tempest do fall






Stay Cleonel, I have more to say; I have considered my rash suit, and cannot with Justice, quarrel with thee, for not parting with such a Treasure as Selindra is; but I must call thee to account for thy late smiles, and false fawning on me, and for thy base treacherous kind∣nesse, by which thou hast betray'd me to reveale a secret, too great to trust thee with:  Thus I lay by my greatnesse, and as a private in∣jured man, I draw my Sword to kill thee.



But I must not lift up mine against my Prince, I have been ever taught to draw my Sword in your defence, and shall be as glad to
  18
serve you with it, as I should be proud to use it in this cause against any other man; I dare scarce shew it you Sir.




I have now made my self thy equal, by my rivalship in love; either defend thy self, or by heaven I'le kill thee.


They fight, Phillocles hurts and disarms Cleonel; as the Emperor comes in, Phillocles throwes Cle∣onel his sword, and goes out.




What insolence is this, so near us? Cleonel this posture does not become you, in this place.



You will pardon it Sir, when you shall know I only drew to save my life, not to offend the Prince, who swelling with rage, came like a ruine on me, because I would not quit my interest in Selindra unto him, to be his wife Sir.



Is this true Cleonel?



You'l find it true Sir, I could have had Astella, and her Crown for my consent; 'tis some pleasure to deny another, what I cannot get my self.



He has not hurt thee?



Not much Sir, you came in just as he fell on me.



This must be timely cared for; Cecropius send presently and fetch Selindra to your Lodgings, this night she shall be your charge, to morrow let her be sent back to Ciprus to her Father; and be you sure Cecropius, that Phillocles do neither see her, nor send to her this night.




She is here Sir, with the Princess.



Where is my Brother Sir?



He is gone hence hurt Ordella, (I wish he were else) fighting forsooth for Love! you now see what mischiefe your fondnesse to Se∣lindra, has produc'd; your Brothers life endangered, and the Empire tottering: Cecropius take Selindra to your care, as I commanded, let her be sent home, attended as befits her quality:   Ordella come you with me.


All goes off but Cecropius, Cleonel and Selindra.



Leave us a while Cleonel,   Madam, you now see the evils I foretold, are come to passe, these young fiery spirits, will never submit to suffer either to enjoy you: do but consider how happy you may be, by being mine, though I am not so young; yet many men of my years have made young Ladies happy: of my love, you have had long tryal, my Power, my Honours, and my Wealth, will prove as pleasant, as the
  19
smooth chin of Cleonel:   Phillocles his Wife you cannot be, his Mistriss I hope you scorne to be; much may be said Lady, on this argument, but the time allowes it not, to morrow early you must to Sea, unlesse you will blesse me, by being mine.



Is it even so my good Father? I shall shew you a trick for

your trick, if my skill faile not!



My Lord, I must now give you the same answer I have ever done, that I can never have affection for you.



No matter, few old mens wives have any.



My Lord, I do submit unto the Emperours commands, pray let me be sent away.



'Tis my humble love, begets this contempt!  I must try

her another way;   Madam, you know the Emperours humour well, and you have heard how eagerly he covets to joyne Hungary to Greece, by Phillocles his match with Astella, and how much he abhorres his love to you, is evident: The truth is Selindra, you are this night by his command, to be ravished by my Son Cleonel, to that end sent thi∣ther, which will allay the gallant Prince his appetite to marry you, and remove all further feares of that matter: 'Tis yet in your own power Madam by obliging me, to prevent Cleonels force, who for un∣dertaking so base an act, ought to be dispis'd.



Ravish'd, I'le rather dye, then suffer Cleonel, or yield to be your Wife, the Gods will not permit such wickednesse!



Please you to retire unto your Lodging Lady:  There is no

way to winne this foolish Girle, I am angerd even to hate her, yet can∣not chuse but love her;   but why should I loose this opportunity? I may now do, what I only invented for Cleonel,  I shall curse my self when she is gone, and when no possibility is left, wish it had been so: it shall be;   if when I have ravish'd her, she can consent, I'le marry her, if she will not, I'le poyson her, and being dead at Sea, hire the Marriners to throw her over-board, I will about it while my Blood is high! 


  Venus propitious be to my designe:
I'le offer Insence onely at thy Shrine.






GIven to Cecropius custody! that is to Cleonels embraces; I must see her:   is Cecropious, or Cleonel within?








Is Selindra yet at rest?



Yes Sir, long since.



Is it so late? I do believe you do mistake, and she is not;

 what means this rudenesse?



The Emperor has given command, that neither your high∣nesse, nor any from you, should visit Selindra; besides Sir, all within are now at rest.



My Fathers command! this is some designe from Cleonel:

 are they all at rest say you?  whence then is this noyse I hear?



We know not Sir.




Hark, the same noyse againe, 'tis within  stand by,   Vil∣lains
give way, or I shall force my passage through your hearts,   by

Heaven 'tis a Womans voice!  it is Selindra's voice! she calls for help too!



Help, oh help! murther, murther.






By my Fathers soule, I will strike with thee Phillocles.



Thou darest not be so barbarously base, to harme such innocence!


Here they look at one another in this posture a while, then Phillocles throws by Cecropius, and runs at Cleonel; he quits Selindra, and meets Phillocles; while they sight, the others run out & raise the Court.






Phillocles, I have thus long winked at your follies, hoping that my mildnesse would have begot a better temper in you, but I now see your sore requires a Corisive: go to your Lodgings, and as you value my displeasure, move not from thence without my leave;   you of the Guard, wait upon the Prince, and let him not stirre out, as you

will answer it to me,  Cecropius, let all leave us but your self;  and now informe me of this Fray, and how he came hither, against my Command.




Mighty Sir, the Prince forced my servants from the Door, and found me threatning Selindra; and frighting of her, as if I meant a Rape, which I only fain'd; intending to take off Phillocles his affection that way, by which he might apply his thoughts towards Astella, for if the Prince should marry Selindra! how can Hungary be yours? this Sir, is the truth.



I wish thou hadst done, what thou onely talkest of, for this young man, will ruine all my hopes of Hungary, if we do not prevent
  21
him!  it must be poyson Cecropius; I see no lesse will do it; Selindra
must dye, and that presently.



And shall Sir, if you so direct; by to morrow night it shall be done.



Be it so then, 'twill be the least evil; and the onely way to se∣cure all the rest; let her be poysoned.





Poyson her, my curiosity was to good purpose at this time; was ever gray haires so wicked? how to prevent this mischief I know not;  Selindra will never credit it from me; yet I will urge her hard, and if I do get belief, and by this means bring my designs to pass! I shall finde Doores too strong for Phillocles to force:  Love and Venus guide me.

Cleonel goes out and returns Selindra flying before him, with a knife drawn, which she holds at her brest.



Hold Cleonel, if thou presumest to touch me, this Knife shall be my rescue.



Will this distance, with my obedience, and my humility re∣move

your fears?  by Selindra's self I swear, my only businesse is to save that life you threaten;  does my heart and my looks so ill agree? that you can fear harm from me!



Art not thou Cecropius's Son? and does not his wilde blood, runne in thy vaines?



No Madam, I am no whit allied unto Cecropius the Ravisher; he was a Man when he made me, and is now become a Monster; such as I dread to see Selindra under his Roof.



My Lord, that posture does neither become you, nor me, pray





You will pardon my approach when you shall know the cause of this unseasonable Visit; I have by accident o're heard the Emperor, give my Father order to poyson you, and he is providing to do it, this next night.



I am glad to hear they are grown so mercifull, death is lesse dreadful then his Rape,   but how can I credit this from you? and how avoid it, if I do?



Can Selindra believe, my love could ere conceale such a mis∣chief? or that I will omit any endeavour, to preserve her from it?



Were not Cleonel a kin to the Ravisher; I might believe he would detect a Poysoner.



If I tell you a false word, may suddain plagues seize on me, and if you please to make me the blest Instrument of your escape; the Ho∣nour will be ample recompence for any hazzard I shall runne: I have Madam, a strong Castle within the Forrest, about a League from hence, thither I can convey you first, and then whither you please.



Pray my Lord leave me a few minutes, that I may consider

this great concern:  'tis very like, that he who would have ravish'd, may consent to poyson twenty such as I, rather then loose his hopes of Hungary:   I like well to fly from this near death, but I like not to trust my self to Cleonel; there may be more danger at his Castle, then in the death I would fly from; if I discover my self unto Ordella! she will solicite me for Phillocles (who I must ever hate) this will prove more desperate then all the rest:   I must trust Cleonel, though

he be of a fiery Spirit, his honour was never yet tainted:  I will look gently on him, and ingage him if I can to be true to me:  My Lord, I

have weighed my dangers, and your councel to avoid them, and I will trust my self to you, so you will swear to carry me directly unto Bel∣grad, (and not to your Castle) I have friends in Hungary, who will protect me, and there I shall have time to consider of your hazzards for me.



By our House-hold gods I swear to do it, by this fair hand, I will observe my Oath, and what ever else you shall command me:  though it be late, we must this night depart, you must make ready, while I take order for my Servants, and my Horses.



May I not see the Princess e're I go? will not to morrow night be time enough?



To morrow night brings death, beyond all power to hinder; we should be going while we talk:  Let no fears disturb you Ma∣dam, I can command the opening of the ports at any hour; all shall be according to your wish.



Heaven grant it Cleonel;  
 When I remember the strict vow you made,
It were Impiety to be afraid.





Let the Boy only stay, and sing the Song I like.
The SONG.

Come, come, thou glorious object of my sight,
Oh my Ioy! my Life, my only Delight!
May this glad minute be
Blest to Eternitie.


See how the glimmering Tapors of the Skie,
Do gaze, and wonder at our Constancy.
How they crowd to behold!
What our armes do infold!


How all do envy our Feliceties!
And grudg the Triumphs of Selindras Eyes:

  23How Cynthia seeks to shroud
Her Cressent, in you Cloud!


Where sad Night puts her sable mantle on,
Thy light mistaking, hasteth to be gone;
Her Gloomy shades give way,
As at the approach of day;


And all the Planets shrink, in doubt to be
Eclipsed by a brighter Deity.
Look, Oh look!
How the small
Lights do fall,
And Adore,
VVhat before
The heavens have not show'n!
Nor their God-heads known:







To descend; and remain,
Amongst Mortals again.











Thou art welcome Ordella, let us sit, and talk sadly.



My coming is to divert this sadness which you too much indulge.



Does not my sorrow become me Ordella? canst thou wish me merry, when thou considerest my Condition? who is there now in Greece more scorn'd then Phillocles?



Who more honour'd? thy Victories shine bright upon thee, thy Vertues are unparallel'd, thy self ador'd by thy own Subject, and by other Nations coveted; let not my brother provoke the gods, by his ingratitude.



Thou art mistaken my dear Sister, I am not that Phillocles thou meanest; not he that chased the Germanes out of Hungary, I am one that Cleonel dares Rival, and with a single Arme, can check my force; a poore contemn'd prisoner I am, a man with half a soul thou seest; do I not become my Goale?



I am sad my self to hear you talk thus;   but, my Brother, your affaires do require your present Counsel; pray let us consider how Selindra may be secur'd from farther danger.




Is Selindra in danger? speak Ordella, what danger? who dares threaten her?



You mistake me Brother, I was about to tell you that •n my opinion, she will be safe at Ciprus, and do think fit when she takes leave of me, to let her know your love, and resolution to marry her, which will soon dash Cleonels hopes; this I could not yet do, by reason she was so suddainly committed to Cecropius;  your looks do fright me, and your unquiet thoughts, will ruine you.



Thou art my only comfort, thou shalt still direct, and I'le obey, prithee Ordella chide me when I do amiss; methinks thy looks speak good successe; I do approve her absence for a while at Ciprus, because you like it, and I will have patience too, because you say 'tis fit.



Patience will become you best, and best suit with your affaires.



Thou Councell'st well Ordella, but canst not fancy what a bro∣ken heart endures;   my whole soul labours under the burden of my Love, and to that is added her neglects more weighty, and to this double load, my Fathers unjust anger falls up on me, as if I were not sinking fast enough before!



My Fathers anger will be soon over.



I wish it not Ordella, may his fierce anger urge him on to my destruction, it will be handsomer to fall so, then to perish by Selindra's scorns.



You raise imaginary evils that are not; I am confident Se∣lindra has no thought for Cleonel, nor can I doubt but she will meet your love, with as bright a flame as yours is.



Oh! that I could suffer such a hope, or such a thought pos∣sesse me; I would then meet my Fathers frowns, and blow away his thunder; did Selindra love me! I would wage a second War with heaven, to gain her, and be more proud to fall her Martyr in so high attempt! then sit next to Jove, with her neglects upon me.




Madam, the Emperor sent me to see if Selindra were here with you.



What means my Father by this? Is she not a Prisoner with Cecropius?



She was, but is now missing, at which Cecropius is halfe madde.




Madam, I come to let you know that by day-break Cleo∣nel, with Selindra past the Ports, and about two hours after, were met on that way, that leads to his Castle.



Let them that love me follow me.
Phillocles snatches Antillacus his Sword and runnes at his Guard who give way.



  25As Phillocles goes out, he meets Lascares. and Cecropius, and wounds Cecropius in the Arme.



Traytor, Villain:   stay all; I do command you stay Antilla∣chus:   See the Court-Gates lock'd, that none go after him;   Cecro∣pius do you retire and look to your hurt, he meant it at thy heart old Man; may thy Sons good Sword revenge it on him, if they meet, and he fall under it.



Oh Sir! Let not your curses follow my Brother, he has Af∣flictions enough without them.



Peace Ordella, thy tendernesse doth too much nourish thy Bro∣thers follies, I would rather he should not be, then be thus E••eminate; I have fought many Battles, and done great things to settle this Em∣pire; and think you it will be kept, and Govern'd by a heart with a Dart in it.



Good Sir, let not my Brothers single errour put from your memory all his great Actions, if you would speak mildly to him of his Love, I do believe your Arguments may move him more, then all this rigour can; he has a Noble Spirit, such as you did like, and I know he loves you Sir.



Let me know when he returnes.





Are any gone after Phillocles?






Yes Madam, we think Antillacus is gone with Antenor.



But can they overtake him time enough, before he reaches Cleonel?



No doubt they may▪




Not yet gone Antillacus?



Madam, all the Court-Gates, are by the Emperors expresse command lock'd up, and Guards set, that no man now can passe.



Is it not madnesse to hazzard him alone against Cleonel and his company? My Lords, do you mean to give obedience to this rash command? and suffer Phillocles to perish thus; when my Fathers anger is allay'd, hee'l curse your modesty, if not punish it, in case my Brother do miscarry.



Madam, we have no way to follow the Prince, unlesse your selfe command the Guards to let us passe.



Come then with me; I will stand my Fathers anger when it goes highest, rather then let my Brother fall thus neglected.






Those at the Castle, do not hear of Cleonel, nor expect him there; sure Antillacus did mistake them, or I him, which way now to take I know not:  'Tis strange Antillacus and Antenor stay so long, I must not quit this Road, untill they come:  Hark I hear men and Horses within the Wood, my businesse is to search every where: Love guide me to her Rescue, or my Death.







How is it now Madam? your Spirits seem to be return'd, are you yet strong enough to ride on? we have rested long.



I hope I am, 'twas the blow which the bough gave my head, makes me thus ill, the bushes kept me from the ground, so that my fall could not hurt me.



The day is farre spent Madam, and we shall be no sooner mist, then follow'd; pray let us to horse, there is a place near, where we may rest for one night secure.



My head growes diszey with this little motion, I fear I can∣not sit upon my Horse yet;  methinks you might hide me here in these thick bushes untill night, and when 'tis dark, find some better means to carry me away.



'Twill not be safe to stay longer, so near our Enemies.




'Tis Cleonel;  turne this way Traytor:

Cleonel holds up Selindra, and sends his men to Phillocles.


Take the Prince without harme, if you can.



Am I not worthy thy own Sword Ravisher?


Phillocles runnes desperately among the men, passes them, and comes up to Cleonel, they all incompasse him, fighting: Selindra runnes amongst them and parts 'um



I beg your patience Sir;  and do command thine Cleonel, but here me speak, I do conjure you both,  Phillocles, brave Prince,
  27
look on me with pitty, and on Cleonel with justice; my life being sought several wayes by Lascares, and Cecropius, I have endeavour'd to preserve by flight; you must therefore look on Cleonel as trusted, and imployed by me, being ingaged by Oath to carry me to Belgrade, to my Friends there.



Thou art betray'd Selindra, lost for ever; this is not the way to Belgrade, you are now within a mile of his Castle, this way leads to no other place;  thou persidious Villain, canst thou smile at such a treachery?



Yes Phillocles, and will be my own carver now, I must be first serv'd here:  do you two carry her to Horse, I'le soon o're take you.




To Horse Cleonel;  I'le rather dye, then stir a foot that way.



Force her to Horse, we have no time to talk.



Force her! thou cursed slave, I'le sacrifice thee ere she goes.

Cleonel and his two Men sight with Phillo∣cles, while the other two force off Selindra:  


The gods preserve the Prince; help, help, murther, treason, treason:  




Vpon her cryes, enter six Travelors, Pollidor the Chief.



Let some help those that cry, let others search the Wood, I'le towards the clashing Swords;  how's this! three to one!

Pollidor runs at Cleonel and diverts him, just as Phillocles had kill'd one man, at which in∣stant the other man hurts Phillocles in the back, and seeing this rescue, he runs into the VVood; Phillocles runs after him that fled, be∣lieving it had been Cleonel, whom he could not see, because Pollidor having run Cleonel through the heart, was fallen himself upon him, who being by Cleonel run into the throat, lay al∣so as dead covering Cleonel.





Curs'd be that Woman, accurs'd our Fate to loose our prince




Now the blood issues at the wound, it may prove not mortall.



The blood only choak'd him as he lay, you see his Eyes look chearfully.




Ye Gods, if any do take care of Hungary, look down on Polli∣nesso, and restore him to us.



What's that he said?  was it Pollinesso that he named?




The King will live, thanks to heaven for his deliverance.



They call him King too; Pollinesso's name, gives me Strength;  but that face is none of mine, and yet that name makes that face love∣ly to me;  How I fool my self with vain hopes, of what cannot be!




How is it Sir? your looks are lively, and your wound, though it did at first seem desperate, is not very dangerous.



My tongue moves heavily, and painfully, losse of blood makes me faint too;  how shall I travell with these wounds?  my stay here will be very dangerous, and my Journey to Belgrade, too long for one so weak as I am.



The same Gods that have preserv'd you to this day, will not let you fall thus.




They talke of Belgrade too; who can this be?  give me way, that I may gaze on this wonder.


She rises, crowds in amongst them, and stares on Pollidor.


Away wild Woman, thou Author of this mischief.



He looks up again! those Eyes are mine, I know 'um now!




Throw her off, teare her away, she disturbs him, sure she is madde.




'Tis you are mad, 'tis you that love him not; why do you haile me thus? whither will you dragge me? did you not call him Pollnesso.











I think we did.



That name is mine, those wounds are mine then!




I wish they were.



And so do I with all my heart, pray let me go to him, I can heal him with my tears;  I'le suck his wounds well, for I have heard wounds have been cur'd so.



How comes his name in her mouth.



'Twas not well done of us, to name him as we did, best to strangle her, lest she discover us.



Shall I shoot her in the head? though the Act be horrid, 'tis better she perish, then all wee.



Let us first hear what she will say to him, we shall have time enough to kill her after.



I pray who are all you?



We are the hurt mans servants Lady, pray who are you? by whom we have receiv'd such dammage.



If my Eyes deceive me not, I may be happy; but am yet, the most miserable, accurs'd Woman living.



I think so too. 




What Woman is that weeps so?



'Tis she you rescued Sir.



Did I rescue her?  losse of blood makes my Eyes dazzle, and my fancy work even to a lightnesse; that Face brings to my me∣mory something that I have known:  why does she weep? and why do you hold her so rudely Tenedor.




In charity to me Sir, though they know it not, for had they sooner let me know that Pollinesso liv'd! my suddain joy had slain me:



What is this she sayes?



She is a Witch Sir I think.



Does not my Brother know me yet? have my sorrowes wrought such a change, that Pollinesso should not know me?



Oh! my Astella, pardon my dull sight; for I am very weak.




Would I had dyed, rather then be rescued at this rate, so joy∣ful, and so sad a day I have not seen before.



He does but slumber Madam, and 'tis good he should do so.



But slumber say you, it looks so like death! that I would dye to see it!



Madam, the Joy will out-live the sorrow of this day, the Prin∣ce's hurt is without danger;  can your goodnesse pardon the rude words which my selfe, and these Lords in our distraction speake?



Alas my Lord, I was not sensible of what you sayd, my mind was so o're-loaden with my griefs, and so intent on Pollinesso! that I heard you not; Now while my Brother takes this rest, pray make me know how he escaped, when my Father and Barzanes fell, and why he has been thus long conceal'd.



Madam, in that sad day, Pollinesso in vain attempting to save his Father, was with my self, and these you see here, cast on a sandy bank, from whence by good swimming we got to shoar, and have been since disguised for fear of Lascares, in several Princes Courts soliciting for aid, to force the Grecians to quit their stolen possession of Hungary; when in the midst of Pollinesso's preparation, he hears that Phillocles had resign'd the Crown to be preserv'd for you; This made us lay
  30
aside all further preparation for a Warre, and thus disguis'd to passe this way to Belgrade: It seems by destiny directed to your recsue.



I shall find some fitter time for my own story, 'twere good that we removed my Brother,  he wa•kes:  how are you Sir, has this repose refresht you?



I am something better then I was Astella, and shall soon be well, now I may look on thee.



And I most happy! my brother you must give us leave to remove you to some place of rest, and safety, and you must be still conceal'd; which these new wounds, with your Perriwig will be dis∣guise enough.



I shall be directed by you.



You must also a little counterfeit your voice, lest you be re∣member'd by it; for should Lascares know who were in his power, all his hopes of Hungary would vanish, untill he saw you dead; I am call'd Selindra here.



Who were those Robbers? and how came you amongst them?



'Twas Cleonel, who did beguile me, after he had sworn to car∣ry me to Belgrade, was conveying me to his own Castle.



Was not Cleonel Cecropins's son? and will not his death, be our ruine if we stay here?



My interest in the Princess Ordella, will secure you, and his guilt was such a crime, as can expect no justice from the Law to touch you; besides the rescue you brought the Prince, will merrit a reward,  but where is Phillocles? where is the Prince! we are all lost indeed, if he be fallen: I have been so much distracted, that I mist him not till now!



What Prince mean you Madam?



Prince Phillocles! 'twas he my brother rescued; runne, look, search about the Wood, for heaven sake search;  unfortunate Astella, and unworthy, that could thus long forget him; now Polliness• lives! I have no hate to Phillocles; methinks his vertues now look gloriously upon him   but how shall I look on Ordella? if her beloved brother have lost his life, to save my honour!



Was it Phillocles that I found fighting with Cleonel and his two men?







'Tis strange I knew him not, but I now remember as I came in, he did persue the man that fled into the Wood,   (let some looke that way,) Selindra I must glory in my wounds, that have sav'd thee from false Cleonel, and relieved Phillocles, who my soul thirsts to see, next thy self most dear to me.



And mine trembles at his absence.






Selindra, Selindra, is Selindra safe?  has she any mercy yet for Phillocles?



She is safe and happy too, now she sees you alive Sir; my heart is so much disturb'd by my fears and joyes, that I know not how to ex∣presse
she goes kind∣ly to him.
my gratitude: good Sir, let these strangers dress your Wounds, they have shewed much skill on this hurt man.



My Wounds are but slight scratches when Selindra smiles; my joyes are much more dangerous then my Wounds.



My life Sir, and my honour you have saved, I must look on you with devotion! pray be pleas'd to own these our Redeemers, and give them some assurance of your Protection, they fear Cleonel's death may by Cecropius's power with the Emperor, prove their destruction.



I will be their security, Selindras Redeemers shall command my life; of what Country are they?



Hungarians Sir, Men that since the late Warre, have sought Fortunes in Forraign Lands, and now on private Affaires, were retur∣ning home.




Unto you Sir, I have a great Obligation, such as my whole Life shall express my Zeale to serve you, for by you Selindra lives.



Sir, I am rewarded much above my merrit, and shall bless the occasion that gave me power to serve you.




Sir, the Emperour's much inraged at Cecropius's hurt you gave him, and at your departure, staid us till now;   Is this Cleonels, or your own blood Sir?



'Tis neither, Cleonel fell by that Noble hand, whose timely ayd deliver'd Selindra from a Rape, and me from death; My Arme Antillacus, is grown weak of late, and thy good Sword so dull, it will do nothing in my hand.



But Sir, how comes it that you thus neglect your Wounds.



I have businesse of more weight to think on, now Selindra smiles:  Antenor, pray haste you back unto Ordella, and desire her to be the first relator of Cleonels death, bid her tell my Father of his horrid Treachery, and let her magnifie these strangers sent by the gods to save the innocent, and to chastise the perjur'd Ravisher; make haste Antenor, and tell Ordella that I am in Paradice!



She will be glad to hear that you are well Sir.



Well Antenor, why thou art well, and so is he, and he, we are all well; but I am blest with all my heart can wish for; tell my Sister the gentle, and the fair Selindra smiles, and let her think the rest!  I am all Ayre, Antillacus pray thee help me to rub my Wounds, a little smart may let me know that I am mortall. 



If I mistake not Sir, you'l finde smart enough in your Fa∣thers rage, when he hears of Cleonels death.



Some anger will do well Antillacus, to allay this joy with∣in me.



I have some fears too, lest Cecropius's malice may ruine us, you know his power Sir.



Let not my Divinest Mistris have so mean a thought of my power to serve her, let not a sad look appear on this day, that you have dain'd to smile on Phillocles: Madam, 'tis time that we were moving towards the Town, with our wounded Friend; how must I call him?



I think they call him Pollidor; Sir, though my confidence in you be equal to the value you are pleas'd to set on me, I cannot chuse but fear Lascares's anger, when I think on Cleonel.



Believe me Selindra, I will rather dye, then let them suffer.




Thus let us march in Triumph to the Town,
Aloud proclaiming Pollidor's renown;
While the Arched Heaven do Ecco its content,
To see Selindra freed from Ravishment.








SIr, I beg the due Execution of our Lawes on Murderers.



And I Sir, beg mercy for those that have sav'd my Brothers life.



I may not hearken to thy suit Ordella, the Lawes must be in∣violable, to pardon such a Murther, would pull down Vengeance on my own head, on thine too, on all our Family.




When you remember Cleonels faith, and his many services, I hope Sir you will not deny me Justice.



Cecropius you shall have Justice;   go you Antenor, and command the Provost of the City that he seize Selindra, and her fellow Murtherers, let them be all close Prisoners in the black Tower; by to morrow this time, shall their bloods be shed, as they shed Cleonels.



Did you say Selindra should be Prisoner Sir.







Good Sir, call back Antenor till you have heard me speak.



I may not Ordella.



Who can forbid you to be Merciful? and just? you break the Lawes of Hospitality in this; Selindra is a stranger, she is innocent, and cannot suffer justly; Cleonel was full of horrid guilt, and was cut off by a just hand;  the Travellers too, have saved Phillocles his life; good Sir, let not Cecropius malice, perswade you to do, what you will blush to think on after.



They shall have Justice, and a Legal Tryall.



Oh Sir! where is your wonted mercy? whither is that good∣nesse fled? how have I lost your favour? that cannot with my Tears, nor Prayers prevale on your mistaken anger.




Is it your Majesties Command, that Selindra should be a Prisoner?



Must I aske your leave?



Though not my leave Sir, I cannot chuse but wonder at such rigour!



You have leave to wonder on.



Thus low Sir, I do humbly beg Selindra's Inlargement, and an equall Tryal for those that rescued us;  




Selindra as chief accessary must abide the Sentence of the Law, in this case of Cleonel:  Phillocles thy mean Love has drown'd all my Favours, and Eclip'st all thy former actions; from this time I shall study to forget thee, unlesse thou wilt forget Selindra, and lead the Army to relieve Astella.



I shall obey you Sir in this, and all things else, so you will be pleas'd to send Selindra safe to Ciprus, and set those innocent men free, that saved my life.



Degenerate fool, I shall cure this disease in thee; Cecropius send presently for the Judges, Command them by virtue of this my Signet, to put the Lawes in present Execution, upon thy Sons Murthe∣rers; let the rigour of the Law passe on them all.



Ye Gods, to what purpose are men innocent? why is virtue prays'd, and taught us?  Good Sir, consider how you do murther these innocents, with a shew of Law, and a pretence of Justice.



How dare you talke thus?



You make me desperate Sir.



Do not raise my temper higher, lest I cut thee off, as if thou wer't no part of me;   they shall dye.



Had the Gods so pleas'd, I wish my self the meanest of your Subject, for I am now a slave unto your passions, and must inherit the curse that's due to all your guilts, such as I shake to think on; 'Tis you Sir, that have murthered Cleonel, 'twas your poyson that Selindra fled from; by your confining me, you gave Cecropius first, and Cleonel next, the power to become Ravishers; pray let the Law take notice of this!   It may free innocent persons.



Who am I? Is this Gallant my Son, or my Soveraigne?



Sir I do see fire, and fury in your Eyes, and am prepar'd to meet it, 'tis better to dye with those are Noble, then to live thus neglected; by my hand two of Cleonels men fell, 'tis I am guilty of that sin of res∣cuing Selindra from a Rape: let your Justice, and your Lawes, grow famous by my blood, 'twill please Cecropius well; by all our Gods I▪le not out-live those innocents.



Tis fit to take thee at thy word.


  34The Emperor Draws and Runs at Phillocles to kill him, Ordella steps between.



It will become your own hand best.



Have you another Son Sir, when you have slain my Brother?




Antenor, call in my Guard, and carry Phillocles to the New Castle; see that he be safe, and close there, as you will answer it with your life;  I shall not trust you in the Army now Sir.




Pray Sir re-call this severe command, my Brother has no dan∣ger in him, you saw he did not avoid death, when your hand offer'd it.



Antenor, I will be obeyed;  by Heaven he dyes that dares dispute my Will.




If I go to Prison? Selindra dyes, there is none can help her,

and then, I shall have time hereafter, to lament her sad fate; Sir, I aske your pardon for the harsh words I utter'd, I did believe those truths might touch you, and move compassion towards those you threaten so much rigour too: but I now see your anger has decreed them dead, and that you have the same thought for me; my last sute is, that since we may not live, we may dye together: I shall submit to any kind of Death Sir; But I have vowed to be no more confin'd.



You of the Guard seize on him.




Against Imprisonment, I shall endeavour what I can; com∣mand my death Sir, and I will welcome it.




Kill him;  Kill the Traytor;  dares none stirre to do it? Is my breath grown so weak? Ile try my own strength then.


The Emperor snatches a Partizan from one of the Guard, and wounds Phillocles in the breast slightly, Phillocles holding down his Sword opens his arms and receives the wound, they search his wound, set him in a Chair, while the Emperor stands amaz'd at what he had done.



Oh, my Brother's slain! how cruel, and unnaturall a deed is this?




The Surgeons say the Chiefe prisoner will not Live till Morning; I beg Sir, that the sentence may passe on the rest.





'Twas well the Emperors age did not permit his force to act his will, the wound has not past the bone Madam, 'tis but a slight cut in the flesh.



'Tis time that you hasten to the Army, for while Cecropius holds his power, you cannot be safe here.



He advises well Brother, untill my Father be dispossest of this evill spirit that reignes in him, I wish you away too.



I think it must be so; the Souldiers I hope have not forgot their love to me;  My Dear Sister, pray will you ore-take my Father lest in this sit he slay all our Friends; say that Selindra did sly wil∣lingly with Cleonel, and that she regards not my Love, say any thing to gaine a little time, untill I may do something to relieve them.



I shall do my best:  

Ordella at the Door meets the Emperor with Selindra in his hand, and Pollidor led in, he delivers Selindra to Ordella, and points to them to set Pollidor by Phillocles, then goes out with Cecropius and Servants.



What means my Father by this dumb shew?



Where are we now Tenedor?



Truly Sir, I know not, but I see Friends here.







Those that brought you in, were the Emperor, and Cecropius; you know Prince Phillocles, that whispers with Selindra, that other sure is the Princess Ordella.



Is that the Princess Ordella?



Your presence Madam gives me strength, and your kind looks, give life unto my drooping spirits.



How miserable am I Sir, that am the occasion of all these evils.



Your own sufferings are the onely evills to be lamented, I could curse my self, that brings such troubles on you;  but Madam we forget to comfort this Gallant man, by whose Sword we enjoy our Lives:  Sir, can you pardon me that undertook so much, and can so little serve you?



It was an injury Sir, to think I would receive my life, ransom'd by your death.



By my wound Pollidor, I have appeas'd my Fathers Rage; by thy wounds Selindra Lives, and through all these Clouds, I see the Tempest ceasing;  cannot Selindra speak to him?



I have a heart as full of Gratitude as yours Sir, but not yet any means to shew it; I shall make it my businesse to serve him.



Has my Dear Sister no complement for Pollidor? by whose valour she enjoyes Selindra, and me.



Yes Phillocles, I am studying how to expresse it, for you two have left nothing for me to say: Sir, I can only thank you o're again for my Brothers, and my Friends preservation, by which you have ob∣liged me, and the whole Empire, and do deserve some publique Ho∣nour, and high Recompence.



What honour, or what recompence can outweigh this you now heap on me? Madam, if what I have done, be a service that you will own, I have no wish beyond it; I shall ever on this day keep a solemn Feast unto the Gods, that did direct my course that way, and gave me power to become as happy here, as in Elizium.



Let those Lodgings next to mime, be made ready for Pollidor, I will not trust him farther from me;   Antillacus, go you with as lit∣tle noyse as may be to the Army, and let the Souldiers know, that I will suddainly be with them; some lead out Pollidor.





'Twas not revenge, for Cleonel, made me presse your Maje∣sty to do Justice on his Murtherers, but to cut off Selindra, by which Phillocles might have no hindrance to gain Astella;  But Sir, since you have freed the Prisoners, and are content, the Prince shall marry Selindra, I have done; if you Sir, can lay by all thoughts of Astella; and that Crown, I shall soon forget a private losse.



I must laugh Cecropius to see how thou art abus'd by my feigned shew of kindnesse, which I only did, to heal the wound I gave; had I another Son, by whom I might gaine Hungary, Phillocles had found my Force, answerable to my Anger; but I confesse I did relent, upon a suddain thought, which made me strike so feebly at him, for now to loose Phillocles, were to throw Hungary away, and to destroy Selin∣dra, were by another kind of stroak to destroy Phillocles.



What other way have you Sir? that I cannot yet fancy.



A sure one Cecropius, away that cannot faile, I will give loose reins to my Sons Love, let him run on, and Joy in his beloved Selin∣dra, whose sweets once had, and his young appetite allayed, (as most violent passions soonest are) then 'twill be best to take away Selindra by a Poyson; then it may be done without suspition, while I urge on the Marriage, joyne in all the Nuptiall Jollities, and put on such plea∣sing looks, as shall make thee doubt my purpose, though thou know∣est my heart.



I see not yet how this can get Astella, or that Crown.



Thou art grown so dull of late, that thou seest nothing; while this joy lasts, Astella may be found, and then Selindra dying, what can hinder Phillocles from getting Astella?



I do submit Sir, and must applaud your purpose, 'tis a design I do confesse, much above my reach, and the first mischief I have come short in.
Exeuut ambo.





You look chearfully to day Pollidor, we may hope to see you abroad shortly.



I believe I might venture now Sir, though my Surgeons be not of my mind; but Sir, how do you find the good old Emperor dispos'd.



I like not my Fathers smiles Pollidor, his suddain starts into such extreams, make me apprehend more danger in his kindnesse, then his rage; so that to prevent all further evils, I have a purpose to re∣paire unto the Army; and 'tis Ordella's wish, as well as mine, that Se∣lindra would trust her self with me there.



That may secure you both, but will not Selindra's honour suffer?



Now that Selindra's interest, and his are become one, I see no reason she should fear to go, nor indeed any scruple why their Marriage may not be privatly, and presently dispatch'd, for while the businesse lingers thus, they give hopes to such Endeavours as would divert it, and do runne daily hazzards, by staying here.



Ordella argues what my soul wishes, but Selindra's looks do not consent to make me so soon happy.



Sir, my loooks do be-lye my heart, if they shew ought that would delay a happinesse to you, for I have none beyond yours:   But Sir, above all other reasons, Pollidor (not being yet able to attend you) if he be left behind, will hardly escape Cecropius's fury?



Most true Selindra, he will be in danger, I shall therefore attend his recovery; without him I will not move; nor will I put a thought in act without thy Councel.



You have both said well, but in my judgment, this is no fit time for such Complements, when your lives are daily sought.



If you be resolv'd to attend my recovery, I shall propose a sudden fancy of mine, to that purpose, which may secure us:







Suppose Selindra do ask the Princess leave to return to Cy∣prus, and give out that she only expects, her Fathers coming to convey her thither.  Sir, you may court Selindra publikely while she stayes, and she seem to neglect your love, and put on a shew of kindnesse unto me, as in gratitude for my hazzards in her redemption, I will also coun∣terfeit affection to Selindra, and give out, that I am of better quality then I seem: This Sir, if well manag'd, will be ground enough, to deceive their best Spies, and for some time secure us all.



I approve your thought Pollidor, and if Selindra can un∣dertake her part, doubt not me, I'le put on such a seeming jealousie, as shall puzzle the old Fox Cecropius himself.



I shall easily observe my directions, and soon learn to be civil to a man, I owe so much to!



Come Ordella, while they practise love, we will reconcile us to the Emperor, and try to bring him on a present visit to Pollidor, be∣fore this sit of his good nature leave him.



Selindra we must find you sitting in a more familiar way with Pollidor, then ordinary conversation does allow.




I shall obey you Madam:   Now they are gone, we may enjoy our selves, this happy design of yours, will afford us many houres of freedome.



My soul is joyed to look on thee Astella!



And my happinesse too great to be exprest by words! that you live! makes this Earth a Paradice to me; my heart can scarce make roome for Phillocles, it is so full of Pollinesso!



I am all thine Astella.





Is it time Sir, that you retir'd to rest, you spend your spi∣rits, by so much discourse, which does retard your cure.



You should neglect no means Sir, for your recovery, lest by a long stay here, some accident unlook'd for, may make you known.



I wonder Phillocles does not call to mind that he has seen you.



He believes me dead, as all others do; but I shall observe the best rules for my recovery however:   Now Astella we have time to hear how you were conveyed from Belgrade, pray make me know how you came hither!



That same night that you departed to the Army, and our first Embassadors went towards Greece, to implore Lascares's aid against the Germanes, I was by my Fathers own hand deliver'd unto Peri∣ander, whom I was to call Father; and by him was brought to Ci∣prus, where the Plague then raging, he transports me with his Family to this Town.



How came you into the Court then?



On the first Feast-day, I went with Periander to the Temple, that I might see the Emperor, and the Printess Ordella, where the Prin∣cess casting her Eyes on me, found mine so fixed on her, that I could not remove them, but blush'd, and still look'd on her; by what power led, I know not; but she took a fancy to have me live with her, which Periander durst shew no dislike to: thus was I, to my great joy, call'd to Court, where I became a Companion to the Princess: within a short time Cleonel had affection for me, which did not free me from old Ce∣cropius dotage: of which, with Prince Phillocles his worthy love, you shall know hereafter, for I have now held you too long from your repose.



Dearest Astella thy words are balsome to my wounds.








Your Majesty will not think this honour too much for Pollidor, when you shall know he is of better quality then he seems;   ha! what do I see?




That which should teach thee to have nobler thoughts Phil∣loces, think on this surprize.



How they are disturb'd!



They do it rarely well.




Sir, I am now come to excuse the imprisonment you had, and to give you thanks for my sons life; I shall now endeavour to recom∣pence your merit, rather then trouble you with words.



Great Sir, this honour, with the many other favours I receiv'd, do shame me to think that you allow me a merrit I cannot own, but if the Gods do give me life, my onely businesse shall be to seek occasions to serve you and yours.



I shall contribute what I can to your health, and will please my selfe, with the expectation of great things from you.


While they talk, the Emperor observes Phillocles courting Selindra, and she neglecting him; the Em∣peror observes Pollidor to be troubled at their Court∣ship, and is pleased at it.



Sir, you oblige me beyond words, to utter my sense of your fa∣vours.



My purpose is to give you a kind welcome, and a respect sui∣table to your worth, and quality:  fair Maid, I know not well how

to frame my discourse to you, whom I have so ill treated; but I shall no more disturb your joyes, I do now make it my suit, that you will defer your return to Ciprus, I shall lay my commands on Ordella, to deny you her consent to go.



Sir, The favours and honours I have received here, are farre beyond the ills you mention; and my happinesse such, in the Princesse Ordella's love, that I lament the thoughts of my departure, but when I consider the mischiefes past, and foresee worse like to follow, 'twere madnesse not to fly them; when my Father is return'd, I shall renew my suit, to have the Princess leave, to leave this place, and until then, make it my care, to tend this hurt man, my redeemer! to whom I owe my life and honour!



Selindra, if I can adde any thing unto thy happinesse, I shall do it gladly, for thou art something more, then ever I have found in Wo∣man.





What thanks do we owe Pollidor for this disguise! it takes Ordella, beyond our hopes; did you observe how my Father eyed us, while he talked to Pollidor?



Yes, and do believe Cecropius and he are gone to compare their notes, for that Fox was very vigilant.



Selindra, let us enjoy this blest minute.

Phillocles leads Selindra to the Couch, and Ordella goes to Pollidor.


Sir, While the two Lovers whisper, pray oblige me with the knowledge of the occasion of your coming into these parts, by which we have received so great an obligation; and if you please? to passe this
  40
time with the relation of your own story, unlesse with your selfe, you would conceale it.



Madam, My story is not worthy your eares, nor my self this honour:  yet I have a story,  such as will make me blush to ut∣ter, though no crime do belong to it:  nor am I what I seem, and yet not fit to appear other,  but Madam, your commands are too high ho∣nours to be neglected, my own resolutions shall give way, and my nea∣rest concernes submit to your will.



I perceive you are disturb'd at my curiosity to know, what I believe you would conceal; it may be you have vowed not to discover; truly Sir, for want of what to say, I onely said it.



Madam, I was surpriz'd by your approach, which made my tongue appeare lesse ready then my heart to obey you; your com∣mands, Madam, are sufficient to dissolve any vowes of mine, and since you will vouchsafe to hear, I shall relate.




How are you Sir? Methinks your Eyes do shew some an∣guish in your wounds, do we not trouble you?


Here Phillocles and Selindra interrupt Pollidor, which puts him into some passion, for he now began to love Ordella.


We have done ill to stay thus long, Selindra 'tis your fault, you should have directed better.



No Madam, my houre to rest is not so precisely to be kept, nor have I any pains upon me, as the Prince thinks; my wounds heal the faster for your company.



You are civil Sir.



Madam, the Prince's kindnesse, and his care, is not at this time necessary:  pray Sir, if your occasions call you not, do not go yet.



Pollidor we know your civility is great, out discretion must not be the lesse, I see you are disturb'd, and know your pains are great upon you; make no reply, wee'l soon visit you againe; come Ordella, let us leave Selindra to her charge; good rest unto my friend, all joyes unto my Mistriss.





Beshrew your kindnesse at this time,  how like Tantalus was I?



What mean you by this passion brother? shall I call the Surgeons?



No Selindra, they have no skill in my disease.



You speak, and look, as if you wanted sleep, pray retire to rest.



Rest Selindra! where can I find rest? Phillocles has taken all rest from me! did you not observe how the Princess came to me? and how she threw her favours on me! when in the height of all my joy, your approach destroyed me.



If this be all! I must smile, to hear you sigh brother.



All Selindra! doest thou mock me? are thy own flames so weak? thou smilest at mine!



I cannot chuse but smile, when I rejoyce to see my wishes fall so fast upon me: you love the Princess, and she will love you, she must, she shall, nay, I doubt she does already! and have some fear, the work will be too easie, if I undertake it.



Now thou mockest me more, then thou didst before! prithee Selindra be serious, and do not play with what torments me.



What can be more serious? then to make a marriage be∣tween so great a Princess, and the King of Hungary? pray where can she make a better choice? or who can better plead your suit then I? Look to your wounds brother, leave this affair to me.
Exit:



My best wishes do attend thee, she has rais'd in me such doubt∣full hopes, that they begin to vanish with her, and such fears to lose what I never had, do throng so fast upon me, that on the sudden I am orewhelm'd, 

 With doubts, with joyes, with fears, so strangely mixt!
My heart is Hell, untill my hopes be fixt.






GOod day unto the bright Selindra?



May your Lordship find many such.




Why do you sly me, Madam? I come in dilligence to make known to you, what concerns you more, then any other businesse can, towards which you make such haste from me.



I fled not from your Lordship, nor did I perceive, that you had ought to say to me; what is your pleasure now?



My businesse is, to preserve you from a certain ruine, and to set you above the reach of mischiefe, as high in honour, as you are in beauty, and in vertue.



I were much unworthy such a favour, and not Mistress of any virtue, if I should not return a befitting gratitude.



Know then Selindra, you are design'd unto your grave; your wedding robe, will prove your winding sheet, if I prevent it not; the Emperor puts on this shew of kindnesse, onely to destroy you with lesse noise; he does consent that Phillocles by a present marriage, should satisfie his appetite; after which you shall be poysoned, that the Prince may have no object between him and Astella: This by all our Grecian Gods is true, and this I have consented to.



Can there be such a wickedness 'mongst men!



Can you doubt it, that have seen so much? or can you think Lascares will consider such a life as yours, when it does interpose be∣tween the Crown of Hungary and him?



If this be so, how can I avoid it? shall I think you will be∣tray the Emperors trust, to oblige me!



Madam, if you would please to look on your faithfull servant with equal Eyes, and on your dangers with judicious thoughts, you'l see that Phillocles his love brings death;  and Pollidor methinks, should not have gain'd an interest where Phillocles pretends.



My Lord, I must confesse what you have said, is worthy my most serious thoughts,  but my Lord, 'tis not fit that I treat farther in this affaire, until my Father doth return; if you please to move him in it, my obedience shall follow his will.



Of his consent I make no doubt, my best Mistriss; joyes, and greatnesse do attend Selindra when she smiles on me!




But how can you secure your self, and me from Phillocles? will not his rage, raise a revenge as ruinous, as this you would have me fly from?



Good Madam, let not so mean a thought remain with you; I have Lascares Scepter in my hand, and all the Frontier Towns in my Command; the Souldiers too, since Phillocles forsook them, are be∣come mine; if my fair Mistress would by one kind look confirme my joyes, it would encourage me to let her see, at what a rate I value her.



I blush to think that I have smil'd so much, upon so short ac∣quaintance, Pray Heaven you have not a design, to destroy me this way!



Can you think I will destroy my souls onely joy? to remove all such fears, I will now put my life into your hands.



How my Lord! your life?



You have heard, Madam, how the Hungarian Army marches towards Grecce, it does so: drawn in by me, to my aid they come, to assist me to get Selindra, and to set Lascares Crown upon her head! if she will deserve it?  we are interrupted now,  think on me, and thou shalt wear this Imperial Crown, Selindra, within few howers.






What has caus'd thy clouded brow Selindra? has that viper vext thee?



He has frighted me, and will anger us all, if he be not preven∣ted; such horrid mischiefes he has in love to me reveal'd, as I shake to think on.



To what tune runne they?



To several tunes, some to Love, some to private blood-shed, others to publick Warre, and in summe to ruine all that's good;  The
  43
Emperor will permit our marriage Sir, and after poyson me, that you may have leisure to gaine Astella; but above all, Cecropius treachery must be lookt to; He has call'd in the Hungarian Army, to make me his by force: he talked of a Crown too, that I should weare, if I would comply with him, and at that word you interrupted us: good Sir, make it a little more your businesse to prevent these Devils, and their de∣signes.



There is danger in this, worthy our best care, Selindra, I see our stay here, will still occasion new designs on us.



And you too late, I fear, will find my counsel good, why may not I have credit to protect Pollidor in your absence?



I think you may, but yet 'tis not fit to hazzard such a friend, to the fury of that Monster Cecropius; besides, Selindra is now enga∣ged in honour, to stay for him.



Truly Sir, I think I am in honour bound, not rashly to throw away a man, that has preserv'd us both; but Sir, when you shall con∣sider that his wounds do now permit him to walk abroad, a few dayes more, will get him strength to ride with us: during which time, I can se∣cure all by dissembling a little kindnesse to Cecropius, by which, I shall also discover his treaty with the Hungarians.



Pollidor is much oblig'd to you Selindra, I like well this noble humour in you.



It does become her, my dear Sister, it shall be my care to look after Cecropius now, and if necessity require, I will remove him speedily; I must leave you for some houres Ordella, to attend my Father; Fare∣wel, my bright Mistriss; pray let your care continue unto Pollidor, and let not fall your kindnesse to Cecropius, he may confesse to you, what no tortures can draw from him.





It does concern me Sir.



It does indeed, Selindra, thy gratitude to Pollidor, looks han∣somely; methinks as he recovers health, he growes comely, he seems to me, as if he were above the ordinary rank of men, I dare say he has a Noble Soule.



Madam, you judge right, did you converse as I do daily with him, you should wonder at such worth; methinks I see greatness in his looks, and do observe that he holds in that lustre, with more advan∣tage, then others shew it forth:



He is sure some great Prince disguis'd, Selindra! and a happy man he is, that has found one that can discover his conceal'd perfections to the life!




Madam, my Master is now awake, and begs the favour of a visit.





I shall follow your Lordship, when I have brought the Prin∣cess to her Chamber.



Is he a Lord too, Selindra?



Did I call him Lord, Madam?



Ask when you see him next, go Selindra; this Ceremony to
  44
me is needlesse, I shall find the way alone; 'tis fitter that you attend your charge, Pollidors wounds will not heal out of thy fight, Selindra:  I cannot chuse but wonder what kind of entertainment you can find, for so many houres, with so great a stranger, as Pollidor!




Sure she is jealous, and I have been too free in praising him;  Pollidor and I, do spend more houres discoursing of Ordella's beauties, then of all other matters; he admires your perfections, Madam; his other wounds are slight, compar'd with those, he received from your eyes: for 



Hold, Selindra, I delight not in such saucy thoughts from Pollidor, nor does it become you to heare, much less to relate them unto me: I do feare Selindra, you hope by this invention, to dazle my Eyes, that I may not discover your own affection to this Pollidor; take heed you fall not from that vertue you are valued for, if you do deceive my trust, or Phillocles his love! you will be neither worthy his anger, nor my pitty.



Let me fall under the weight of both your angers, when I de∣serve ill from either of you, your jealousie afflicts me Madam.




I hear my Brother coming, retire, that he may not see thy tears, and meet me in the Garden after supper, then I will hear more of this, and till then, suspend my Jndgment of thee.






Why went Selindra weeping out? and what troubles you my Dear Sister?



I am not troubl•d now Sir: pray how did you find my Father? in what temper is he?



Well Ordella, all is safe yet; but I cannot be satisfied untill you tell me why Selindra weeps;   your silence will beget doubts more troublesome, then the knowledge can be.



'Twas nothing but an Argument that fell between us.



That Argument Ordella, if thou lov'st my peace, that Ar∣gument!



I may wrong Selindra by it, and trouble you without a cause, when I am certainly informed, you shall be so, till then, pray do not urge me farther.



I am so weak a man in thy esteem, thou darest not trust me with my self; Ordella, thy discourse will disturb me much, unless thou lettest me know the whole matter.



My unwillingnesse to tell you, is now become the onely cause I feare to do it, for I was questioning Selindra onely, about her frequent visits to Pollidor, which it seems I put into such Language, as made her weep; this on my credit is the truth, are you now satisfied?



I am satisfied that we have the same thoughts, your judgement on this matter, confirms my Observations, which till now, took no hold on me;  If she prove false, thus I can blow her off;  But Polli∣dor, shall pay deare for his Treachery.






Madam, 'tis fit that I visit you before the Temple, and pay my first vowes at your shrine, offering up a Life devoted to your Service.



You owe your health Sir, next to the Gods, unto Selindra's care, such a gratitude I have not seen before, nor such a zeale as hers, to serve you.



My obligations to Selindra, I must rank after the Honours I have received from you Madam:  Pray Sir, how does the Empe∣ror,

and Cecropius, take this fained love between Selindra and me? how does it work with them?



Since Selindra dwelt with you, the whole Court believes it is a mutuall Love; onely my Sister and my self, have other thoughts.



(Those last words came coldly out, I must remove this jea∣lousie;) I am glad Sir that you are secur'd by it, and I am joy'd to have a hand in any thing, that shall conduce to serve you, I do professe my Medicines have not so much wrought my cure, as the joy I have to see such unparalleld Virtues, and Affections meet, as is yours, and the good Selindra's; day day she tires her tongue in praising Phillocles, and stiil growes fresh, by talking of you Sir; I cannot wish you greater happinesse on Earth, then you will have with her, may it last while you last, and may Eternall Curses light on those that wish it less.



I thank you Sir, and will hope to prosper, as you pray for me, and next to Selindra, and my Sister, place you by my heart.



You Honour me too much, and will make me proud, I must take my leave Sir, my strength is not yet enough confirm'd, to stay long abroad.





The Gods go with thee, thou Man of Honour.



What think you Brother of this Complement?



I think him really, what he seems.



I wish I could do so too, but when I call to mind that Selindra unto me, did talk just thus of Pollidor, as he now discours'd to you of her, methinks it looks like a designe.



Does Pollidor presume to pretend to you?



So Selindra would have me think, which indeed was the main cause of my anger, and her Tears.



I am not willing to be jealous, nor yet so fond, as not to be sensible, when there is just cause; Ordella let us smooth our browes, and observe them farther, such a guilt cannot be long hid, and untill we be confirm'd by some better proof, 'tis unworthy in us to suspect them, on our surmises only, since what they do, is by our direction.



'Tis not my nature to judg ill of any, and I hope Selindra will deserve better; I am converted, and now we are thus secure, why may not you go to the Army, and leave Selindra with me; Pollidor in your absence, may Court her in publick, which will confirm my Father in his mistake, when he sees me dislike it.



I like it well Ordella: what will you do this Evening?



I have some businesse for a while; Selindra after supper, will meet me in the Garden, pray come to us there.



Bid your Boy attend us with his Lute then, it may so happen that I must take leave this night, for I hear that the Hungarian Army comes on apace.




The Emperor sends you word Sir, that Cecropius has deliver'd all the Frontier Towns to the Hungarians, and himself advances in the head of that Army towards us.



Dispatch a Post unto Antillacus, bid him advance towards the Traytor, I will this night set forth, and by day break shall reach him.



Sir, Antillacus retreats before the Enemy, his men fewer in Number, are so disheartned by Cecropius's revolt, they dare not look on the Hungarians.



Let the  call Pollidor, to my Sisters Chamber presently, we will take leave there, and depart immediatly; Come Ordella, this is somewhat quicker work then I expected; bid my servants make what hast they can, to meet me here at my return.





My Lord, since you went hence, the Court has been in daily Tumults about Phillocles his Love unto your Daughter.



Is Selindra so much in favour with the Gods, as to be look'd on by Prince Phillocles?



The Prince seeks no other Heaven but her, and as the World thinks she neglects him, and Loves one Pollidor.



Madam, I cannot raise my Faith to what you say, nor can I joy in such a blessing, untill I know the Emperor does approve it; pray Madam, where may I find Selindra?



She is now with the Princess in the Garden, I shall let her know your Lordship is return'd.




You obliege me Madam;  though I have been long ab∣sent, I have not been Idle, nor could I well have made more haste hither, cousidering how many great Affairs I have dispatch'd, since I went hence.




Oh Sir! you are welcome, I have with some trouble, and some fear expected your Returne.



Madam, I stay'd the longer, by reason of those Tumults I found at Belgrade, a false Astella was set up by Euticus, and his faction, but so soon as I made known, that you liv'd, both sides laid down their Arguments, though not their Armes, which I advis'd as the best means to bring you home in safety.



But why does our Army enter Greece.



That's the riddle Madam, the old Fox Cecropius gave no∣tice to the Hungarians, that the Emperor purpos'd in his own person to invade them, since Phillocles had refus'd it, and would by a conquest joyn that Crown to his Empire; he insinuates also, that if the Hunga∣rians would assist him in his design, he would make the Emperor unable to harme them, by delivering up all the Frontier Towns into their hands.



And what is his design?



Onely by their power, to force the Emperor to deliver you, and one Pollidor up to him: This I perswaded Orsanes, and the rest to hearken too, and my long stay was to see the Towns deliver'd to Orsa∣nes, which is done, and Cecropius fooll'd by his vaine hopes, Marches in the head of your Army, which comes on apace, only to receive your Commands Madam.



The Gods reward you, for I never can;  but here is Newes Periander, beyond what you tell; Pollinesso Lives, lives here under the name of Pollidor; and see where he comes;  Oh! my Brother we

are happy above our wish; this is Periander, who has so much obli∣ged me.



I hope I shall live to thank you Sir.



Sir, I am rewarded in the good I have done, if my services do prove such in your esteem.



My Brother, you must dispatch Periander back unto the Ar∣my, to give Orsanes and the rest, notice that you live;  Cecropius has rendred all the Towns, and comes on demanding to have me deliver'd to his lust.



Wee shall order him at leisure, our care to informe Orsanes, must indeed be speedy;  Periander, though I cannot command, I may intreat you that know our Affaires, to return unto Orsanes, and give him notice, that I intend this night, to set forth with Phillocles, and will come over to him, with my first opportunity; bid him march fairly through the Country, and take heed that Antillacus ingage him not to fight, till I Arrive; if you ride hard; you may be back with us, be∣fore we part from hence, for I hear Cecropius is not far off.



By my speed Sir, judge my Zeal to serve you.



As you passe by my Lodgings, pray send all my servants to attend me in the next Room, from hence we shall take Horse this Eve∣ning;  Now Astella, methinks the Gods do smile on Hungary, and

on us; if Ordella would be gracious! Pollinesso were most happy; How does my Love prosper, Astella?



I can make no certain Judgment on it yet.



Canst thou not procure me one smile before we part?



'Twill not be possible, if you depart this night; I could wish we had more time, because I now propose some pleasure in my woeing for you; methinks the storms that I have rais'd, look merrily, now the calm is certain, and so nigh, I have so light a heart, that I could play with dangers, if any were within my reach.







Let me Embrace and Kisse thee, my Dear, Dear Selindra; thou art so great a Joy unto my Soul, that I lament to part one minute from thee; when we meet next, we shall Embrace more freely.
Embraces.



That you must go from me, grieves me; must you needs go with Phillocles? may you not stay one day longer with me?




I dare not, do not weep thus, thy Tears will prove ill Omens, and I become a superstitious fool, to fear I know not why!



How can I chuse but lament to part with, what is dearer to me then my life; pray do not go this night, bestow this night on me.



I swear thou makest me sad, prethee speak more chearfully, and dry thy Eyes, least Phillocles perceive thy Tears, and Ordella do discover us, and so unmask us both, before we be prepar'd.



No matter for their jealousie, are not we above the reach of malice now?

Phillocles drawes, and offering to strike, is held by Ordella.


Not yet Selindra, we may be ere-long, till then, 'tis not good to provoke any, it is by your advice to, that we should be still disguis'd.



Yes, and 'tis my opinion still; but when Phillocles is gone who can discover us?



The Gods, who will not suffer such impiety to be longer hid, let me loose Ordella, and I will cut these twisted Monsters into Atomes that their united Souls, may so expire together.




Why thus inraged Sir?



Canst thou ask false man? we have heard and seen, all that has past between ye.



It may be so, and yet be mistaken, in all you have heard, and seen too;  Sir, if you will have a little patience, you shall see your mi∣stake, and be sorry for this injurious Language, when you know to whom you speak.

Phillocles offers to runne at him, but is held by Ordella.


Good Madam, perswade the Prince to hear us, and there will be no cause to fight.



Thou worst of Women, how dares thy lips move to∣wards me?



For Heavens sake Madam hear us, you will too late repent this rashnesse else; we are both as innocent, as you can wish.



Brother you may do well to hear them, and revenge at lea∣sure; pray lay by this anger for a while, and take it up again, when you see cause; they are in your power to punish, as you please.



I thank thee Ordella, they are so;  I am tame, and now you may say on.



Sir, if you have heard; and seen what past between us, I do confess you have reason for your anger, and our fondnesse doth deserve blame, but not death; 'tis true, that we have negligently shew'd, what we might better have conceal'd; necessity therefore now compells us to discover what we yet meant not to do, that our Innocency may no longer suffer.









Madam, the Prince his absence, gives me opportunity to begge your pardon for Selindra, and my self, who have too long hid our affecti∣ons from you, and our selves also; for she is my Sister, and will ere long, appear worthy Phillocles his best thoughts, and I do hope my self, when I shall dare to be my self, may have leave to say, my life is vowed to serve you.



Sir, you are mistaken, I am not to be deceved by this slight trick;   you would gaine time to escape my brothers vengeance.



No Madam, you will shortly see, I am above it; and if 




Seize on that Traytor.




Tenedor, Periander, Tecknor, Treason;  what means this mad∣nesse
Phillocles? a reasonable man should hear another speak; if I do not satisfie all your doubts, you shall find that I dare meet your fury; and shall raise stormes as high, as you can wish to see.



Pray unfold this mistery, I do attend you.

Pollidor leads Selindra to Phillocles who steps back from her. 


Let this pledge speak for us both, for I can have no other in∣terest, then to give her up into your Armes Sir, send your Guards off, and this riddle shall be as easie, and as pleasant, as it now looks harsh,

 Phillocles will blush, when he shall know from whom he slyes, and by whose hand offer'd to him.



I understand you not, nor do I care;  hark, what noyse is this?






What's this? a Warre within his owne Walls; Phillo∣cles is this a time for private brawls? when the Hungarians are at your Gates?



I am ready to depart Sir; and shall send them back, much faster then they now come on; I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect.




What Newes brings Gillon?



Antillacus sends you word Sir, that you must prepare to receive him with the Army, under the Town Walls, his souldiers have so many pannick fears, he dares not lead them out, to face the Enemy, he also wishes that Prince Phillocles would draw out the Court Regiments, to hearten his dejected men.



I think 'twere better to receive them within the Walls, untill their shame, do out-face their fears; Tell Antillacus, my old Armes are on, and that I will my self strike the Traytor in the face.



Hast back good Gillon, and tell Antillacus; if he can defend his Camp till I Arrive, I wish him not to move this way; my looks will send those ungratefull people home, if not, I have a flame within me, will consume them all.  I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect.



Repaire it by your speedy succour, I shall take present order for what the Town can afford us.





Ordella, I have a Warre within, that will consume me.



I hope this great Affair will divert your thoughts, and remove your trouble.



For some few dayes it may;  farewell my Dear Sister;  and when I return, you shall hear from me Sir.





I shall not stay behind you Sir, my wounds is not so ill, are to keep me from waiting on you; when this hurry, and your anger is over, I hope you will be at leasure to hear me out, and be pleas'd rather to finde you can be mistaken, then me guilty.



I will by no means suffer it, 'twill be no charity, to permit you to hazzard Selindra's interest, by new dangers.



Sir, your scornes, shall have no more power to stay me, then your anger has, I will along.



But you shall not; I do suspect you will betray me to your Country-men, and dare not trust you with me.



All this will not do, I know you do not doubt me that way? and I do swear, unlesse you break the bonds of Hospitality, (and do im∣prison me) I will along.



And I will rather do it, then have your company, if you de∣sist not.



Phillocles will not so much blemish his great Name! imprison me that sav'd your life;  me, that am vowed to stand, or fall with you;   Sir, I must chide you now, you do too long hold up a causelesse an∣ger, you know not why; too long neglect the great Affair that calls you hence;   I will stay no longer for you, but go do the work, be∣fore you come.




Stay Pollidor, thou hast confounded all my reason, such a mix∣ture of Noblenesse, nee'r met with such a Treachery till now; though I do know thee false, and do resolve with my own hand to Kill thee; I will trust thee this way, and do now intreat thee to stay till to mor∣row, that my Father comes.







Oh! my dear Sister, once more farewell,
I am now fall'n from Paradice to Hell.



The Gods go with you, and your action bless,
While I retire, and pray for your successe.




We will be gone Selindra, and face Phillocles, in the head of our own Army;  what newes Periander?




Sir, I am come to fetch you to your Army, I can convey you thither, before you are mist here.



We are ready now, how farre off is the Army?



You may hear their Drums Madam, at the City Gates.



Come, let us hasten to our Troops:  
When instruments of Warre, from Warre release,
'Tis a good Omen, to a happy peace.
Exeunt.










Thou art a bold ill man Cecropius, thou art ungratefull to thy Country, and my trust.



Sir, I have but hid my gratitude under this old Armor, which is onely now put on, to obtain what my prayers could not,   I demand justice Sir, for Cleonels blood, which you have hitherto denied me, in fa∣vour to his Murtherers.



This fained modesty, is more impudent, then thy Armes are, thou knowest I was more eager then thy self, to do justice on those that slew thy Son, and thou seest clearly, our Lawes cannot touch them for his fall.



Was not Cleonel slain by Pollidor? and was not Selindra accessary? and does not our Lawes condemn such Murtherers to Dye?



No, thou knowest they do not, thou knowest thy Son was by a just hand punish'd, and that Pollidor deserves prayse and reward.



Good Sir, spend no more breath on this vile man, the slave is not worthy your anger:   Foolish Hungarians, ingratefull perjur'd peo∣ple:   Orsanes, I did not look for this from you;  but my sword shall speak my vengeance.




Prince Phillocles has not in Grcece a more faithful servant then Orsanes; Pray Sir lay by this passion but a few minutes, and you shall see that I have labour'd hard, to bring your own desires, to their wish'd ends:   and Cecropius the main Agent in it all!



Why do your Actions, and your words so disagree? Orsanes knowes our Grecian hearts cannot be compell'd, when we have time to draw our Swords.



Great Sir, your actions, have enought declar'd your worth unto the World, and to our Nation most; which we shall ever own, though now by some necessity compell'd, we do appear as enemies, in the behalf of this good man, who has ingag'd us to deliver up a Lady call'd Selindra, and one Pollidor, to his hands, which he by strong argu∣ments assur'd us, would be for your, and for our future happinesse: this done, we are all at Phillocles command.



Those two you mention, are of late become unworthy of my thoughts; yet your engagement was barbarous, to undertake you know not what: sound the charge.




Hold Phillocles, I have entertain'd you with discourse thus long, only till I might hear that shout behind us:  hark, hark, Sir! Now the time is come, for us to keep our Oaths made to Cecropius, and to manifest our love to Phillocles,  make way there for the King.


The Hungarian Army opens, and through them enter Pollinesso crown'd, leading in Astella; Orsanes delivers them both unto Cecropius.


What Riddle's this? what wonders do I see?




Take away that shadow of a King, to present death Orsanes; and now Selindra you are once more at my dispose: and you Sir, that think you can command the World! shall find this weak old Arm, can justifie my title here.



Have I now perform'd my oath unto the great Cecropius?







I must then set this Lady free, from the danger of our Swords.  





Long live the King of Hungary.







Pollidor! and Selindra! why is he crown'd!



They are confederates with Cecropius, on which design they have thus long liv'd amongst us.



Orsanes, lay that Monster, at his Masters feet; there to re∣ceive a Doom worthy his treachery, and ingratitude.




Pollidor, what mean these misteries?



All respects to Phillocles.



How comes Selindra then with thee? and that Crown upon thy head? I tell thee Pollidor, if Selindra can neglect me, I can con∣temn her; and not envy thee that mis-becoming Crown thou wearest, which I will tear from off thy swelling browes, and trample on it, when 'tis mine by a second conquest.




 Will Phillocles forsake the List? fly from such a foe! send for the Princess Ordella then, that we may meet on equall termes.



You are merry Sir, my gentle temper I see, begets contempt from your great courage.



No Sir, you are mistaken still, I am your servant, and do value Phillocles, more then he can contemne me:  Orsanes, bring my Stan∣dard hither:  carry this, and my Crown, unto the Princess Ordella; lay

them at her feet, and if she dains to take them up, tell her your King, with his whole people, do wait on her Commands.



I understand not what these Riddles mean!



If Phillocles be yet at leasure to hear me speak, I shall soon re∣move this wonder?



If Pollidor prove worthy, I shall not trust my Eyes nor Ears for ever.



But when Prince Phillocles shall know that Pollinesso speaks, he will believe no hand has more right, to deliver up Astella into his Arms, then I: Do you not know me yet Sir?

He pulls off his Perriwig and patch from his Eye.


Nor yet know my self!   Antillacus, do I wake? or is this a Phantosm that I think I see?




'Tis as strange to me, Sir!



While my Sons wonder lasts, let me imbrace you Sir, and ob∣taine both yours, and Astellas pardon, and chide you both in the same breath; why did you suffer us to walk so long in this unhappy dark∣nesse? and runne so many hazzards, which this light would have a∣voided.



There was no other way to obtain this light, while Cecropius eclips'd your glory Sir.



Does Pollinesso live? can he forget my crimes? and forgive my blindnesse!



Can Phillocles pardon my concealment? by which he was so blinded?




There is but one happinesse on earth beyond holding Polli∣nesso thus!



To me too, there can be onely one above it!  and that is Ordellas leave to love her:  but Sir, have you no room for Selindra in your heart?




I dare not look that way: I dare not have a hope so high, as pardon from her.  I am so full of guilt, that I dare not live longer to think of my unworthinesse.




What have I done Sir, that you should be thus cruel to me! will you not look on me?




I shall blush to death, if you speak thus again!



Will Phillocles turn from me ever?



Yes Madam, as asham'd to look on you; I have a guilt within, that takes my manhood from me!  shall I dare to think you can for∣give my unworthy jealousie?



If you can forgive me that provok'd you to it? I can meet you thus.



And I, fall as low as Earth will let me, to receive your pardon.





I am so much amaz'd at what I see, that I know not which way to turne me!



This way, Ordella, if you will by me, be guided to felicity?  this is Pollinesso's wish too, if I mistake not!




'Tis my ambition Sir, my highest hope on this side Heaven.



And my honour, that Pollinesso has such thoughts for me; but Sir, 'twill ask some time for me to raise my wishes to such a value of your worth, that we may meet on equal termes.



Pollinesso's merit, and his worth is such, that when he sayes he Loves;  'tis argument enough to gaine the greatest Queen:   Ordella, the Gods smile upon us now:  and you, Sir, I hope concurre with Heaven in our Felicities.



My prayers and my blessings shall not be wanting: let Polli∣nesso give sentence on Cecropius, before we go unto the Temple.



Let him live for ever banish'd from this happy Climate, which he has so long polluted with his venimous breath.



Antillacus see it done.





Madam, can you pardon my disguise?



I cannot well tell what to answer! to find Selindra worthy, is a concerne greater then Astella can be to me; and that you now are Astella, does not more raise my wonder, then that you were Selindra, does confirme my love, and my respects to you, Madam.



I have a heart too full of joy to keep this distance any longer?




We now loose time, that might be better spent,
In sacrificing for this blest event!



Lead on then to the Temple, and proclaime
A publick feast, in bright Astellas name;
While we do march in a triumphant state,
That all the City may participate
Our joyes, now Phillocles captivity
Is chang'd into a triple Victory.

