





RUN, and tell Mrs. Warner, my Lord is at hand; and bid the butler send me a bottle of hock.
(Throws himself along the hall chairs, wiping his forehead)
Phew! the months have jumbled out of their places, and we have July in September.









Ah, my dear creature! how have you done these fifty ages?



Why, methinks, you are grown mighty grand, or you would have come to the still-room to ask; will you chuse any chocolate?



Why don't you see I am dead? absolutely dead; and, if you was to touch me, I should shake to meer dust, like an Egyptian mummy. Because it was not provoking enough to lounge away a whole summer in the country, here am I driven up to town, as if the devil was at my heels in the shape of our hopeful heir; who has neither suffered my Lord nor me to rest one moment, thro' his confounded impatience to see his uncle.



Umph, he'll have enough of the old gentleman presently. He is the very moral of my poor dear lady, his sister, who never was at peace herself, nor suffer'd any one else to be so. Such a house as we have had ever since he came! why he is more full of importance and airs than a bailiff in possession; and hectors over Miss Mortimer, 'till she almost keeps her chamber to avoid him.



Hates Miss Mortimer! why, here 'll be the devil to pay about her, I suppose?



Hate her? ay, that he does. He look'd, as if he could have kill'd her, the moment she came down to see him; and got into his chamber presently after, where he sends for me. "Who is this young woman, Mrs. What's your name?" says he. Why, sir, says I, she is the orphan of a Colonel Mortimer, whose intimacy with my Lord, says I "Pho, pho, says he, all that I know, woman; what does she do in this house?" says he; his face wrinkling all over,
  3
like cream when it's skimming. Why, sir, says I, her father unluckily died, just before the Duke his brother, and so could not leave her one shilling of all that fine fortune; so my Lord intends to marry her to Mr. Woodville, says I. "He does? cries he; heav'n be prais'd I'm come in time to mar that dainty project, however. You may go, woman, and tell Miss, I don't want any thing more to-night." So up goes I to Miss Mortimer, and tells her all this. Lord! how glad she was, to find he intended to break the match, tho' she can't guess what he means.



Upon my soul, I think, it is full as hard to guess what she means. What the devil, will not my Lord's title, fortune, and only son, be a great catch for a girl without a friend or a shilling?



Ay; but I could tell you a little story, would explain all. You must know,
(sitting down; a loud knocking.)




Zounds, here's my Lord!





Lord Glenmore and the Governor meet; the latter hobbling.



You are welcome to England, brother! I am sorry your native air pays you so ill a compliment after sixteen years absence.



'Faith, my Lord, and so am I too, I promise you: I put up with these things tolerably well in the Indies; I did not go there to be happy; but,
  4
after all my labours, to find I have just got the money when it is out of my power to enjoy it, is a cursed stroke: like a fine ship of war, I am only come home to be dismasted and converted into an hospital. However, I am glad you hold it better: I don't think you look'd as well when we parted. My sister, poor Susan! she is gone too: well, we can never live a day the longer for thinking on't. Where's Frank? is he still the image of his mother?



Just as you left him, but that the innocence of the boy is dignified by the knowledge of the man.



He will hardly remember his old uncle! I did love the rogue, that's the truth on't; and never look'd at my money-bags but I thought of him. However, you have provided him a wife?



I have; you saw her on your arrival, I suppose, for I left her in town to attend a sick aunt. Poor Mortimer! he died one month before the Duke his brother, and missed a fine title and estate. You know how I loved the honest fellow, and cannot wonder I took home his orphan'd daughter, as a match for Woodville.



Brother, brother! you are too generous; it is your foible, and artful people know how to convert it to their own advantage.



It is, if a foible, the noblest incident to humanity. Sophia has birth, merit, accomplishments; and wants nothing but money to qualify her for any rank.



Can she have a worse want on earth? Birth, merit, accomplishments, are the very things that render money more essential: if she had been brought up in a decent plain way indeed, but she has the airs of a peeress already; and, if any philosopher doubts of the perpetual motion, I would advise him to watch the knocker of your house. Then you have, out of your precise decorums, removed your son, to make way for this flirt of fashion; and what is the consequence of rendering him thus early his own master?



If you run on thus, only to divert yourself, with all my heart; but, if you would throw a real imputation on Miss Mortimer's conduct, she is entitled to my serious defence. I never saw any good arise from secluding young people; and authorise Woodville and Sophia to live with that innocent elegance, which renders ev'ry rank easy, and prevents pleasure from seducing the heart, or ignorance the senses.



My Lord, I am amazed at you! was there ever yet a woman who didn't mean to pass for a goddess? Do they not gain upon us continually, 'till nothing of our prerogative remains but the name? We are wise fellows truly, if we do not keep down this humour of theirs as long as possible, by breeding them in retirement. Every tinsel fop will find address enough to convince wife she is an angel; and the husband must be lucky, as well as sensible, who reconciles her to treatment so inferior to her deserts. Woodville will agree with me, I dare say; for the character suits with his intended; and, 'faith, he will
  6
make but a modish husband, or he could not endure to see her flying about, like the queen-bee with the whole hive at her heels.



You are too captious, brother!



And you too placid, brother! if, like me, you had been toiling a third of your days to compass a favourite design, and found it disappointed at the moment you thought it complete, what would even your serene Lordship say and do? here have I promised myself a son in yours, an heir in yours; instead of which, 



His marriage with Miss Mortimer will not make him unworthy either title.



Never mention her name to me, I beg, my Lord! I hate all mode-mongers of either sex: the wife, I would have given him, has beauty without knowing it, innocence without knowing it, because she knows nothing else, and to surprize you further forty thousand pounds without knowing it nay, to bring all your surprizes together, is my daughter without knowing it.



Your daughter? why have you married since my sister's death? your daughter by her, you lost before you went abroad.



Yes, but I shall find her again I believe I know you will call this one of my odd whims as usual, but we all have some, witness this dainty project of yours; and so I will tell you the truth in spite of that project. from the very birth of this girl, I saw her mother would spoil her, and, had she liv'd, proposed kidnapping Miss in her infancy.



Kidnap your own daughter! why brother I need only prove this to obtain a commission of lunacy, and shut you up for life.



Why, tho' my wife was your Lordship's sister, I will venture to tell you she was plaguy fantastical, and contriv'd to torment me as much with her virtues, as others by their vices such a fuss about her delicacy, her sensibility, and her refinement, that I could neither look nor speak, without offending one or the other; and execrated the inventor of the jargon ev'ry hour in the four and twenty: a jargon, I resolved my girl should never learn; and heav'n no sooner took her mother, heaven be praised for all things, than I dispatch'd her draggle-tailed French governess; made a bonfire of ev'ry book on education; whip'd Miss into a post-chaise (under a pretence of placing her in a nunnery) instead of which, I journey'd into Wales and left her under the care of a poor curate's wife, whose name was up as the best housewife in the whole country; then return'd, with a solemn history of her death in the small-pox.



Well, this is indeed astonishing! an admirable tutoress truly for my niece!



Yes, but there's a better jest than that 



Indeed! Is that possible?



How do you think I contrived to make them obey my instructions? I saw they suspected I was some rich humorist, and was afraid they would, after all, make a little bit of a gentlewoman of her, for which reason, except the first year in advance, they never had a single shilling of my money.



This is almost incredible! and so you left your only child to the charity of strangers?



No, no, not so bad as that neither. You remember my honest servant, Hardy? after the poor fellow's leg was shot off in my tent, I promis'd him a maintenance; so entrusting him with the secret, order'd him to live in the neighbourhood, have an eye on the girl, and claim her if ill-used: fine accounts I had from him, 'faith! the old parson and his wife, having no children, and not finding any one own her, gave out she was theirs, and doated on her; in short, she is the little wonder of the country; tall as the palm-tree! with cheeks, that might shame the drawing-room; and eyes, will dim the diamonds I have brought over to adorn them. This confounded gout has kept me in continual alarm, or else she should have spoke for herself.



Why then does not Hardy bring her up to you?



Why for two very sufficient reasons: in the first place, that identical parson paid him the last compliment, that is, buried him, a twelvemonth ago; and in the second, they would hardly entrust her to any man but him who deliver'd her to them. Here was a girl, my Lord, to support your title, of which I dare swear you are as fond as ever: she would have brought you a race of true Britons; instead of which, from the painted dolls and unjointed Macaronies of these days, we shall produce our own enemies, and have a race of Frenchmen born in England.



I thank your intention, brother; but am far from wishing the chief accomplishments of Woodville's Lady should be the making cream cheeses, goats whey, and alder wine.



Let me tell your Lordship, women were never better than when those were their chief accomplishments. But I may be ridiculous my own way, without being singular. Harcourt shall have my girl, and my money too. Cream cheeses, quotha? no, no, making cream faces is an accomplishment which the belles of these days oftener excel in.



I would not advise you to publish this opinion, Governor!



But where is this son of yours? sure he has not totally forgot his old uncle?



He will be here immediately.



Nay, I must e'en take an old man's fate, and follow his mistress without complaint.



You have no reason for the reproach; this is not his hour for visiting Miss Mortimer.



Miss Mortimer! ha, ha, ha! why, do you think I took her for his mistress? what, I warrant, I can tell you news of your own family, though I have hardly been three days in it? Woodville keeps a girl, and in great splendor! nay, they tell me, that the unconscionable young rogue encroaches so far on the privileges of threescore, as to intend marrying the slut.







There's no jest like a true one, ha, ha, ha, how foolish you look! this is your innocent elegance!  10
this is the blessed effect of letting him live out of your own house! 



Pr'ythee reserve your raillery, sir, for some less interesting occasion; to have my views thus in a moment overturned, where does she live?



Ha, ha, ha! oh, the difference of those little syllables me and thee! now you can guess what made me so peevish, I suppose? as to where Miss lives, I have not heard; but somewhere near his lodgings. A devilish fine girl she is, by the bye. Ah, I told you, twenty years ago, you would spoil this boy, entirely spoil him.



Zounds! Governor, you have a temper Socrates himself could not have supported; is this a time for old sayings of twenty years ago? finish dressing; by that time your nephew will be here, and I shall have reflected on this matter.



With all my heart, 'tis but a boyish frolick, and so good morning to you. Here; where's my triumvirate? Pompey, Anthony, Caesar!
Exit.



A boyish frolick truly! many a foolish fellow's life has been marked by such a boyish frolick! but her residence is the first object of my enquiry. Vane!


Is not my son come?



This moment, my Lord; and walks till the Governor is ready.



Vane! I have deserved you should be attached to me, and I hope you are?



My Lord! (what the devil is he at? 
aside.



This strange old Governor has alarm'd me a good deal; you are more likely to know, whether with reason, than I can be. Have you heard any thing important of my son lately?







Not that he keeps a mistress? what does the fool smile at?



I did not think that any thing important, my Lord.



I do, sir and am told a more important thing: that he even thinks of marrying her; now, though I cannot credit this, I would chuse to know what kind of creature she is; could not you assume a clownish disguise, and, scraping an acquaintance with her people, learn something of her character and designs?



Doubtless, to oblige your Lordship, I could do such a thing. But, if Mr. Woodville's sharp eyes (and love will render them still sharper) should discover me, I might chance to get a good drubbing in the character of a spy.



Oh, it is very improbable he should suspect you: at the worst, name your employer, and your bones are safe. The office perhaps is not very agreeable, but I impose few such on you: execute it well, and you shall remember it with pleasure. I will detain Woodville 'till you are ready; and, as I doubt not that his next visit will be to this
  12
creature; by following him, you will find out where she lives. Prepare then as quick as possible, and send me word when you are ready; for, 'till then, I will not suffer him to depart.
Exit.



A pretty errand this his formal Lordship has honor'd me with! um; if I betray him, shall I not get more by it? ay, but our heir is such a sentimental spark, that, when his turn was serv'd, he might betray me. Were he one of your hare-um scare-um, good-natur'd, good-for-nothing fellows, it would go against my conscience to do him an ill turn. I believe, I stand well in my Lord's will, if Counsellor Puzzle may be trusted, (and, when he can get nothing by a lye, perhaps he may tell truth) so, like all thriving men, I will be honest because it best serves my interest.
Exit.







How tedious is this uncle! how tedious every body! was it not enough to spend two detestable months from my love, merely to preserve the secret, but I must be tantalized with seeing without arriving at her? yet how, when I do see her, shall I appease that affecting pride of a noble heart conscious too late of its own inestimable value? why was I not uniformly just? I had then spared myself the bitterest of regrets.





Woodville! how do'st? don't you, in happy retirement, pity me my Ealing and Acton marches and countermarches, as Foote has it? but, methinks, thy face is thinner and longer, than a forsaken nymph's who is going through the whole ceremony of a nine month's repentance. What, thou'st fall'n in love? rustically too? nay, prithee don't look so very lamentable!



Ridiculous: keep this Park-conversation for military puppies! how can we have an eye or ear for pleasure, when our fate hangs over us undecided?



I guess what you mean: but why make mountains of mole-hills? Is the rosy-fisted damsel so obstinately virtuous?



Imagine a fair favorite of Phoebus in all respects; since, while her face caught his beams, her heart felt his genius! imagine all the graces hid under a straw hat, and russet gown; imagine 



You have imagined enough of conscience! and now for a few plain facts, if you please?



To such a lovely country maid I lost my heart last summer; and soon began to think romances the only true histories; all the toilsome glories recorded by Livy, phantoms of pleasure, compared with the mild enjoyments described by Sir Philip Sydney; and happiness not merely possible in a cottage, but only possible there.



Well; all the philosophers (ancient and modern) would never be able to convince me, a coach was not a mighty pretty vehicle; and the lasses as good-natur'd in town as country: but pray let us know, why you laid aside the pastoral project of eating fat bacon and exercising a crook all day, that thou might'st conclude the evening with the superlative indulgence of a peat-fire and a bed stuft with straw?



Why, faith, by persuading the dear girl to share mine.



Oh, now you talk the language of the world: and does that occasion thee such a melancholy face?



How ignorant are you both of me and her! ev'ry moment since I prevail'd, has only serv'd to convince me I can sooner live without ev'ry thing else than her; and this fatal leisure (caus'd by my absence with my father) she has employ'd in adding ev'ry grace of art to those of nature; till, thoroughly shock'd at her situation, her letters are as full of grief as love, and I dread to hear ev'ry hour I have lost her.



I dread much more to hear you have lost yourself Ah, my dear Woodville! the most dangerous charm of love is, ev'ry man conceits no other ever found out his method of loving: but, take my word for it, your Dolly may be brought back to a Milkmaid. Leave her to herself awhile, and she'll drop the celestials, I dare swear.



She is too noble: and nothing, but the duty I owe to so indulgent a father, prevents me from off'ring her all the reparation in my pow'r.



A fine scheme truly! why, Woodville, ar't frantic? To predestinate yourself among the horned cattle of Doctors Commons, and take a wife for the very reason which makes so many spend thousands to get rid of one 



To withdraw an amiable creature from her duty, without being able to make her happy is to me a very serious reflection; nay, I sinned, I may say, from virtue: and, had I been a less grateful son, might have call'd myself a faultless lover.



Well, well, man! you are young enough to trust to time, and he does wonders. Don't go now and ruin yourself with your uncle; I have found him out already, and advertise you, none of your formal obsequious bows and respectful assents will do with him; having been cheated in former times of half his fortune by a parasite, he mistrusts ev'ry one, and always mistakes politeness for servility. Maintain your own opinion, if you would win his; for he generally grows undetermined, the moment he knows those around him are otherwise: and, above all, shake off this mental lethargy.



I will endeavour to take your advice. Should she fly I were undone for ever! but you are no judge of my Cecilia's sincerity. How should you know those qualities, which rise with ev'ry following hour? Can you think so meanly of me, as that I could be duped by a vulgar wretch? a selfish wanton?
  16
oh no! she possesses ev'ry virtue but the one I have robbed her of.
Exit.





Poor Frank! thy sponsors surely, by intutuition, characterized thee when they gave thee that name did I love your welfare less, I could soon ease your heart, by acquainting you of my marriage with Miss Mortimer; but now the immediate consequence would be this ridiculous match. How, if I apprize either my Lord or the Governor? both obstinate in different ways: I might betray only to ruin him. A thought occurs, my person is unknown to her chusing an hour when he is absent, I'll pay her a visit, offer her an advantageous settlement, and learn from her behaviour her real character and intentions.
Exit.

