




CHarming aboad, delightfull so∣litude,
Fair places where I first receiv'd my life
And love, old trees, cleer brooks, whose shade and murmur
Speak pity for my sorrowfull adventure,
Sweet Zephirs, Eccho, rocks, and silent forrests,

  8Be witnesses all of my secret griefs:
I am no more now that Zelinda some∣time
Adored by the worthiest Lovers of
The country round about; alas! I serve
Vnder the habit of a Slave, a traitor
With an unparraleld'd fidelity,
Traitor in Love, I meane, not otherwise,
A Hero, but ingratefull, one who slatters me
In my extream misfortune, yet would hate me,
If he knew that I Love him. Gentle trees,
Happy are you, although the rigourous •inter
Vseth you hardly, for when the fair Spring
Maketh the cold to cease, you suddenly
Resume your anciēt verdure, and at harvest▪
Vpon your branches wee see fruits, where formerly
Hung Isicles: my fortune's not so good;
Each of the seasons have twice chaung'd, since Love
Resolved to afflict me, all which time
I've languished continually, and could no•

Ptetend to the repose my heart hath lost:
He whom I love with so much constancy

•s false and fleeting; o Gods! here he come•









Ormin▪ I sought thee.



Sir, I sought you also.



Know that to morrow we will depart hence.



What! will you leave so soon your native country,
These cottages, these woods and these fair meadows?



I have not hid from thee that in those places
I love the sweet Fatima, a rich Master-peice
Of Heaven, and hop'd to see that Beauty here
So cherish'd and ador'd; but I have learn'd
That she is now at Tunis with her Father;
And though this happy residence may be said
To be a second Paradise, I cannot
See any fair thing here, since she is absent.



How happy is Fatima, and how miserable
Am I!  
aside.




How grievous is her absence to
My amourous soul! to render me by her,
To morrow by the break of day we'll take
Our way for Tunis, I shall be too happy,
If • ma• see her, and I do believe
That she will bear some part too in my joy;
She had no little trouble, I perceiv'd,

  10For my departure last, and without doubt
I'm not indifferent to her.




Her flame will not be quench'd.



That's all my hope.



And that is all my feare  
aside.








Cheer up, cheer up,
Smother your sighs, I have a counter poison
For all your sorrows.



Speak it then without
Holding us long in trouble.




First, if you please, to take a little breath.







I'm not dispos'd yet.



Oh thou mak'st me.
Suffer too much? tell it unto us quickly.



You might die with it.



Is't then some misfortune
Sent me by destiny?




You might die with it, but t'would be with joy;
Fatima yesterday late in the evening
Arrived in these quarters.








Yes, assure you, I have seen her.



Perhaps thou art deceiv'd.



I am no asse.
I did observe her well, and knew her per∣fectly.
Her Slave, who was my Mistresse formerly,
Entered just now with her into that wood.



Good Gods? do I not see her?








What lustre hath her eye,
What grace her gate?







I see a thousand new charms there.



Are you besotted? wil you not salute her?



No, to perform that complement, I'le give her

  12A visit, when I shall have without doubt
My soul lesse in disorder.




Who do not love so daintily, I will,
Without deferring it, make my addresse.



Without discovering our selves, we may
From hence know by the usage of the ser∣vant,
In what esteem the Master is at present.




ALABEZ, CHARIFA, FATIMA, ZEGRY, ORMIN.


SWeet Beauties welcome, from what quarters come you?



What means this insolent? Go on your way



How's this? instead of kisses and embraces,
As I expected, I am quarrel•d with:

Charifa, whence this change?



Begone, and leave us.



Thou actest well the scornfull.









Whom I know not.



I am much changed then
Since this last voyage; but thy soul is chāg'd
And not my visage, without doubt thy Mistresse
Hath better eyes, and more wit; she will know
An old, and a familiar acquaintance.



who are you then?











Should you not know him neither?
Is his name raz'd out of your memory?



Assuredly, Charifa, this man's mad.



How, Madam, is it possible you can
Forget the valiant Zegry?









What strange inconstancy is this? who e∣ver
Could have imagin'd it?  
aside.




That noble and illustrious successour
Of those brave warriers who even in Spain
Have gathered Lawrells, and brought home faire spoils,
Madam, your faithfull Lover, Zaida's bro∣ther.



Oh! I remember him.







You ask not how he doth.




Have I in his sweet person? happily
He's dead.







We are all mortall;
The Prophet hath his soul.



A faith full servant
Would have accompanied his Master; why
Art thou not dead too?



Only to •nrage thee.


  15Zegry discovering himself.


The Prophet hath his soul, o false Fati∣ma!
Is't thus you do expresse your goodness to me?
Deceitfull object, my return, I see,
Displeaseth you, who would despise me dead,
Must hate me living, I disturb with plea∣sure
That faithless joy which the delightfull news
Of my feign'd death procur'd you: I live still
Ingratefull, but I live no more for you:
M• passion is transform•d all into fury:
As much as I lov'd you, I now despise you:
My heart shakes of so rigourous a yoak:
Love raiseth no more sighs, nor fires within me,
Only I sigh that I us'd so much care
To please you, and if I burn yet, it is
With anger, not with love.




Answereth my wishes fully?  
a∣side.





Surpriseth, but no way afflicteth me;

  16My first discourse should make you under∣stand
That I'm not very tender hearted to you,
And, me thinks, after such a cleer con∣tempt
As was expressed there you might believe
Nothing should trouble me that comes from you,
Vnless your amourous addresse: I have
A thousand other Lovers braver far
Then you, and therefore I daign not to put you
In the rank of my conquests.




Is greater then your beauty, the charm is
Dissolv'd wherein I formerly was held;
Tis true, I sometime thought you beauti∣full;
But I was amourous, and therefore not
To be believed, having now my spirit
No more disordered, you cease to be fair
And I to be abused, whereas you
Pleased me formerly, it was because
It is impossible for me, when I
Am lov'd, to be insensible.




Heaven! what a strange opinion is this?

  17I never had but strong aversion for you.
All your indeavours serv'd but to displease me;
But though I hated you, I lov'd your Si∣ster,
And •t was for her sake that I feign'd to have
Some pitty for your passions; her prayer
A hundred times restain•d my hate, you sware
That your daies did depend upon my sight,
And yeelding unto her desites I did
Enforce mine eyes to smile, when my heart frown'd,
To the end not to be cause of your death.



Your eyes have never made a mortall wound.



Take heed that your do not revive again,
One Only of my looks darted more gently.
Can change this violent anger into love;
But I am verie nice of such a look,
It is too rich a price, Sir, for your conquest
I limit my desires to see you never,
Adieu, become wise, and leave me in peace.
  Exit Fatima.








YEs false Fatima, I will become wise,
Thy contempt is unjust, but mine is lawfull:
Since thou pretendest but to make thee hated,
I will obey thee, thy unworthy trophy,
My heart shal be no more, his charmes are broken,
His flames are quench'd; Alabez, follow her
Close at the heels, even unto her house;
But have a care not to discover thee.



Her pride's unjust, and not to be endur'd;
Your change herein is but too equitable,
O how wel should you do to free your heart
From the imperious captivity
Of such a cruel conquerour, you are
Born with too many fair advantages,
To obtain nothing but eternall wrongs;
There are Sir, other beauties in the world
VVhich would be glad to share their flame with yours,
To imitate your sighs, and which would tell you
That the resplendent honour of a crown
Is beneath that to be beloved of
An object that one loves Contempt in love
De•erves to be repayed with contempt,

  19And who refuseth, is not worthy of,
For the most part, the person that's refus'd.



How great my griefs are, and how grievous is
This proud contempt? o light, and wave∣ring Sex!
O black ingratitude! since love began
To trouble Lovers, was there ever torment
Equall to mine? I feel my heart infected
VVith all imaginary griefs.




Believe me, I know some that are much more
To be lamented, and if what I know
VVere reveald to you, you should have great cause
Of comfort by it.



Oh speak, and divert
The grief which doth oppresse me. of∣tentimes
A wretch is pleased in his misery
VVhen he sees that he suffers not alone.



O love, I pray thee make his heart grow tender
At the recitall of the evill which he
Hath caused me, oh make him Sensible
Of my sad sufferings?  
aside.

A young Beauty, Sir,
VVhose name and birth, if you please I'l conceal
Through decency, only thus much I'I tell you,

  20That she was neer to me and lov'd me deer∣ly,
Scarce yet attained to the fifteenth yeer,
When love and marriage was proposed to her,
And she commanded to expect for hus∣band
A man too lovely, and to much belov'd;
And who for his part was so farre from being
Warm•d with a mutuall flame, that he un∣lawfully
Took an affection for another object:
His faithfull Lover with grief understood it
But yet a worse misfortune afterward
Surprised her, th' ingratefull brak th' ac∣cord
Of the approaching marriage, and departed
For a long voyage without seeing her;
I can assure you that her grief was quick,
And anger ardent after this affront;
But yet her anger was lesse then her love:
Although, th' inconstant left her, she re∣tain'd him
Still in her soul, and valuing not her sex,
Nor fearing death, i th' habit of a man
She followed his steps.










More touch'd when you shall know the rest: scarce was she
Embarked on the sea, when by a new,
And worse misfortune certain infamous ro∣vers
Surpris'd her vessel, and not long time after
They sould her unto that ingratefull man,
Who falsly and unworthly forsook her:
And so at last it hapened that Fortune
Aswell as Love would put her into chains:
But she still without changing heart, or habit.
Found sweetnes in this double slavery;
Far from desiring to be free, she follow'd
Her faithles friend into his native coun∣try,
And fearing not to be discovered,
Serv•d this deceitfull Master without hope,
Indeavoured to please him, and therein
Prosper•d so well, that he esteem'd her zeal,
And conceal'd nothing from her; but this kindnes
Was not a cure, but corsive to her grief,
Because it made her privy to the happi∣nes
Her Rivall did enjoy in the affection

  22Of him she lov'd, who every day protested
Vnto her, that rather then lose her love,
He'd lose his life.









Gods! he groweth tender,
Love be propitious to me,  
aside.

Sir, what lay you,
Is not she more then you to be lamented?
Compared to her torments, your afflictions
Are sweet. You answer not.



Yes, yes, I grant it
I ought to hate her, but I've too much weaknes:
Oh fair Fatima!



Oh my hard misfortune!



Ormin, What charms she hath?




To what I said.



What spak'st thou to me of?



Of a young maid
Oppress'd and injured in love.




Were otherwise imploy'd, and troubled,

  23I heard thee not, at least I have forgotten.



You seemed to compassionate her grief,
And her misfortune very much.




I onely thought upon my proper grief.



What! shall th'ingratefull and cruel Fatima
Although she quits your heart thus, have the glory
To live still in your memory? oh no,
Banish her thence; but if you'l think of her,
To ease your evills a little▪ imploy your thought
Onely to think of her defects; remember
That she's too proud, and fancy to your self
That she's not fair enough, to hould so no∣ble
And such a faithfull Lover as you are▪
That there is nothing charming in her eyes,
Nor in her cheeks, that her proportion,
Her posture, stature, gate, and carriage
Have nothing commendable, that her witt  



Ormin, no more, I cannot suffer yet
She should be injur'd; that ingrateful Beauty,
Who laughs with scorn at my sad languish∣ment,
Hath no defect at all but her fierce rigour;

  24And I fear that in spight of this defect,
My violent love will triumph o'r mine an∣ger.



What, shall Fatima be so proud, and you
So humble? shall she be compos'd of Ice,
And you of fire? must you persist to love her,
When she despiseth you? oh fall no more
Into that fatall errour. It belongs, Sir
But to low spirits to suffer without hate,
Such a contempt; to leave what flyeth us,
Is little trouble, and when hope is quench'd,
Love should be querched also.




Ormin, is verie true, I should indeed
Follow Fatima in her lightnes to me,
I should in her unkindnes trace her steps,
I should be as insensible as she's
Severe and rigourous, my flam'es an er∣rour,
I doe confesse it, but I love this errour,
Thy faithfull counsels are not seasonable,
Love hath not yet given place unto my rea∣son,
I'm born to languish, and to die for her;
Although she be ingratefull she is not
The lesse faire for it.



The false hope that flatter'd me
Fled in a moment; miserable Lover,
And too unjust!  
aside








FRiend, I am very joyfull
To meet thee.



My content is still compleat,
When I behold thy face, as in thy absence,
Nothing seems sweet unto me: Now I see
Th'art habited like us, this garment is
Well made.



I took it just now in th'apartment
I have in thy abode.




Becomes thee rarely; but for an Almansor,

It is too much abasement.




Takes nothing from the lustre of the merit,
In imitating thee, I cannot erre;
Thee, whose heart is as noble as thy race▪
And unto whose aid in an eminent danger
I owe my life.



The Shepheards of this wood
And fair Campania, are descended from
Those Heros, who in time pass'd conquer'd Spain
From those renowned Moors, whose great ex∣ploits
Made the Kings of a hundred Christian people

  26Tremble for fear, and who seeing Tunis con∣quer'd
By Charls the fifth, conserve here in these places
Their glory and their freedom, secretly
Dispose the hearts of the most Zealous Kings
To drive the Christiās frō this desolate coūtry,
And are in readines to joyn themselves,
And to encrease the first fair levies which
Shall be imploy'd on such an expedition.



I know that this fair desert's like a Court:
But hast thou heard yet that Gomella is
Return'd heer? suffer me at present, Zegry,

To leave thee, he is my familiar friend,
And I owe him a visit.








Yes, that Beauty hath receiv'd
The light from brave Gomella; friend adiew
I will return to thee with speed, excuse me
At present, I must speak with him upon
A busines of importance 
Exit Almansor.









A busines of importance? oh that word
Redoubleth my affliction; to marry

Fatima, without doubt, is his design:
Oh Heavē? hast thou ordain•d that, to make up
The full proportion of my misery,

  27•y dearest friēd should rob me of my Mistresse?

•las! if this be true, grief, fure will kill me;

•ear Ormin, let us use our best indeavour

〈◊〉 hinder this misfortune; I expect

〈◊〉 only remedy from thy advise.

•he most resplendent wit yeildeth to thine

〈◊〉 point of knowledge, I have observ'd in thee

•omething thats great, and extraordinary;
Thy judgment charms me, and thy care sur∣priseth me.




〈◊〉, I'm your Slave, and glory to be so.




〈◊〉 no, I make thee free, henceforth be thou








•easeth my fancy lesse then the chains which






•is zeal so little common,

•akes me grow tender, and amazeth me.

〈◊〉, quit thy fetters, Ormin, I commmand it,






••nce tis your pleasure, I obey;

•las! what have I said, Love, can I be

〈◊〉 liberty, when my heart is not free?








FATIMA, ZAIDA, CHARIFA, MEDIN•



ENter again, sweet Zaida, ceremony
Between us should be banish•d, where• will you
Trouble your self unnecessarily?



Since you will have it so, I'l go no further



I may assure my self then ere we part,
That Adibar shall have no free admittanc•

To your society, I have already
Told you, that formerly he loved me;
But now I know that you give laws to 〈◊〉

And I have cause to hope that, if you scorn 〈◊〉

He may return unto his first subjection.




Fatima, be assur'd than he shall be
Repuls'd, his love will be but troublesom•

But if you love me, forget not to feign
Some kindnes for my brother; I beseech
For my sake give him cause to hope a little



Adieu, I promise you that at next meetin•

I will receive him better.  
Exit 〈◊〉









Of fair Fatima, and of her request?




• think that Adibar is not a person





True, but I am too proud
T'accept a heart that hath been conquered
By any other, and would now be mine
Trough an inconstancie, but if I durst
To love  



Why stop you, Madam?




I must not speak the rest.




•ut I divine it;
You are in love, and I have cause to judge

•hat it is with Almansor, that fair stranger



Who, I in love with him?




•hy not, I pray you,
Is that a crime?



Oh do not name that love,

•hich is no other but a fair esteem.



There is so little difference between
Esteem and love, that oftentimes we take th•

One for the other, and are so deceiv'd.




I cannot but remember that my brother
In his last voyage did conclude my marriag•

In Argier, that he who's design'd to be
My husband, is heer shortly to arrive,
And that my heart ought to reserve it self
Wholy for him. Besides in thy opinion.
Would it not argue a great weaknes in me
To love this stranger, though my broth•• friend.
Who hath not been above a moneth amon•

And whose desert as yet's unknown unto



Seeing this Stranger, who's not of the vul•

Deserves to be caressed of your brother,
There's reason to believe that he deserves
To be your Lover, and I can't conceive
Why your mouth will conceal the fl•• which is
So cleerly for him in your eyes and coun•••nance.
As often as he commeth with your brothe•

To visit you, your looks seem to be fix'd
Wholy one him, and at the same time also

I observ'd often that the stranger ey'd you
With the same ardour.



Prethee, speak in earnest,
Did'st see him to behold me oftentimes?



You ask it me with very much impresse m•


I do believe in lesse time then an howr,
That you have question'd me upon this 〈◊〉


  31More then a hundred times; your curiosity
Gives me a full assurance that his looks
Displease you not, nor wound your modesty



Alas! can one in justice be offended,
To be belov'd?



If his love pleaseth you, I think his person
Will please you equally.





Without interpreter; but perhaps, he loves
Elsewhere, and I may be unpleasing to him.



Madam, although you fain would cover it,
This fond suspition publisheth your flame,
Iealousy alwaies is daughter of love.



vvould it pleas'd Heaven, that he were free, and that
He thought me fair, But I see him come forth

Gomella's house, I'l satisfy my self
In sounding of his soul, upon this bank

I will repose my self, and feign to sleep.



VVhat's your design? I cannot comprehend it.



VVithdraw, anon thou't understand it better.








G•mella is expecting his return.

  32In visit, heer I may conveniently
Dream of my new love: Heaven! do I not see
Vnder that flourishing shade the beautious subject
Of my sad sufferings? Love in this encounter
Seemeth to flatter me sufficiently;
It is the lovely Zaida without doubt:
How sweetly, and with what tranquility
Doth that fair one repose, whil'st wretched
Languish with the disease which she procures me
Surely she cannot hear me now, I may
Speak at this present unto her of love,
And not offend her; but alas! the rigour
Of my sad destiny is great, when I
Presume to speak, I fear that she may hear me
You that have taught me the true use of sighs▪
Dear object of my joy and of my griefs;
Suffer my amorous and silent soul
T•expresse its secret passion before you,
And to complain heer of a thousand evills
Which you have made me suffer, yet unknown
Vnto your self: and you resplendent sources
Of all my fires, from whence I have deriv•d
Such violent heats, fair charming eyes, the au∣thors
Of my captivity, enjoy the rest,
Which your have taken from me: If I see
The poppies which shut up your lids, be no•

Offended that you lose your lights, the Sun
Is subject to the same eclipse, and can
No more then you, dispense himself thereof.

Zaida feigning her self in a dream












  33To burn, to languish, and not dare to speak it,
Alas!



O Heaven! what heare I?




One and the same heat.



Oh! that it were true!



My modesty, excuse me.









When shal we be content, when shall our plaints
Have end?



In this great extasie of joy,
All my respects are vain; to give her thanks
I'l kisse her fair hands. 
He kisseth her hands.




Hold, insolent; whence doth proceed this bold∣nes?  
feigning to awake,




What have I done?  
aside.

I came to give you thanks.







Tis for your goodnes.



How, I know not:
I'm sure I never gave you any matter
For this acknowledgment, who ever will

  34Consult th' apparence of the thing, shal find
That I have much indifference for you;
But though I had lesse, was it fit to trouble
My rest, in making your acknowledgement



Excuse my transport, beautious Shepheardesse▪
If I had lesse lov'd, I had been lesse guilty;
In this occasion a Wary Lover
Would have expressed little love in shewing
Too much respect; and whatsoer my crime b•

It would be pardoned, if you slept stil;
But, alas! my good fortune is soon chang'd,
I find that you awake but to afflict me,
Your eyes in taking unto them again
Their grace and lustre, take unto them also
At the same time their usual cruelty.
And that most charming hope which I so littl•

Enjoyed, vanish'd with your sleep.




An ill expression of your self, that word
Of hope gives me astonishment, I never
Gave it, nor took it yet from any person.



If I might dare to credit your discourse,
At least you had not an aversion for me,
Nothing would be equall to my good fortune
You would not find my presence trouble so me,
I should be used better, I should be
Esteem'd and possibly 












Belov'd! of whom; if you magine
Of me, you are mistaken.




You honored me so much to tell me so:
If I may but believe your voice, I have
Place in your heart, you are my wltnesse and
My judge both at one time; oh disavow not
That favorable sentence, that fair Oracle
Proceding from an adorable mouth.
Those words so full of charms pronounc'd in sleep,
Which promised me blessings so soon vanish'd



I dreamt, Almanser, and you are not ignorant
That a dream oftentimes is a deceiver,
And stil a lie.



True, a dream is my glor•;
But I have passions which are real truths,
The flame with in mine eyes hath appear'd to you
Too cleer, to be concealed, and the coldnes
Which you expresse unto me, quencheth not
My love, although it ruineth my hope.



This love comes very late, and really
I'm troubled at it, you know wel that I
Am otherwise engag'd.




Deny but I have heard say that a Lover
Favoured of Heaven is to come sho••l heer
To take you from mine eyes, I know you love him

  36Before you see him, therefore I'le not trouble
Your pleasures, nor his joy: how great soever
His happines be, I do intend to suffer it
VVithout complaining of you, but withall
I doe intend to die. As soon as you
Shall depart hence upon the fatal voyage
Ordained, where your happy mariage
Must be accomplish'd, Know, at the same time,
That you shall see me in my griefs excesse
Depart to go unto the grave, where those
Remains of fire which sparkle in my bosom,
After my death shall still yet warm my ashes.



Fortune doth ow you, Sir, a happier lot



My good or evill lot depends on you.
All other favours would be troublesome:
Lastly I do adore you, and not fortune.



What expect you from me in the condition
Wherein I am?



Immortall heats and torments;
I still must love without hope to be loved.



Who loves much, may hope to be loved like∣wise.



What may I hope one day for better usage?



Consult with your fidelity upon it.



Your soul appeareth too insensible
To love.



A constant Lover may do much;
The first refusal ought not to astonish
Any one that hath love enough to give it.



Oh this is plain enough to my glad sense!



The blood strikes up unto my brow; alas!
I've said too much, and now I blush for shame on't.



This glorious confession rendereth me
Too happy and content.



Dreams sometimes are not
VVithout effect; but the Sun hath already
Finished his career, let us go in
Yet further to discourse upon this matter
I fear that troublesome.







Without too much ambition may I hope
The honour to take you by the fair hand
The one is free, may I presume to kisse it?



I have no need, Sir, of your services.



They may be worth a Strangers, notwith∣standing
Your scorn of me.



In thinking to oblige me,
You may displease me, by this odd expression.



The Prophet, who knows how I reverence you,
Knows also how far forth I fear your anger,
And the cares which I take, should well as∣sure you,
That I come heer but for to honour you:

  28May I aside declare a secret to you
Of some importance?



Nothing 'is so important
As decency, which in th' opinion
Of every one, allowes we not the Liberty
To hear the secrets of such as you are.



I desire nothing of you what another
Doth not obtain▪



His discourse pleaseth me,
And yours I hate.



You take an unfit time
To tell your secrets, to the indiscreet
Love seldome is propitious; th incivility
Which your pride doth expresse, is an ill meās
To gain esteem.



I am not heer to take
Lessons from you.



I give them to your equals
To all intents and purposes.




Which carries you away, convicteth you,
And doth excuse me of the incivility
Wherewith your errour charged me; a man
Better instructed, to avoid suspition,
Would have retir'd himself out of respect;
You are too grosse; but as you are a Stranger,
I ought to bear a little with your ignorance.



You have •he faults which you cōdemn in him;

  39This Stranger doth oblige me, and you trou∣ble me.



Yet you should take away your hand from him  
to Zaida.





If she should do it, you would be in danger.



In quitting her, you might run to your death.



I respect Zaida, you I do despise.



If by the same respect I were not stop'd,
In my revenge, your punishment should soon
Follow your insolence.

Zaida quitting, Almansors hand.



Are sorry passtimes for me; by this violence
I know that neither of you doth respect me,
But both offend me.




Your hand from me to answer his desires?
My Rivall will become too proud at this:
Should you affrōt me wit design to please him?



By what right also am I bound to give
You satisfaction?



Madam, I beseech you,
Vse no constraint to your free inclination
In my behalf, I know which of us two
Pleaseth you best, I yeild to him in fortune,
And perhaps too in merit, his discourse
Is acceptable, mine is hatefull to you;

  40Of this truth I cannot be ignorant;
Therefore to th'end I may not trouble you,
I will retire me, my respect for you
Is stronger then the jealousie, wherewith
My amourous soul is justly seised now,
And I will force all my resentiments for you,
Yea evē to hate my self, if you should hate me.
Let here my happy Rivall without trouble
Discourse with you, establish, if you please,
His happines at the expense of mine;
But take this into your consideration
That Adibar, who quits you with regret,
Though the least lov'd, is not the least discreet.



VVhere go you Adibar? come back again.



My absence will oblige you.





I say come back again; if you esteem me,
You will return, to take away suspitions
Opposed to my glory, lend me, pray you,
Your hand, and lead me back.  
he gives her his hand.





Suffer this cruell injury.




Stay I command you, on pain of my hate.



Hear me a word or two,




I can 't be mov'd.
Reason I hear, and duty is my guide.







What unexpected clap of thunder's this,
Which ruineth my joy thus with my ho∣pe?
Reason I hear, and duty is my guide;
My constancy, at these words giveth place
To my despair; and duty is my guide

No, cruell Zaida in following Adibar,

Tis Love that guides you: but what! I may be
Too rash in censuring her so; perhaps
She doth enforce herself in quitting me▪
And doth prefer my Rivall here before me,
To take off all suspition of our love.
She loves, she loves me; oh▪ what say I, fool?
without doubt she hath left me through con∣tempt.
Love, like to fickle Fortune is in constant.
His Empire, doth resemble his who doth
Command the sea, where nothing is secure,
To day a calm, to morrow a sad storm,
And every minute, the most fortunate
Vpon that element, may fear a change.
Even in the Port, We often suffer Shipwrack:
These are sad truths, whereof I need not doubt:
But what maketh my Slave so hastily
T'addresse his steps unto me?












Yes, Sir and I think that he
Advāceth heer with large steps to embrace yo•




Tis that which my care should prevent.




Withdraw whilst you discourse?



Yes, and be sure
Thou fail not to prepare for me a consort
Of Musick.



How a consort, Sir, so late?
ALMANSOR.








How glad am I to see you heer again?



My joy in seeing you is no lesse great:
But speak we of my mother.




To morrow without fail she arrives here
Vnknown.



Vnknown! and why dares she not to be se•




The secret only you must know from her,



Comes not my Sister?



You must not expect her.



Where is her residence?



I cannot tell you.



How's this, Gomella, what can I imagine
In the uncertainty wherein you leave me?
I am astonished at this proceeding;
Your obscure language is a cleer presage
Of a conceal d misfortune: Oh! my Sister
Is dead, I need not doubt it.



Her death is not
The evill which should attrist you.








No, but something worse.



That word is not sufficient to cleer me:
Shall I not know why I receiv'd an order
To depart from •••missa where I was
Brought up, to come with al speed to these quarters,
T•addresse my self to you with confidence,
To change my true name of Abencerage

Into that of Almansor, and to have
A care not to reveale my family?



Vpon this point I must shut up my mouth:
Y m not allowed to say more unto you.
It is you Mothers absolute injunction,
And request to me; have but patience

  44Vntill to morrow, when you shal be satisfied
From her own mouth; but the Sun, I perceive,
Already groweth pale before the Moon.
Enter into my cot, and take with me
A poor repast.




I doe desire to be
Dispens'd thereof now, if it pleaseth you.



VVhere will you go?





On my engagement at his house to night.




Zegry, what say you, what charm doth oblige you
To answer so ill to Abencerage name,
To that debate, which for a thousand reasons
Is, between your two houses, as it were,
Hereditary?




A far juster duty
Inviteth me to love him: but for him,

I'd lost my life in Cairo, treacherous enemies
Encompassed me round, and had he not
Succoured me speedily, I had been murthered:
His name, which I knew well without disco∣vering
Mine own, disturb'd my new born amity;
But his goodnes for me, his cares, his kindnes,
Soon dissipated all those old resentements;
And so in order to the friendship which
Conjoined us, at last we came together
Into this country, where I was oblig'd
By the same frienship to lodge no where else
But at home with him.



Oh Heaven! but proceed.



You know his Sister: at first sight of her,
I was her servant: by a powerfull charm
VVhose art she only knows, her fair eyes paid
But one look for the purchase of my heart;
And if the God of marriage.  




Take heed you flatter not your self with such
A fatall hope, destroy your passions,
Or you destroy your honour.







Yes, Sir, your honour, what! doth this discourse
Surprise and trouble you?




I fear the name
Of an ingratefull person.




Of a low spirited one; these shamefull motiōs
Do wound your duty.



May I not know how?



To morrow, when you see your Mother here,
You shall be satisfied, in the mean time,
Hate both the Sister, and the brother.





I who have been so much oblig'd unto them?
No, no, I swear  



Swear not but let us entet;
Your mind will change, when you have heard th'adventure.











THe night approacheth, it is time to put
This letter with my hope into thy hands:
Work on her Slave, and act discreetly, t•at
She take this diamond from thee, afterward
Vse all the skill thou hast to know the secrets
Of her disdainfull Mistresse, and consider
That I expect at thy return to hear
The sentence of my life▪ or of my death.



Cruell commandment, whereunto I see
My felfreduc'd! 
aside.

One word, Sir, ere I go.
Think well upon it yet, what hope have you?
Your importunities will increase her anger,
And you should do much better, If I durst
To tell you so, henceforth to free your self
Of this unworthy Empire; as love is
The price of love, so hate should alwaies be
The recompense of hate, and of contempt.
Your soul's are too ill suited to unite,
Love loseth his power in Antipathies,
And tis an equall crime, Sir, in a contrary
Effect, to hate who Loves us, or to love
Who hates us.



Oh! speak no more on't unto me:
My evill's invincible, and my soul feels
Too sensibly the charms which doe destroy me;
To overcome my griefs, which have no equals

  47I seek some gentle succour, and not counsel,
My chain, alas! is too strong, and my heart
Too weak, as not to yeild unto the torrent
which carries me away.



O rigorous Fate! 
aside.

But if all your indeavours ate in vain,
If fierce Fatima still persist in her
Former disdains 



what pleasure dost thou take
T'increase my troubles? hide her rigours to me
And speak but of her charms: my heart is try•d
By torments great enough, it need not be
afflicted with an evill not yet arriv'd.
flatter my weaknes, though therein thou shew
Thy self lesse faithfull, if thou dost desire
To interest thy self in my misfortunes.



Sir, if your eyes could penetrate into
The secrets of my heart, you would soon •ind
How great an interest I take in them,
And that if your lot lay within my power,
Your pleasures should soon passe your hope, I call
The Prophet, so much honoured amongst us,
To witnes• that I feel the counterstroa•s
Of all your troubles, that I'm grieved for them
Asmuch as you, and tremble in like manner,
Lastly that you are dearer to me far
Then you imagine, that my happines
Depends on the successe of your amours,
And that it is for you alone my heart
Makes its devotions.



Grant it gracious Heaven

  48That thy zeal happily succeed in touching
In my behalf the soul of that ingratefull:
My sister hath already been with her,
And I believe she hath not fail'd to speak
To her for me, their friendship flatters me;
And gives me leave to hope that who esteem
The sister, may in time cherish the brother.
Adiew, perform thy duty, and return
With speed to calm the tempests of my spirit
 Exit Zegry





I will indeavour with permission of
The holy Prophet, to hear such successe
As I desire.







WHereto shall I resolve me in this sad
Extremity? shall I sollicit now
My Rivall gainst my self in the behalf
Of an ingratfull Master that doth wrong me
And though he appeares blind to my disad∣vantage,
Shall I approve my self so more then he?
What shall I presse th'effect of what I fear?
Shall I give him content at my sad cost,
By a constraint so cruell? and shall I
Become my self the faithfull Minister
Of the injustices which he doth do me?
No, no, let us not serve with so much heat
To trouble us yet with a new misfortune,
A person who cost me so many tears:
If I must die, at least let me not give

  49Arms for to peirce my heart; o'th contrary,
Let me act so, that he may hope for nothing
From fair Fatima, let me without scruple
Betray this false one, and deprive him of
A good which would become so fa'tal to me.
I should ground all the hope thats left unto me
Vpon the losse of his. But how is this,
That at these words I tremble with affright?
I find my heart already riseth up
Against me in behalf of this false Master.
Alas! how cruel and perfidious
Soer he be, I cannot fail of faith
To wards him, but must love, and serve him truly.
'Tis so resolv'd, my anger must give place
Vnto the love that raigneth in my bosom:
An ill example never justifies
A crime: let us deliberate no more;
But what's the noise I hear? it is Fatima

That passeth, and Charifa follows her.







THis foul contemps which Zaida offers me
Provokes me highly, •o far was this false one
From hindering Adibar to visit her,
(As she engag'd herself in promise to me)
That she accepted kindly of his hand,
To disoblige me; tis an injury
Of such a nature as requires reveng.



The affront is known unto your self, you saw it
With your own eyes, and to speak truely Ma∣dame,
The injustice is extream.



Know that my anget
Is so too; let us enter, it is late,
This night shall give us counsell.




And stay no longer, las! I dare not open
My mouth, nor keep it shut. Love, I beseech thee,
Mingle at least some good in the great masse.
Of my misfortunes, graunt that in demanding
All things of her, she grant me nothing for him.  
aside.

Madame, shall I find so much goodnes from you
As to allow me the sweet liberty
To leave this letter heer in your fair hands?
It commeth from a Louer the most passionate
Of all those which the Lustre of your eyes.
Hath made slaves; and who, not withstan∣ding all
The love wherewith his soul is seis'd, hath gri∣ven you
Some cause of plaint.



Of plaint! ist Adibar

That writes vnto me? Softly to Charifa.




Wtihout doubt tis he,
My heart doth tell me so.



What would that false one
Desire of me?



How cruell is this sweetnes
To me? 
aside.

The end of his desires is to
Appear before you, highly to detest
His insolēt crime, he would expresse the trouble
Wherewirh his soul is press'd, to the Divinity
Iustly offended, and receive in making
His fault worthy to be forgot, a pardon.
Or death at your fair feet.




His death; but I would have him live and hope▪
How late soever his repentance comes,
I love it, and 't is welcome. My heart is
Already pacified by thy discourse.



I have for my misfortune, too well sped. 
aside.




Lets see with what, air, in this letter he
Vtters his thought, we will go in to read it▪
And to give answer; since he is no longer
Obstinate in his coldnes, I will send
His pardon sign'd and seal'd.



How full of joy
Will Zegry be at my return?








Tis he that sends me, he will kisse
The words where with y'ave flatter'd him.


  52Fatima tearing his letter.




My answer, go, and carry it unto him.  
Exit Fatima.








THis in equality astonisheth
And puzleth me,  
Charifa!








Hear me, I pray thee.



I take no delight
To talk with fools



Stay yet a little.



I have not the leisure.
Adieu, fair prater!



Be not so ungentle.
My hād shall speak gould, to supply my mouth



I do'nt believe thee.




From Zegry take this diamond.




And sell my Mistresse? God defend, I will not
Receive it-



Be not such a simple creature.




I take it then to please thee, but accept it
Vnto a good intent: the stone's not false,
At least I think so.



Thou mayst be assur'd on't,
Tis very fair, and perfect.




My words might seem t'imply a doubt, that I

Suspected thee, but I am innocent.



Wilt thou not tell me by what fatall errour
Thy mistresse humour chang'd so suddenly?
And how it came, that only at the name
Of Zegry her heart presently grew cold,
Although enflam'd with my discourse before?



I love thee but too well; and if rhou wilt
Be secret, I'l discover unto thee
This secret of importance, this hid mistery.



Thou wilt oblige me much, speak, I'm discreet.
And will concea'lt as closely as thy selfe.




Fatima then loves Adibar asmuch
As she doth hate thy Master; but for her,

Adibar by a pleasant fair return
Hath no, lesse coldnes then thy master love.
Thou knowst that thou art not yet known of her,
And that love oftentimes troubleth the brain:
Hence was it, that at first she did believe
That Adibar sent thee to speak to her;

  54But since she knew her errour, she was mad;
I hear a noise, let us speak soft I fear
We should be heard.







THe Devill! where thinks my Master
That I should meet with Ormin? it is night
And I can't find my way.







Let me alone▪ thy honour is not much
In danger with me.




Is fallen from my finger.




The grasse conceals it from our sight.




Seek it a good while ere we find it heer.



Yes in this manner, I'le go fetch a light▪








Return I've found it.  
taking him for Ormin.




I should know that voice;
It is Charifa, strange! what might she do
So late heer in these woods? I will approach
A little neerer.  
aside.




Thou but jests with me,
Kisse me no more, if thou dost, I'l retire.



A rare piece this! I must hear all.




Promise me to be quiet, or I'l leave thee.
This is a little too much liberty
At first, I am a maid that stands upon
My reputation, and fear evill tongues,
I hold my honour very precious to me.



Thou seek'st to lose it, and invitest him
To take it from thee.  
aside.




What! thou speakest not
A word unto me.







How doth thy heart sigh, and thy close mouth murmur?
Those liberties, for all what I have said,
May be excus•d, if thou will marry me;
Thou know'st that one must marry, to love well
And if I please thee.  











I am much surpris'd, by Heaven.



What! answerest thou nothing? should this be
Through a contempt? I think that I'm not yet
So torn by time, as not to be thought worthy
To be considered; thou knowest well

Alabez, if I would have had that fellow.
My marriage with him had been already
Concluded, but that is a lowt, and hath not
The art to please me as thou hast, his faults
Are more considered by me, then his services.



The impudent jeers at me to my face.



That troublesome never did any thing
Which pleased me, he hath a sottish spirit,
And silly carriage; if the fool should marry me
I would not passe my word that he should not
Be one of those which every one points at
With' finger, which permit their neighbours to
Think their wives fair, ād which we commōly
Call cuckoulds.







SEe heer, I have brought you light.



What have I done? this is a grosse mistake.



What think'st thou; have not I much cause to be

  57Well satisfied? I have done nothing then
That ever pleas'd thee, I've a sottish spirit
And silly carriage. Thou shouldst die with sha∣me.



Why? prethee? I have uttered but a truth.



But a truth, traitresse, o thou brazen face!
What! If I married thee, thou dangerous beast
I should be of the number of those people
Which we call cuckoulds? thy impertinent tongue
Lied a hundred times, I'd rather chuse
A rope then such a bed fellow:








Peace a while, I shall in good time
Talk with you, friend, companion of iil luck

Ormin putting out the candle.


We must be gone, there's nothing to be gotten
But blows heer by a fool. 
Exeunt Ormin and Charifa.





ALMANSOR, GASVL, ALABEZ▪ ADIBAR.


GOe see whence comes this noise.



Oh have I met thee,  
giving Gasul a buffett.










I took thee for another, in good faith:
I sought a raskal that escaped me,
To whom I did intend that injury
But I shall soon o'r take him without running.




Hast learnt the cause of those cōfused rumours▪



No, but I have beene beaten by a person,
Who afterward made me excuses for't-



The house is not far of, give order to
The voices to advance, and bid them sing
Neer to that Little wood.

Adibar appearing on the other side:


See, friends, the place
Where Zasda dwels, if you are ready now,
Begin immediately.




YE deserts, and dark cells
Where night and silence dwells
You whom I trust with my sad cares.



This voice belongs not to our company.



This Stanza finishd, let us be prepar'd
To sing forthwith the ayr which I compos•d.

Ye deserts and dark cells,
Where night and silence dwells,
You whom I trust with my sad cares,
With all my deaths, and my despairs,

  59Rocks, forrests, and thick Shades,
Which the Sun ne'r invades,
You in whose bosomes I enclose
My love, my sighs, my plaints, and woes:
Alas! when will you be
Keepers of my felicity?




Ye brooks, and Zephirs sweet,
Which heer in Spring-time meet
To water and perfume these plains




What insolēt voice troubles our confort heer?
Th'affront shal not passe without punishment


Ye Brooks, and Zephirs sweet,
Which heer in Spring-time meet
To water and perfume these plains
Frequented by the amorous Swains
Favour me not to flovv
Oblige me not to blow,
Vntill my tears their course have spent,
And my sighs given my gr•efs full vent,
Then in your Channells glid•,
And winds breathe, as before, in pride.





Who art thou that dar'st heer to trouble me?



My name is too well known to be conceal•d.
I'm call'd Almansor.




Fear, fear then mine anger.
I'm Adibar, thy greatest Enemy
Who to meet thee, have made some weary steps
Vnto no purpose; now when least I sought thee
I've found thee; tell me, how comes it that thou

  60Takest a licence to besiege my Mistresse
With so much insolence? dost visit her,
As friend unto her brother, or as Lover
And servant unto her?




To understand that as the brothers friend,
The Sister doth accept my services,
And that I reverence her: assure thy self
That if I were so happy as to be
Her Lover, I should be discret enough,
Not to acquaint thee with it.




And juglings which thou usest to defend thee,
Cannot withdraw thee from my just revenge,
Thou shalt die. 
Drawes




Rather fear that my sword heer  
drawes.

Peircing thy heart, quēch thy love in thy blood.







FOr bear, and moderate this barbarous fury,
What means this, friends?



Nothing, since we are parted.



Oh, ist you Adibar?



This is not the Song






Zegry, thou dost me wrong.



What cause, dear friend, could animate thee so?
Permit me, I beseech you having parted you,
To reconcile you too at the same time:

I take an interest in your debats:
Let me know therfor what your differnce is.




Zegry in vaine you interpose your felf
To hinder the proceeding, my revengt
Is just, and your cares but prolong his life
For some few minures.  
Exit. Adibar.








DEare Almansor tell me

Whence comes so strong a hate between you two?
Relate the cause on't,



Tis not worth the labour;
This petty difference which troubles thee,
Should be determined ere known.




Thou dost persist to hide this secret from me:

Almansor, I ghesse at it; sure, some Beauty
Embroils you; I've heard heer two different consorts.
The rest I do divine.



Friend, I confesse it;
We both at one time gave our Eve•ing Musick
To one and the same Mistresse.




Know her name, Friend?



Heavens how am I put to t•?
Should I tell him that I adore his sister? -
aside.




Friend, this reservednes suits not that name,

I did not hide my amours for Fatima





He hath already promised
His sister; Im confounded; if I dare
To name her, what will he not say?  
aside.




This confus'd silence should sufficiently
Instruct me that he doth adore Fatima,

And dares not tell it me  
aside.

What! shall I not
Know then what object hath subjected thee?



Her fair name uttered would make us enemies,
Instead of doing thee a courtesy
I should do thee an injur•; adiew;
Dispense me to say more on't.




Wilt thou not go unto my house?




This night I am engag'd by promise to
Lodge at Gomella's.




How! Gomella's, sayst thou?



Yes, I fear that he stays for me, adiew,

  63I'ue promised him, and I can't fail my word.





The traitor Loves Fatima: and intends
To marry her: to judge on't otherwife,
Is to abuse my self; yes owing me,
His life, he makes use of it to destroy me;
But he that could save it, can also ruine it;
And his death loudly shall proclaime to all
That the same arm which serves the innocent,
Can punish the ingratefull insolent.











YOu shal not go alone to meet my mother,
I I follow you, Gomella.





Her order doth oblige you to expect her
Here at my house.



But nature doth impose
A stronger law upon me.



Sir she hath not

  64Vnderstood of your comming yet, your sight
Will be too sudden a surprise, for bear
Till I acquaint her with it.




No blame in this encounter; If I should
Surprise her, it would be delightfully:



Seeing you will, let's go together then.



I do but what I ought.



I speak my thoughts.




Zegry comes forth his house; before I go,

I must embrace him.



Stay, you may not do it.



Constraint's unjust, asmuch as it is cruell:
Ought I to fly a friend so dear, so faithfull?
Suffer me to speak to him, and I'l follow you
Immediately.



I cannot, for I have an expresse order
Vnto the contrary.  
Exeunt.









ORmin, did•st thou observe how carefully
That traitor shun•d me assoon as he saw me?
Did'st mark how he was troubled at first,
How he advanc'd, a step or two to Wards me,

  65And then went back again, how he resign'd
The place unto me in confusion,
Press'd with the stings of his ingratitude?



What ever I observed, it can never
Enter into my thought Almansor should
Be guilty of so base and black a crime;
And though in shew I find him culpable,
I esteem him incapable to commit
Any base act; he still appear'd vnto me
A person of much honour, and too jealous
Thereof, so ill t'imploy the life which he
Holdeth of you: besides I find within me
A certain secret instinct which I

Can•t comprehend, that when I should accu∣se him,
Forceth me to defend him.




To cheris'h that too much belov'd Ingratefull,
Thou art accustom'd also to caresse him.
I can't believe, neither that he betrays me,
Nor can I doubt ont, that's my punishment.
And those sweet motions, which I scarce can banish,
Aggravate his offence, instead of lessening it:
Iudge then how much I am to be lamented
In this condition, the onely good
That rests to me, is to fear nothing more.
Fortune would not afflict me h•er by halfs;
I lose a Mistresse, and a friend together:
Both injure me, and I have so much weaknes,
That I can't hate the Mistresse, nor the Friend;
But could'st thou yesterday learn from Charifa

Why fair Fatima hath so much contempt
Within her bosome for me? thou hast told me

  66That Adibar doth charm her, but thou hast not
Tould me from whence her hatred doth pro∣ceed.




Fatima, if I may believe what hath
Been told me, alwaies did abhore you for
Vnfaithfullnes, she hath some reason to
Be•ieve you false, and this is that as far
As I can understand, which doth oblige her
To be so cruell to you.




I never was so.



She hath understood though,
That a maid call'd Zelinda, faire enough,
Very young, and of an illustrious family,
And who received sometime many services
From you, being almost on the point to see you
Her husband, and when all things were dis∣pos'd
And ready for the mariage was fouly
For saken by you and despis'd; it seems
That this example toucheth, and doth teach her
That who can once, can chāge a thousād times,



Ormin, this change is no inconstancy.



It would be very hard to prove it innocent:



VVithout doubt this pretended mariage
Made a great noise; but I wil tell thee all



VVhat will th'ingratefull say?
  aside





Before that mariage was concluded which

  67VVas to unite us to Abencerage blood,
And by that means at last to quench the heat
Of an old hatred, fair Fatima was
Already Mistresse of my heart; to make me
Take a new chain, Zelinda, whō they offered me
In my opinion, was not fair enough:
So that I saw her without loving her:
Her feeble Beauty could not shake the fetters
VVhich tied me, yet I indeavoured
To have som kindnes for her, but her eyes
Or my heart were not strong enoug to work it;
And if I did her any services,
It was but in design to please my parents:

Fatima there fore is to blame to think
That I am false: fince I had never love
For any but for her.



Alas! I need not
Doubt more of his contempt! I was inquisitive
To know too much, and now I doe repent it.





This is a truth, which easily can bee ptov'd?
But how comes it my sister, s up so soon?




ZAIDA, MEDINA, ZEGRY, ORMIN.


Brother, have you receiv•d th' intelligence
Is given me of the death of him which was
Designed for my husband?



Yes, I've heard it;
It is too true, he died in Argier



  68I'm unhappy by it;
But you are neer your ioy, and may discourse
Of mariage and love.




Say that I must no longer now discourse
Of love nor Mariage: say that I must punish
A base and an ingratefull spirit with death
One that hath wickedly betray'd my friēdship:
Fury alone presides now in my soul,
And I must think nor speak of any thing
But of destroying a perfidious wretch.



Who is that traitor? let me know, I pray you,
What signall crime provoketh you so highly.



Thou know'st too well the Authour of my in∣jury
His name's Almansor, his love is his crime,



His Love! What hear I?



Sister, tis too true,
His insolent love hath stirred up mine anger.



He knoweth that Almansor loveth me,
And that is it enrageth him.
  aside.






Is just, add he shall die, base, and ingratefull!



Brother, you should examine without passion
All that which might be of a friend suspected,
And we should never judge of his offence
But with much care and much indulgence: al∣waies

  69Almansor l•tth appcar'd too generous
To mingle any foul or unjust thing
In his affections; and he oweth you
Too much, to have a thought to wrong a friēd
That sav'd his lif•




Sister, thou dost oblige me;
Thy arguments with little contradiction
Disarm all my resentments quite; Almansor

Is so dear to me, that how ere he wrongs me,
Thou wilt do me a couttesie, to stop
My anger.



Perhaps, you have accused him unjustly.



Would that it pleased Heaven I were abus'd!
But alas! my suspition is too just,
I'l tell't thee now; he loveth











How! should he love Fatima? really
That crime is black:



The better to assure thee on't, tis best
Thou go to vissit her, I do believe
Thou'lt vnderstand frō her that he adores her,
And that he's false to me.








But, Sister, VVhy appear you
So troubled in your eyes and countenance?



The trouble of mine eyes cleerly denotes
That my heart feels the evils which your friend doth you,
Your friēd, what haye I said that name suits ill
With his condition, if he be your Rivall,
He's not your friend. Goe persently to quench
His life and Love, and wash away the crimes
Of his soul in his blood.




We should examine without passion
All that which might be of a friend suspected,
And one should never judge of his offence
But with much care and much indulgence; al∣waies

Almansor hath appear'd too generous,
To mingle any foul, or vnjust thing
In his affections; and he oweth me
Too much, to have a thought to wrōg a friēd
That sau"d his life.



In what an errour are you?



If I am in an errour, I receiv'd it
From you: these were your sentiments, good Sister,
And shall be mine.



Then knew I not his crime;
But now that it is plain, take your revenge,
I will no more restrain you.




Condemn my anger, not my amity.
In favour of Almansor I would be

  71Abus'd; I will accuse him, but I would
That others should excuse him, I speak of
Revenge, but seek it not, and threaten only
But to the end to have my arme restrain'd.
His passion, perhaps, may be condemn•d
Vnjustly: possibly it might be born.
Before our friendship, and, perhaps Fatima

Answereth unto it, and that to unite them,

Gomellas orders do invite him heer;
If it be so, to free my self from crime,
Sister, tis just I yeild Fatima to him:
I'l break my chains, and with a setled heart
Will make the pleasures of my friend mine own.



what strange abuse, what secret charm thus softens
Your heart in the behalf of an Ingratefull:
He owes his life unto you: ought he not
T'acquit him self to wards you by all possible
Indeavours? if he be our Rivall, can you
Without much weaknes tamely give him up
Your Mistresse? if he be your friend, as you
Esteem him, ought he not to give you up
The object which you love.




Go presently to visit fair Fatima:
And fail not fully to inform your self
Of their intelligence.  
Exit Zegry.






I can't conceive how one can love a man,
And presse his death.

  70〈1 page duplicate〉  71〈1 page duplicate〉
  72ZAIDA.
Oh! say not that I love
Such an ingratefull and inconstant wreteh:
Believe that if I have fires, they are fires
Of rage, and that my heart will ne'r be quiet
Till this perfidious Lover be a sacrifice
To my just anger.



But you weep, Madam.



True, I weep, Medina:
If that false one should perish, I should die;
I feel that rage and tendernes, hate and love
Triumph by Turns within me: I▪m his Enemy,
And yet I am his Lover, when my anger
Encreaseth, th'other Kinder passion springs:
And though that he be louely, and hath fal∣sely
Betray'd me, I can neither love, nor hate him



Madam, speak softer, you will elce be heard.

Adibar comes towards us.












Zaida, where go you with my heart!




Leave me alone, and do not trouble me,
Adieu.








No need of them.



I do beseech you, hear me.



You must excuse me, I have other busines.



With a look onely, consolate my griefs;
Tis you I seek.



And tis you that I fly.



How! treat you such a faithfull Lover so?




Fatima there will be lesse cruell to you.



Mock not at her, Fatima is as fair,
Although lesse proud then you.




FATIMA, ZAIDA, ADIBAR, CHARIFA, MEDINA.




Still with this scornfull? my revenge is just,
'Tis time that it break forth. Zaida, I find you
In such a black and heavy melancholy,
That I lose the design whIch brought me hither:
Shall I dare speak of dances, revels, feasts,
And of a mariage in the condition
Wherein your are?



What say you, of a mariage?



Since you presse me,
You shall know all; know that my Father hath
Provided one for me.







Yes, Zaida, and she bu•imes is well forward.



In your contents I claim an interest:
I should be glad to know your Lovers name,



He's an accomplishd man, noble, and brave
And of a charming presence, and rare merit:

I doubt not but you will approve the choice
My Father hath made of him.



How she makes me
Languish to meet death?  
aside.

Well, who is the man?



You know him very well;
He made long time his ordinary residence
At home with you▪ your brother Zegrys friēd
Have I yet said ynough?



Tell me his name too.



Divine you not that he is call'd Almansor!



I can no more, but faint and die.  
aside.





Is chang'd, she feels my pain, and I'm re∣veng'd



I have much interest in this event.



This match without doubt cannot chuse but please you.



True, I am not of those who through a maxi∣me
Of I know not, what modesty, blush at ma∣riage
As if it were a crime, feign to sigh at it,
And yet in secret are sad at the heart,
If it should not be consummate. I assure you.
Vpon this point I not dissemble with you:

I no way hate the Lover that's design'd me,
I prize his love, his services, his merit
At a high rate, and if he loves me much,
He is no lesse b•lov'd.




He loves you very much.



I can't expresse it:
He lives but for me, breatheth but for me:
I am the sole original of his good
Or evill fortune: when he sees me not,
He is in torments, and when hazard brings me
Vnto his sight, again, I have great cause
To fear that he might die with sudden joy;
Lastly if any truth be in his oaths,
All other beauties are contemptible to him.



Oh Heaven ! what hear I, where am I? Oh trator!
Ingratefull wretch!
  aside.


But could you so soon love him
Before yov knew him?



I cannot be blam'd
For this quick love, I saw in him at first
All things that might induce a maid to love:
Besides heerein I execute the order
My Father doth ordain, I willingly
Obey his will; and since he hath chosen him
For son in law and for support, I think
That he is worthy of it, and conform
My self unto him.



But what are your thoughts
Of Adibar?





I dare not to pretend
To her pass'd goodness more.




The honour of my love; he changed first,
And I change at my turn.



He was not alwaies
Vnworthy to please you; can you forget him?



Yes, and with much justice, and reason too,
He is to me the most ingratefull person
Vpon the earth; his contempt was unjust,
But mine is not so. Let us cease to speak
Of that inconstant Lover; I will pay him
Hatred for hatred, contempt for contempt.

  77Let us again talk of our mariage,
And let me know if I may have the honour
To see you there,



Excuse me, I'm oppress'd
With a great pain, which is redoubled
Since your discourse, so that I'm rendered
Incapable to be present there, and am
Enforc'd to quit you at this very instant.



I wait you; suffer me to pay the service

I owe you.  
He leads her by the arm?




I am forced through my weaknes
To accept your support. 
Exeunt Zaida & Adibar









ZAida feels my discase, but Adibar

Fli•s me; herein my revenge is compleat,
Though my hope be destroyd.



You have lost nothing
By that, Almansor's worth a thousand of him



Iudge better of my plaint, what I have said
Is but a fiction; I perceive Medina

And thou are intimate, she could not chuse
But tell thee that Almansor's very dear
To the ingratefull Zaida, this I heard
From thy own mouth.







This devise of mine,
In feigning that Almansor was to marry me,
Is to revenge me of her for admitting,
Contrary to her promise, my false Lover
To addresse courtship to her, and to punish her
For the evills which she hath procured me.



How cunning are you! this deccit is notable.







HOw! quit so soon the object of your heart?



I studied more her rest then my content.



You appear seised with an extream sadnes.




I cannot see that suffer which I love,
Without grief:




Zaida sure, repulsed you.



My respect only put me of, and not
Her cruelty,



If she were just, or generous
She would despise a lover that's unfaithfull.



I were to blame, if I should complain of her.




Almansers fortune is more sweet with me



I'm to well satisfied, to be jealous of it.



You do but flatter you with a vain hope,

Zaida hath but disdain, and hate for you.



Her hate and her disdain are ended now;
And our hearts speedily shall be united
By mariage.



But Sir, you may be mistaken
In your accompt, and hope; do you not know
That Zaida's promis'd?



Rather you may be
Deceiv•d in this point: perhaps you know not
That he who was to marry her, is dead.



How is he dead?



Yes Madam, and fair Zaida

Propitious at last, will render justice
To my devout affection, and did
Assure me when I took my leave of her
That she would marry me, if I could get
Her brother to consent unto 't; adiew;
To obtain this so dear and pretious Beauty,
I must addresse me to her brother, and
Solicit my best friends.  
Exit Adibar.








WHat have I done?
Alas! my fiction hath only serv'd
To dispose Zaida to deprive me of
My Lover.







Leave me; in a fate
So sad as this, every thing hurts, destroyes,
And makes me desperate.



Will you not hear me?



No, I hear nothing but the fury which
Raigns in my confuf'd spirits, grief seiseth me
And anger doth transport me.







Oh that I were dead! cease to comfort me
In such a just despair put me to bed,
Or in my grave there to lye buried.











YOu see the cote where I make my abode.



Sir, if you please, I shall desire to be
Private a while here with my son, and pre∣sently
I'm yours.



Oh Madam, oh dear Mother,
In this blest time shal I obtain the honour
Of your embracements?





Know our dishonour first, and shew thy self
My son before I embrace thee, I was mother
Of two fair children, when a Ravisher
Stole away both my Daughter, and thy Sister.



Good God! what do you tell me?








Name but the Ravisher▪
And he is dead.



Come, now embrace me, Son, this saying makes me
Believe that Heaven hath given thee me for to
Revenge me.



Let me know his name, I swear
By th' holy Prophet, that his blood shal wash
The injury, and that this arm of mine
Shall sacrifice him instantly unto you.



Thou shall know all, hearken, and let me speak:
Thou art not ignorant of the enmity
Which raign'd for many ages twixt the houses
O'th' Zegries, and of the Abencerages:
Now thou must know that on th' opinion
Conceived that a mariage would put end
To this contention, my daughter was
Design'd for wife to Zegry; every thing
Was ready, and the day appointed, when
Through an aversion, or rather through
Contempt, the trecherous Zegry flying our
Alliance, hastily embark'ed himself
For Argser; and to add unto our griefs,
Assoon as this report was spread, my daughter
Was seen no more.



O Heaven! who should be cause
Of this misfortune?



Read this letter heer,
It will inform thee fully

Almansor reads the Letter.


YOu, from whom, I receiv'd my breath,
Know that a sad fate worse then d•ath
Is hapened to me, all our name
In my loss• bear an equall shame:

  83The false and cruel Zegry is
The Author of my miseries;
For he it it that by his charms
Hath taken me out of your arms,
Zelinda.



What have I heard!








Zegry her ravisher! oh fatall news!



In this misfortune I had so much judgment
To hide this our dishonour, and her rape:
By the advice of the illustrious,
And wise Gomella, I spread every where
The rumour of her death, and sent thee order
At the same time to depart from Tremissa

And to come heer: lastly in Tunis staying
Thy comming, I passed an unknown life
In tears and lamentation: and seeing
The time of thy return to be at hand,

I came heer to this fatall residence:

I find thee, and my grief is charm'd already,
To see my just rage in thy soule imprinted,
And thy brave arm dispos'd to take revenge,
And to deprive that wretch of life, who hath
Deprived us of honour.




Afflictions seise! my heart!



Tis time to punish,
Not to deplore, in such a fatall fortune

  84Expresse thy grief by bloody brave effects
Of rage and courage, vain regrets, and sighs
Suit with my sex, revenge belongs to thee.
Thou knowest the offender, go repair
Th▪offence: I would not have reserv'd for thee
Th Imployment, if I could revenge my self
Without thee; and I had already seen
The punishment of Zegry, If I would
Have us•d Gomellas service; thy arm only
Must wash the stam of from tby brow; take all
The reuenge to thee, as th' affront's all thine:
Seeme no more until thou hast reveng'd
Thy Sister, Goe, seek, find and punish fully
Her barbarous ravisher; adiew, perform
Thy duty, and make thy self to appear
A worthy branch of that ill•strions stock
Of Heros, from whose loines thou art descēded;
To end our common miseries and fears,
Go thou to shed blood, I goe to shed tears. 









OH heard extremiti•s! oh cruel violence!
Alas! the friend that doth oblige me, is
The enemy that wrongs me; I owe then
My safety unto him that robs me of
My honour, ād the man that sav'd the brother
Hath ruined the Sister! in this case
What counsell should I take? shall I become
Ingratefull, or be infamous, shal I
Break the bond of a holy amity?
Shal I let forth the blood which preserv'd mine▪

  85That blood in which love will that I have In∣terest?
And to say all, the blood of my fair Mistresse?
She comes forth, and without doubt aymeth here
Honour will that I fly, but Love restrains me:







HE dares not to advance, his crime intimida∣tes him.
We will passe by the traitor, without speaking
A word.



Deare object of all m• affections,
Charme of my Spirits!



Surely, you are mistaken.
You would speak to some other.




T'expresse my passion unto your faire eyes▪
Love,  



You take me without doubt for Fatima.




How for Fatima; this wo•d doth acquaint me
Confusedly with the unjust suspition▪
From whence this chang springs: possibly you have
Believed that I seck to please her, seeing
The league that it between me, and her Father;
But Heaven, and Love my conquerour, be witnes,
That your fair Image wholy doth possesse
My heart, that to remove you thence, Fatima▪

  86Is altogether incapable, that I look on
Al that is lovely in her without love
And that as sensible only of the darts
Of your rare beauties, I confine my thoughts
And actions to civilities for her.



How do you look upon Fatima then
With an indifference?  Let me see how far
His impudence will go  
aside.




Can you doubt of it? you that have tied all
My senses with such sweet and pressing bonds?
Can you suspect with any justice, Madam
My heart of treachery, my oaths of falshood,
And believe that my soul hath so much black∣nes,
As to betray my Mistresse, my friend,
And my Deliverer? could you imagine,
Without being deceiv•d, that having once
Beheld you, one could love elsewhere? oh no:
For me to be inflam'd with a new fire
You are too charming, and I'm too much charm'd.



Too much charm'd, monster of perfidiousnes?
Wilt thou abuse me then after thou hast
Betray'd me, and with an unworthy love
Carried away, wilt thou join impudence
To infidelity?




What say you, Zaida? this discourse confounds me.



I see it plainly, wretch; wer't thou lesse wic∣ked.

  87Thou would'st be lesse confounded; an ingra∣tefull
Still blusheth at reproaches.







Doth that word trouble thee? and fearest thou
The name of an ingratefull person more
Then foul ingratitude it self?




The cause of this your anger, should I never
So much examine me, I still should find
My conscience innocent.



In thy accompt then
Tis nothing to deceive a maid, to wrong
Thy friend, to fail thy faith, to love Fatima,













Oh • believe me,
I love her not.



Dar'st thou to say it yet?
Dost thou not love her when thou dost adore her?
Thy false equivocations cannot heer
Abuse me, I know that thou art to morrow
To marry her.



To matry her! o Heaven, believe it not,
I swear.



No, no, forbeare, I believe not
The oaths of one that's perjur'd, every one,
Knows of this mariage▪



Who told it you?








That certain person ly'd. Tell me his name,
And my just anger presently shall carry him
The reward of his false intelligence.



Goe punish then Fatima, it was she
Her self that told it me.



Oh give lesse credit,
Ador able Wonder, to such false discourses.



Good God! who ever saw such impudence?



The mariage which she hath forged, is
A falsity; bear witnesse thou dread Master
Of Heaven that this I speak is truth; but if
I lie, let thy hand with a thunderbolt
Strike me unto the center of the earth:
Let my name be foreuer odious,
If the fire which I feel proceedeth not
wholy from your fair eyes, and if my heart
Ever conceived for Fatima any thing
Beyond a weak esteem.



I must sift yet:
This brazen face more throughly.
  aside.


How wilt thou prove

  89The truth of thy assertion?





A hundred proofs to disabuse you presently.



I'l have but one, and that too very easie;
To put an end to the suspitions,
Which I've cōceiv'd of thee, give me forthwith
Both thy hand and thy faith.



I give it you
With an excesse of yoy.   but what would I,
Give her a hand that must destroy her brother,
And plung it self in his most noble blood?  




What dost thou answer me so ill for such
Rare bounties? dost thou murmur to thy selfe,
Grow pale and study, as if thou resent'st ill
What I propose.




I was rap'd with th'unexpected honour,
And happines wherewith I saw me filled,
And th'excesse of my joy transported me:
I feare through my obedience to betray you,
To make detraction to speak against you,
And to treat Zegry too unciviliy
In giving without his consent my hand
And faith; but this weak fear yeilds to my flame
Duty prevails not now upon my soul,
And cannot take from me the glorious pur∣pose
Of giving you my heart and hand together.



Thou thinkest on't too late, my mind is chang'd,
And n'er shall chāge again, know that I feign'd,
Only to try thee, that excesse of goodnes,
And thy fires for Fatima presently
Burst forth.



Oh! I had never any for her!



Thy deceit's plain enough, I'm very well
Assured of this fatall mariage:
When I press'd thee to passe thy faith unto me,
I faw that thy remorses for Fatima

Accused thee, and thy confusion
Confirmed me in my belieft that she
Receiv'd the faith which I demanded of thee.



I offer it unto you.



No thou caust not
Dispose of it. Thou hast already given it,
And wilt abuse me.



You abuse your self
Wiih too much warines.



Hast thou the boldnes
To reply yet? Go, go to thy Fatima,

To morrow is your mariage day, I know it.
She hath affections for thee, fince thou hast
Refused me.



Hear me, I do beseech you.



No, no? that were too great a weaknes in me:

  91Know that I leave thee, n'er too see thee more.

A secret poison's hid in the discourse
Of an Ingratefull person, and each word
A traitor speaks, destroys worse then the sword.








STrange successe, this! How is my soul pos∣sess'd
Still with new troubles? must I suffer then
The punishment of a fault which I have not
Committed? when revenge doth presse me to
Destro• a friend, must I at the same time
Destroy a Mistresse too? must I lose Zaida?
Yes my heart, I must loose her presently,
Since in depriving her of a dear brother,
My arm will draw her hate and anger on me:
I should hence forth no longer be so soft,
Tis time to think of Zegrys death, he must
Pay his blood to repair the honout which
He robs me of. This Enemy so dear
Must die, and I must sacrifice him to me;
He comes: at his approach some tēder motions
Oppose my just resentments, and indeed
Render them weak, my friendship combateth
The anger that possesseth me, my tendernes
Is lesse weak, and my fury is lesse strong.
He sav'd my life, he ravished my Sister;
Shall I go to embrace him, or to kill him?







AT last I've met with him that wrōgeth me,

Ormin leave us alone.



I will retire me.
Into this thicket secretly to see
What passeth, I doubt there will be a quarrel:
  aside.









I've much cause to be so.



What troubles you so much?



A wretch, a Traytor,
Whose crime gives me an infinite regret,
And doth deserve more then a single death
To punish it.



May I serve you herem?



Yes, I can't finish my revenge without thee.




Zegry, you can dispose of all my blood.



It is an offer which I can•t refuse.







Thou art extream bold:

  93Knowst thou not, traitor, that it is thy self?







Thou; n'er seem to wonder at the thing.
Only defend thy self.





How much am I.
Indebted to thee for this sudden passion,
Tis now the chief point of thy amity:
Thy anger doth oblige me, though it wrōgs me.

I had already in my heart resolu•d
The design of thy death, and justly too:
My arm was ready for it, when inspight
Of all my fury, at thy first approach
My heart grew tender, and had been reduc'd
To balance the fierce darts which I had level'd
Against thee, if thy furious transport
Had not call'd home my choler unto me,
And banished my tendernes.




No more discourse, once again guard thy self



So fierce a fight can•t but be sweet unto me
Honour solicits me more justly to it
Then thee, but let me know at least the cause
That doth provoke thee; I will make it plainly
appear that thou complainest wrongfully,
And justify my self in Killing thee.



How! feignst thou to be ignorant, and instead
Of making a confession, dost thou threaten me?
Thy base crime groweth greater by thy bold∣nes.



Let me at Iast know what that base crime is.



Consult thy conscience, and thou shalt know it,
It will instruct thee that wi•h a false heart
In recompense of all my kindnes to thee
Thou rob'st me of my Mistresse, and that
Through treacheries which cannot be excus'd,
Thou art to marry her to morrow privately.



If I am criminall, assure thy self,
It is not in this point: I never did
Look on Fatima with desires of love;
Only thou ma•st reproach my heart for ha∣ving
Sight for thy Sister without thy consent.



How! dost thou love her?



No, no, it would be
An extream errour, I say, I adore her,
I dare not say I love her. That which I
Resent now for her beauties doth surpasse
The thing that s called Love.




Dear friend, thou hast restored life unto me.
My griefs and troubles now are waited on

  95By an excesse of pleasure; Zaida is
Too happy, and her thoughts could never hope
A more illustrious husband: she is free.
The Lover unto whom I gave my word,
Hath seen his destiny determined
By death, and my repose shall fully be
Setled to meet a brother in the person
Of my most deare friend.



What thou offerest me
Should be most dear unto me; but dost thou
Know him whom thou makst choice of for thy brother?




I think, I doe; thy country is Tremissa,

Thy name, Almansor, and thy family
Is noble and illustrious; and if I
May believe thee, thy greatest glory is
To be my friend.



Thou knowst me but by half yet;
I was born heer, and born thy enemy,
More then one just and honest motive doth
Engage me to thy ruine; not to hold thee
Long in suspence, I am Abencerage.








O Heaven!  
aside.




That wotd doth tell thee.
Our difference, and my duty.





  96Know as thy self the mutuall hatred which
In our two houses seemes almost as twere
To be immortall; but thy blood which now
Thou owest to my succour, should for me
Stop the course of it in thy soul; and though
My friendship seems to stagger on this point,

I will content my self to hate thy name,
And love thy person. Yes, pursue thy love
Vnto my Sister; by a mariage
We may be tied with new knots, and by
That holy flame, the irreligious heat
Of that so old, and fatal enmity,
Will be extinct.



This mariage would be sweet,
But I can't think of it till by thy death
I have reveng'd my selfe upon thee.







It is not that which thou believ'st provokes me,
Thy name I hate not, but I hate thy person,
And I cannot but in thy blood repair
The wrong which thou hast done me.








How ill thou actest the astonished,
Thy base crime groweth greater by thy boldnes.



Let me at last know what that base crime is.



Consult this letter, read, and thou shalt know it.




YOu, from whom I derive my birth,
Know that a sad fate worse then death
Is hapn•d to me; all our name
I• my losse bear an equall shame;
The false and cruel Zegry is
The Authour of my miseries,
For he it is that by his charms
Hath taken me out of your arms.
Zelinda.



Without doubt they will both mistake them∣selves.



I cannot comprehend this dark Aenigma.



It is too plain to me here that my sister

Zelinda giveth us to understand
That thou art her base ravisher.




Suspect me of so foule an action?



Canst thou deny it, traitor? and can I
Believe it?



Hear me but a word or two.



It would be to no purpose, guard thy self,
I'l hear no more.



How! dares the man that ow• me
His life, to assault mine?




Cannot divert me from my just reveng:
Thou wrought'st my safety, and my sisters rape,
And so much as life is lesse dear then honour,
So much an affront which reflects upon it,
Carries it in my soul upon a benefit,
And I am lesse afraid to be ingratefull,
Then to be infamous; but let us leave
Discourse, and come to action.




Stay yet a little.








ADIBAR, ZAIDA, MEDINA, ALABEZ, LINDARACHE, GOMELLA, FATIMA, CHARIFA, ALMANSOR, ZEGRY, ORMIN, GASUL.



Is this I heare?



What rumour is rais'd up?







No, no, go on,
My son, finish thy work.





Cannot be taken up, therefore let's leave it
To be decided.



No, such a third person
As I, shall never suffer them to fight,
And to look on.



Well then, defend your selfe.
We 't fight all four.






Oh! brother rather lift
Your arm up against me, I'in guilty only,





Whom do I see?




•ou see Zelinda your unfortunate Daughter,
Who left your family to follow Zegry;
And who in changing fate and habit only,
Could not enforce her soul to the least change:
My heart which was pleased in slavery
By him, forgat it self in following.
Somwhat too constantly this fleeting Lover;
But having known him to be taken with
Another Object▪ I feard in discovering

  100My self, to draw upon me his contempt,
And would still suffer the same violence,
If his own i•terest brake not my silence.













Revenge your self, I mourn you, I accuse
My self, and yeild my bosome to your stroak▪




Zegry, You need not to fear any thing
From my resentments, if you pitty me,
I am not to be pittied.




That after so much goodnes as you have
Expressed to me, I have but one soul
Too give you; and if the consent of your
Parents and friends will be propitious to us,
There's nothing can impede our mariage.



This mariage is the chief of all my wishes.



Friend, thou canst make me happy too, thy Sister
Dependeth on thee, thou know'st, I adore her.




I offered her unto thee, a while since,
And now I do again with height of joy.



All my suspitions are extinguished,
And you must know that following my duty,
I follow my desires; but Adibar

Will complain of it.




When I lose all hope, I lose all my flame:
And to expresse unto you that I do not
Resent it, I will sacrifice my heart
In flames of loue to that fair Saint, for whom
I burned formerly; Gomella. may I
Hope your incomparable Daughter?




My family is honoured by your choice.

Fatima, take your husband from my hand.



Such pleasing orders I shall willingly
Obey.



Come, let us go unto the Mosquè

Together, to give thanks unto the goodnes
Of Heaven that set an end to our misfortunes,
And made appear by this happy successe,
That one may be ingrate, yet generous.



