

Antonio and Circumstantio. Ant. waking and rising from his
Couch.



BLess me, Circumstantio, how goes the day?



Dear Sir, two hours precisely are roul'd
off since the Meridian, and Sir by the way I have
often thought the Sun a proper emblem of all us,
though we be never so glorious for birth or parts, like him
alas how soon we set! 'tis pity noble Sir that men of parts 



 Again Fool brushing up your thredbare phrases▪
your nasty ends of Gold and Silver, your tawdry intellectual
Wardrobe, you had best tell me what's a Clock without your
foolish sentences and morals Thou everlasting Coxcomb, are
not words to express thoughts by, and the plainest expression
of our meanings best?



Oh Heaven Sir you amaze me! plain speaking!
Sure words were meant for ornaments of thoughts, and I'd
not for the Universe be without those tropes, and flowers that
my discourse adorn.



Most excellent Rogue! flowers? no your weeds rise
thick, and I will root out them or thee, thou gross nauseous
Fool: laughter which first thou tookest as an applause, since it
hath been the cause of thy disease, shall be thy cure, and thou
shalt be a scorn to all the Family.



The envy, not the scorn, no men of parts can laugh
at me



In short Sirrah, tell me plainly what's a clock, or I
will cudgel you most excessively.



Sir, the Sun has from its Zenith these two hours de∣clined.



Incorrigible wordy Rogue! Come Sirrah, I'll stop
those Rhetorick vapours Ho there within Pietro, is the Pil∣lory
I bespoke for this Fool made?









Let it be brought in.








Now Sir you shall find the ill success of translating
the florid Coxcomb. Is there but one sort of Fool more nau∣seous
than other to me, (I mean your Orator) and must you
copy him?



Sir be concise and clear, I hope you mean not me.



In short, most eloquent puppy, you must stand in the
Pillory, expos'd to jeers and taunts of all the house, until two
hours precisely are rowl'd off. Sirrah, I told you the next
trope was Capital, no metaphors but in turn'd suits Fool.



Oh utinam nescirem literas the Pillory for Rheto∣rick
and good parts!



There is no remedy, I have often threatned you be∣fore.



Oh cruel master whose heart is hard as Rocks of Ada∣mant!



Within there, bring in the Pillory, I'll try if punish∣ment
will reform thee.



I'll dye a martyr Sir to tropes and
figures, Oh Nick Nick Machiavel thou
Enter with pillory.
hast well observed, great merits when they
rise too high, meet hate from them who ought to recompence
them. Consider Sir the injury you do your own fair Honour,
alas I shall not be hurt.



I'll try that, put him in.







Be not so temerarious, Friends.



Put him in, he's at his tropes still.



Must I abandon eloquence? Certes thou wast not born
of Humane race, but sprung from some wild Numidian Father,
and got on some rough Caledonian Mother, from Ganges West,
to Gades East, there is not one so savage. Hold, Hold, I say 





Welcome my dear Marcello thou art come in good time
to see my Farce.







'Tis a Collar for my Orator, you have often known
him plague me with his tropes; this Rascal serv'd me all the
  3
while I studied at Padua, where (instead of Learning) the
Coxcomb got a little false Rhetorick and Pedantry, he affects
to talk like a Scholar, and never since would bring a message
or tell what's a clock without a trope.



'Tis pity you should affro•• one of such parts, re∣lease
him now, I'll be his surety.







Sir, when for this noble intercession I shall cease to
offer the oblation of my thanks upon the Altar of my heart,
may I become the scum and scorn of vagabonds.



You see his amendment.

Dearest Nuarcha, I am your humble servant, let me kiss thee.



Thank you dear Sir.



What news from my Mistress the Widow Paulina?



This night she ends her year of Widowhood, and
now will see and speak with man again, she has removed my
old Masters statue out of her Bed-chamber, and old Seignior
Paulo has leave this night to speak with her, but sure she is de∣signed
for one more young, of whom she thinks and talks,
sleeping and waking.



Much thanks for thy goods news, faith I must kiss
thee again, though much against my conscience and my ap∣petite.




How soveraign a Cordial is Mankind!



Sir I beseech you to entreat for a remission of my igno∣minious censure.



Pray release your Orator on his submission.



I do upon condition he will abandon tropes and fi∣gures,
and speak sence to his fellow servants.



My affairs call me home, I had almost forgotten,
Mrs. Lucinda, Seignior Paulo's daughter, whom you know her
Father has placed with my Lady, has a desire to speak with
you in the Garden about the prevention of her Fathers marri∣age
with my Lady, which would much prejudice her affairs, I
will make way for you to see her.



You will most infinitely oblige me, assure her I will
not fail to do her all the service of my life, and should think
my self happy to venture it for her. One kiss more, dear
sweet Mrs. Nuarcha.



A most absolute compleat fine Gentleman, a civil
  4
proper young man is a most sweet Creature! Sir your most
obedient servant.








You are a most vigorous man to be able to kiss this
Succubus.



This salacious old Chamber-maid is better bribed this
way than any other.



You have a lusty mind to the Widow I see, that you
can travel through so soul a way to her.



O Marcello, 'tis not the Widow which I aime at. Lu∣cinda's
Mine of beauty far exceeds the Widows wealth, so ex∣cellent,
so sweet, so rare a Creature, I but pretended passion to
the Widow to get access to beautiful Lucinda, and now con∣gratulate
my happiness, she has contrived an interview her
self. But why do I tell thee of this? thou art an Heretick, an
Infidel to love.



Oh thou mistak'st me, dear Antonio, I am a Convert, I
have the Image of a fair one stampt upon my heart, that ne're
can be effaced.



This is news indeed, may I know who this fair one is?



That adds to my confusion, she is unknown; yester∣day
morning going to my devotions, this Lady being near me
dropt her Handkerchief, I stoopt and gave it her, she hastily
put up her Vaile, and with so sweet an aire thank'd me for
my service, and show'd me such a face, that nature in all her
plenteous store can never shew an equal.



The shewing of her face in Florence, is an encourage∣ment
against despair.



I should have thought so, had not I found when she
perceived I watched her she shun'd my search, and spight of
all my diligence avoided me in the crowd at Church, so that the
shewing o• her matchless face appears an accident from her
surprise, and no designed favour.



It cannot be, you construe it amiss, fear not she'll give
you opportunity again to see her. But as you are my Friend
I have a thing of near concernment to relate to you, a thing
that grievs me much, I find the Duke's command has not yet
power to tame Lorenzo's spirit, he seems yet more enraged
than ever.



I know it since the Duke checkt him so severely, and
  5
vow'd to punish his disobedience if he contracted not a friend∣ship
with me; he thinks that I by a complaint caused his dis∣grace,
and is more bent upon revenge for that.



It is a custome too frequent, and too brutal here, for
Parents to entail their Quarrels with their Estates.



It is so, and therefore I'd avoid them. Our Fathers
ambitious of preferment could not admit superiour or equal,
they liv'd like the two fam'd Theban Brothers alwayes in war,
the fierce Lorenzo when but young was sworn to oppose the
Growth and Fortune of our house, hatred was left by Will and
Testament. I have used all healing wayes, affecting the friend∣ship
of a person that but for this, would be most worthy of it,
but 'tis all in vain.




A Messenger from Padua, who by his haste may well
be called a Mercury, well figur'd by his wings on Head and
Feet, is much sollicitous to impart his grand affair unto your
proper ears.



Again at tropes, thou odious Rogue?



Antonio Fare thee well, I will to Vespers, and see if I
can find my unknown Mistress out.



Farewell Marcello, I see this Love will make thee very
devout. Where is this Messenger?





Madam, do not thus blast your beauty with your sighs
And drown it with fond tears, forget the cause
Of this dire mischief.



As soon a wretch with dislocated limbs
Might put the rack out of his memory
That caus'd his torments. How just is heaven
To punish thus the Brothers unjust ra•e
With hopeless love upon the Sister! Fierce Lorenzo

Still more and more pursues the good Marcello

Hurryed by my •athers hot spirit, and
His own mistakes and Jealousies, whil'st I
Doat on Marcello's generous nature, which
Would pass by all his cr•ing injuries,
And heal the wounds which weaken both our Families.
At first I but admired his lovely form,


His vertue now compleats the victory.



Why do you call yours hopeless love? Marcello

Though yet he knows you not, has seen and loves you,
By yesterdays good signs you saw it, which
I'm too skilful not to understand.



Ah Leonora, should my Brother know
He once hath seen my face, although by chance,
He'd tear my heart out, but did he know
I lov'd him! Oh fatal eyes that ere beheld
This lovely enemy.



Yet were you married to Marcello, his courage
Might defend you from your Brother and perhaps that marriage
Would close the breach between the Families.



'Twould pull down ruine on us both.
I see thou know'st not his ungovern'd •age.



Too well I know and fear it, he is talking yonder
In the Piazza, should I suffer you to loiter thus
In the way to Church, I should soon feel his rage I fear.
Let's hasten to Vespers, devotion and good musick
May perhaps soften your care.



No Leonora, no divinity can justle out Marcello







Come Charge, let's hasten to the Church,
The Saint of this day whatever good he
Does, brings us good Musick. All the Masters
In Florence assist at the Ceremony.



Yet all will cause but little harmony
In me, there's nought but discord in my thoughts.
Oh fatal love! yonder is my Lorenzo,

Heaven! my Lorenzo, foolish tongue he ne're
Alas can be so, though he long has warm'd
My tender heart, and yet he never saw me.



What are you musing on? let's haste to Church.



He'll hate the Sister of his enemy,
His rage does burn so fiercely in his breast
'Twill cause eternal separation
'Twixt him and any of our Race; fool that


I am, that I should like that fierceness
In him too, and think it does become him.



What do you mutter to your self? go on.



I find my love too hard for me, when we are
Bewitched to love a man, we like
Each fault, and folly in him too.
Bless me! my Brother and he come
Towards one another! stand by, I'll
Wait the sad event, I shall be known
By thee, else my black habit makes me
Undistinguish'd, and I would try to hinder it.







Retire, I'll venture on an odd experiment.





What's here my Brother and Marcello!

Oh fatal meeting. Retire Leonora and let
Mealone 


and Marcello with his man Albricio.



Who's here, my hated Foe? now for his
Blood, what power has hitherto defended
Him from this Arm and Justice?



So I shall have an honourable occasion
Of shewing my prowess.



I will avoid him as much as honour
Will permit me.



What dost thou shun me, Coward?



I am less a Coward than thou a Brute,
I fear thee not thou know'st it,
But I'd obey the Duke.



That name calls all my strength into my arm
And quickens my revenge, you have abus'd me.









They go to fight.


Thou ne're shalt reach it.



Sir I will wait upon you.





Julia goes to Mar∣cello and Camilla to Lorenzo.


Oh hold your hand, spill not Lo∣renzo's
blood,



My life, my soul, my Genius, my good Angel
In appearance, but my destroyer now.
Am I a Rival to my enemy?



Is your protection there?



'Tis in my hand.



O Sir, If ever prayers could move your fierce
And stubborn nature, hear 'em now,
Pull not Marcello's blood upon thy head.
He's Generous and would forget your injuries.



He dare not then remember 'em, prithee
Woman let me go. Come from thy guard
And fight.



Hold, hold, the rashness of this act will ruine you.

Cam. puts up her vail.
Beho•d my tears, deny 'em if you can.



Ha! who art thou?
By heaven the brightest thing that e're was seen,
What is't shrinks up my nerves, and calls
Back my revenge?



I on my knees beseech you will desist
From your rash action, can you deny me?



By all the Saints in heav'n I cannot.
Death what's this that softens me to
Woman? By heaven and earth she is
The sweetest Creature that earth e're was,
Or heaven e're made.



Who is't that on her knees can beg for my

Marcello? have I Rivals too besides the
Enmity of our Family to undo me?



Ah Madam had the care you have express'd
Been aim'd at me, I had been blest enough.



I had a care of you, but he must be my care.




Marcello go and live, this Lady bids thee
Live. Thank her.



I thank none but heaven for my life,
It is unmanly to be thus vain-glorious.



Good Sir walk this way, I have something
More to say to you.




Who are you Madam that have hindred
This present quarrel between my mortal Foe


And me, but let me tell you, y'have 〈◊〉

My private peace, and raised a war more
Dangerous within me than any thing I
Could have met from him.



I dare not tell my name, I meant no
Harm to you, but if you love your self,
Or if your nature has imbibed
But the least softness from your Mothers milk,
Pursue not farther good Marcello's life.



Good Marcello! Hell and Furies! she loves him.
First let me know who gives me this command.



First Sir, deserve it by your temper,
And be assured I will not be ungrateful▪
Farewell.





Tempests and whirlwinds! whither am I rapt!
She is gone, she has lest me quite unmann'd,
At once I am stung with love and jealousie,
And I have let my Rival scape my fury.
Sirrah, dog that Lady, and on your life
Enquire out who she is.

Thou art not my Foe alone but happy Rival.
Instead of cooling shor has inflam'd our strife:
I'll first defeat thy love, then take thy life.






In troth 'tis well leapt, Paulo, who can say thou'rt old,
let me see any young man leap with more agility hah
well done Paulo, come thy joints are plyant, thy back lusty, and
thou fit for an able Bridegroom, hah well done again ho∣nest
Paulo. What? grey hairs are no marks of old age, but
of many years, of chaste and sober youth, and of no idle ex∣pence
of life, of no years cut off by a Chirurgeon, nor washt
away in a Tavern. Widow I commend thee in thy first
choice, and hope thou wilt resemble it in a second Have at
thee Widow, have at thee. Now well jumpt Paulo. But
now I must fatherly infuse Chastity into my Daughter, and
teach her rules too hard for me, Declaim against the lewdness
of the World, and advise her to chuse the vertue of a Nun∣nery,
  10
for •he being 〈◊〉 setled, my Widow can assault me with
no very strong objection. Lucinda come hither.








What have you been doing Lucinda?



Sir I have been observing the Pictures in the long Gal∣lery.



Which of them Child?



I observed Europa and Iupiter, and the Picture of Calisto
surpriz'd by the same amorous God.



And we observed how he put a trick upon Danae, for
all the Guards of her severe Father.



Out upon it, meer bawdry, dost thou know my Child
the moral of it? it declares a hot Gallant, and a vile Governess
debauch't with money to ruine her charge: Out upon you
naughty Girle! to indulge your Carnality with provocation;
why did you not look upon the good Saint Mary Magdalen, you
know she bemoan'd all her love-vanities, you should have view∣ed
St. Katharine of Alexandria. Did not I bid you speak to
your Lady to take down these Pictures, and that of Mars and
Venus in a net?




O Devilish dissembling old Fe•••w!



I will be a kind Father in keeping thee spotless from
this world, I am now old, and can best tell you the small im∣provement
vertue makes in Worldly conversation; come, have
you considered well my Child our late Discourse about a Nun∣nery?
Oh the sweet life! O the blessedness of such retirement!
O divine pleasure of a Nunnery!



This old Goat thinks to deceive me. What sure do
you propose most unnatural rules to be observ'd by her in the
fresh spring of her life, which you cannot submit to in the fro∣zen
December of your age?



Peace vain naughty carnal Woman. Speak Child,
does silence give consent? perhaps thou may'st through piety
be Canonized: O what joy! and what honour to us all!
to have posterity after thy death pay devotion to St. Lu∣cinda.



Pray Sir, may not Wives be Saints? if you please I will
turn Nun when I am a Widow.



I well said Madam; Pray have you the heart to put
a young Woman of this neat shape, this complexion, these
bright eyes, this sweet breath, these clean teeth 



Woman, hold thy tongue.



I will not, what into a Nunnery! what flesh and
blood dares be her Confessor? there's ne're a shav'd pate of them
all but has more mind to her than a month's fasting.



O Lord! she will make me deaf with talking.




Had she been crooked, had she wanted an eye, one leg
shorter, one hand revers'd, or uncurable fits, or by any distem∣per
improper for copying out her own sweet-fac'd Picture:
then she had been fit for a Nunnery, then most fit for your Ma∣tins
and Vespers.



Well, have you done?



No Sir, I have not done, Is this flesh and blood for a
Nunnery? no, she shall be a Matrimonial Saint, her shrine shall
be a Down-bed and a Quilt, and her Chapel a well furnisht
Chamber, the Pilgrim that shall kneel to her and kiss her, shall
be a young handsome man, and you need expect no Miracle,
but to see her Nuns work run up and down, and call you Grand
Pappa.



I tell thee Woman, I shall chastise thee if thou holdest
not thy tongue. Thou hast been false, thou hast corrupted my
daughter, thou hast confederated with Carnality: Get thee out
of my sight, I will forthwith speak to my Lady Abbess about
it, and she shall be admitted to morrow.



Sir, if you please, since a Daughter cannot with a Fa∣ther
dispute this great affair, which like marriage is for better
for worse, let your Friend and mine reason it calmly, whether
your only Daughter should turn Nun; If their reasons con∣vince
me, I obey.



Well, for once I consent, who shall they be?



Sir, any young Gentleman of Florence shall judge for
me, and for you my design'd Mother-in-Law Paulina.



Begon you sawcy Baggage: What, concern your
self in your Fathers Business? what, you can prate, can you dis∣obedience?



No Sir, I am all duty; you told me, you lov'd me,
because I did resemble my Mother: I would fain increase your
  12
love, and be like my Mother in every thing.



Begon I say, my will is fixt.



Pray Sir, I ever lov'd my Father, and since the world
is so perillous, let us both leave it: You often commanded
me to follow my Parents Example.



Hence Impudence. And get thee out of my presence,

 pert Sl•t Well now for my Widow Well
jumpt Paulo hah vigorous Paulo, hah lusty Paulo Hah
brave Paulo.








WEll sirrah, what makes you stay so long, when I
bid you return a speedy answer from Lucinda?



Pray Sir, let me excuse my stay, secundum quid, by the
History of some extraordinary contingences which interfer'd,
though indeed I am of the Stoicks opinion, that nothing is con∣tingent,
but only seems so quoad nos.



Sirrah to the purpose Rogue, Rascal.




Sir, why do you wrong your self, and debase your na∣ture
by this vile imploy, which instead of making you red with
anger, should make you blush for shame?



You tormenting Villain speak now, or else I am re∣solv'd
to damn you to the Pillory.



Alas Sir, the Pillory! by this passion you extinguish
every thing that is Socratick, or indeed Philosophical; you
become my servant, I can make you kick me when I please,
alas poor Gentleman! did he but see how passion alters his
countenance, and defaces the pleasure of his Mistress!



Within there-bring in the Pillory; now sirrah you
shall not escape: bid your fellows come in with the Pillory
and Garland.



Sir, pray ponder the thing, and that you may not by de∣signing
me, expose your self to domestick ignominy, I will en∣deavour
to give verbal satisfaction.



Enter Pietro, Cook, Butler, Coachman, with the
Pillory and Garland.


Look invincible fool, here is the best Scheme for your
Rhetorick, this must be your Climax, and this the ornament
for your florid head, come put his Collar on, lest in his mad∣ness
he bites some of you, and so infect you.



Fellow-servants intreat your Master to consult his re∣putation,
and not pursue a thing so mal a propos.



Insufferable slaye, as impudent, as invincible.



Sir, what •rrour, what fault, what transgression? where
is the least Circumlocution? though habits are very tough.



In with him. I leave him to you, let him not sleep,
for that's bad in Physick, I allow you all battering instruments;
sirrah, your faults are many, I hope they will reckon them up
in my absence.




Torrens dicendi copia multis, & sua mortifera est facundia.



What at it again? I hope this punishment will prove
a cleansing vomit for your tough bits of eloquence.



I will suppress my anger, though it swells my heart,
and hear what the dull Rout will say, and thus by taciturnity
deceive them. Philosophy I thank thee!



Lord what makes Circumstantio in this strange disabilie
as he used to call it! he swells like some Don in his ruff, sure the
rogue has got a cold and cannot stir his neck.



No, no, the Landress has put too much starch in his
Cravat: that light pate of his peeps like a Cork out of a
bottle.



Well learned Domine! I knew you would at last be
yoked for your frequent breaking of hedges, most high and
mighty, you were alwayes despising your fellow-servants,
calling the Cook greasie, Butler frothy, the Coachman stable
man.





I am afraid our sport will be prevented by the com∣ing of this old Maid, now must we kiss her, and talk of her
husband, to keep her in some tolerable humour. Come Gen∣tlemen
show your breeding.




Blessings on you all, kind hearts, I have not received
so much comfort these two months: pray where is Antonio?
for I came to speak with him: ah! but what do I see the ac∣complished
Circumstantio in the Pillory?



Ah how dark and erroneous are the sentiments of the
unphilosophick, which proceed from want of definition and
distinction, they suppose this Pillory to be malum verum, which
we that have been better taught know to be but malum apparens,
no wise man can suffer ill; for how insignificant is malum poenae,
when the essence of a man is free from malum culpae! Oh what
consolation do I find in Metaphysicks! I will assure you Audi∣tors,
neither candid, nor gentle, that I value not this Pillory nor
its Pilloreity.



Well, I never heard him speak so finely before.



Mrs. Nuarcha, my Master is coming.



Then I will compose my self.

has sent me after your servant to hasten your coming, and to
tell you that she expects you within an hour at the Garden door,
where I shall be ready to receive you, and for this good news
let me beg Circumstantio's liberty. Indeed Sir you do not use
him according to his deserts.



Indeed Mrs. Nuarcha you are in the right, but for your
sake and this excellent news, I will not at this time be ungrate∣ful
in denying you any thing, well let him come out; Circum∣stantio
you're bound to pay your respects to this Lady, and by
right, if she thinks fitting, to marry her that brings you the re∣prieve,
but as the Prologue of Matrimony, kiss her.



I kiss her not quà Nuarcha, but quatenu• my deliveress.




Your words and lips shall alwayes be acceptable.



I must now return, shall I tell Lucinda that you will
not fail, for she expects me with impatiency.



Tell her I will watch each minute, and the hour will
seem a year till I wait on her.



and his Servant, in the Town.


Madam, Marcello just meets us.




Knows me I am ruin'd, is there no way
To escape him? though I would willingly
With his leave fly into his arms.




Prepare your discretion to receive him.
And put him off with hopes of seeing him,



Madam, though in obedience to your command
I durst not enter the Church after you,
So nice you are of discovering your self,
Yet now be not offended if I strive
To know the name of my kind Protectress.



Sir, pray retire, for sure the fierce Lorenzo

Hovers hereabouts to meet you, and then
I his fury returns, as sure it will,
Perhaps the kind Lady that bow'd his heart
And arm, may not be at hand to help you.



Like Heaven you gave us unexpected help,
And speak your mind like it in Oracles,
Dark and mysterious. I know no Lady
Neither you nor her, and owe no safety
To any but your self. Strange interview!
Big with contraries, which saves, and yet destroyes.
To hinder my chance of death thrown
From my enemy, yet as the same Friend
To murder me by kindness to my foe!



Let it satisfie in this place in words
To promise you, that I am as ready
As the other Lady to render my
Assistance to the worthy Marcello.




It seems you know me Madam.



 Not so well
As the Lady who ventured the blind rage
Of Lorenzo, by exposing her life
To save yours, you have small reason to blame
My hard heart, when you find such softness there.



Madam, 'tis the greatest severity
To rally with a Wretch upon the rack.



Come, you must be kept there till you confess.







 The name of her that
Did you such service, and then you may more
Justly expect mine, for my part I can
Allow you but one Mistress at a time.



Madam, if you design me by cruelty
For death, let me not mistake some kindness
In your words to keep me longer in pain.
Oh speak my fate, for doubt is worse than death.
You'll prove unkind if you pronounce my death,
Yet more kind by speaking to finish life and pain.



Sure despair is the worst vice of the Brave.
Well, to be short, I will make
This agreement with you, pursue no more
Questions nor any further inquiry
At this time, and I promise suddenly
To grant the satisfaction you desire.
And may Heaven grant that knowledge don't increase
Those torments which we both conceive in ignorance.




Well, I submit, 'tis more generous to say, I obey my
Mistress, than necessity, and 'tis better far to stand still, than
march after love, when it moves like a wandring fire.
Lest the poor Traveller goes more astray
In a blind Moonless light, and unknown way.





Sure my Servant is lost, as well as his poor Master.
Oh how I rack my mind to know who this fair Creature is!
perhaps to my greater torment, for some small hope hovers
about me in my ignorance, which will take wing and upon in∣formation

Well, who is she? speak hold upon your life forbear, your
look foretells misfortune.



Pray Sir, shall I tell you, or shall I not tell you?



If your relation be good, stay not a moment, but if fa∣tal,
let it remain in everlasting silence yet I must hear, come
who is she?



Nay Sir, be not so passionate, for I can neither kill you,
nor save you.



Slave be quick, who is she?



Pray Sir be satisfied, heaven and St. Peter knows
for me.



Wretch, dost thou not know? why dost thou keep me
thus in pain? speak or for ever hold thy tongue, who is she?



Sir, in short I dogg'd her, but she was too nimble for
me, she was mingled with so many in the Church, that I could
not distinguish her.



Villain thou lyest. I will kill thee, and write fool in
thy blood, what, not distinguish her? villain thou lyest, 'tis im∣possible,
a bright circle alwayes crowns her face, her vail was
all illustrated, as clouds gilded by the Suns darted beams, her
breath would discover her at distance, as spices in blossom be∣tray
Arabia to approaching Travellers. Roses grow for ever
where she treads, and nature paints her footsteps: not know
her, not distinguish her! Impudent sot; recollect, and tell me
you know her.



Hey-day: here's brave alteration in my Master: tru∣ly
Sir, to speak the truth, I have a great cold, and so perhaps
could not smell her, and then my eyes are very weak, and can∣not
look against so much light; as for Roses I saw none. La∣dies
servants, and their servants servants look not with the same
eyes. Perhaps 'tis alwayes Summer, and hot weather when
you see her, but it was Winter by that time I drew near to her.



Yes, by your stay it seemed so; march before, and lead
me to her; or 



Lord Sir, what do you mean? have a little patience,
and she may come by this way again. Vespers were almost
done when I came to you: 〈◊〉 see your enemy Marcello is
just going into his house.



I would it were his grave, but I will shortly send him
or my self thither.



Sir pray look that way I think I spy the same Lady
coming, yes 'tis she, now I see the light about her face, yes I
smell the roses, and see them blush, and peep under her Pet∣ticoat.



'Tis she I know my murdress is at hand by inward
bleeding. My heart beats vehemently, and my blood presses
  18
with haste through lifes flood-gates: love which animates all
creatures, abates my courage, when I have most need of it. I
cannot speak to her, and yet I must.





Lorenzo is here, alas I tremble
To meet the Man I love. I know he stares
To learn who I should be, and where I live.
'Tis only ignorance can make him kind,
For knowledge would extinguish his devotion.
He comes this way, be sure you discover
Nothing of me to his servant.





Grant me the favour of some few minutes,
To tell you that you have kill'd me, and sav'd
My enemy; pray pardon the roughness
Of my unpractis'd love, born in a storm
And yet wrapt up in its clouds and darkness.
Oh tell me I beseech you who you are,
That were so kind to my foe Marcello.




Sir, I should venture more to save the life
Of good Marcello; and since time and place
Hinder me from offering long prayers
To you, let me beg one boon on my knees
If you can love




Madam, I beg of you
Not to abuse you supplicant; O Death!
She names the villainous Marcello with affection,
And calls him good, but in death I should be
Charitable, pray name your boon that I
May grant it.



May good heaven bless Lorenzo

For this mercy; be kind to Marcello





Curst expression! each syllable

Proves a poynard, and stabs me to the heart.

Marcello is my rival; Dear Madam
Pronounce those words again to make me happy,
If there be happiness for me in death.




Come Charge, let us go.



Hold, hold, you have not proved your self a woman
yet, and discovered who your Lady is.



But you have declared your self a Serving-man by that
question, What are you? your masters forlorn hope? •ent out
to skirmish with the enemy, and then retreat to the main body.



I never heard the Sutlers wife, or the Laundress call her
self part of the Army before.



Saucebox, I believe your empty belly, and foul Linnen
put these words into your mouth; come Charge let's go and not
expose our selves thus in the street.



I go with great regret, but must retire,
Farewell Lorenzo, and be kind to me.




By heavens I am astonished and scarce know
Where, and who I am! O stay a little
And hear my last petition, pray tell me
Who you are, so cruel to Lorenzo

And so kind to your Marcello; Whom now
I must for ever hate, for what can move
A man so much, as his lost fame and love?



O speak not such ill omens, for kind heaven
Will bring us safe out of our labyrinth.
I go Lorenzo, but will soon find time
To see you, and make my self more happy,
If now you'l promise me to retire
Without observing me.




Since it pleases you, to torment my self:
And be tormented by my ignorance.



'Tis best, for knowledge would my hopes destroy,
His hatred is so inveterate against any of
Our house: farewell Sir




Farewell my Visionary Mistress; for I neither know
who, no• whence thou art; like Ixion, I did fancy a Goddess,
but embrac'd a cloud. Sirrah what were they we discours'd
with just now?



Two Women, without doubt Sir.



'Tis false, impudence, are your sure you talked with
any woman?



I am sure mine was a true Woman, by her way of
speaking.



'Tis strange that I should thus forget my self, to lay
open my follies before my servant: hurried with new passions
of love, and jealousie. Marcello is my Rival and my Foe. My
Rival 'tis enough it is decreed. I will forthwith
to his house, and kill him: no place shall save him, not the
Court, nor Duke; nor Houshold gods; no bright apparition
shall rescue him from death the second time.





Brother, are you resolv'd to go to night?



Yes Dear Sister, my horses are ready.



When shall I see you again?







I am sorry you go; pray have a care
Of your self. Lorenzo you know is much
Enrag'd, and seeks after you




Sister, Lorenzo is honourable.
His greatest fury can suggest nothing
That is unworthy of a Nobleman.
To day I met him, and I will tell you
At more leasure what wondrous providence
Diverted his rage, and divided us.



My Brother little thinks, I know the thing

So well, which he pretends to hide. But yet
Brother, last nights dream disturbs me. Methoughts
A young Gentleman of that house kill'd you,
And I in just revenge stabb'd Lorenzo.

Ye both •ay dead upon the groud, and then
Rose up, and like the dearest Friends embrac'd.
But that must signifie the other world.



Dreams are but the Echo's of the thoughts
Possess your mind by day. a lively mark
Of your great concern for me, for which I thank
My loving Sister.





Sir, Lorenzo whom I never saw here before, with angry
looks and hasty words, bids me tell you that he must speak
with you.







'Tis fortunate Sister to have him here, I hope he
comes prepared to hear me speak: retire Sister, whilest I in∣troduce
him.



I will withdraw, but overhear you both.



Marcello going to the door meets Lorenzo.




Lorenzo most welcome, you oblige me
And my house for ever, by this favour.




Marcello you mistake, I hate both you,
And your loath'd house. I desire no welcome,
But come hither like thy evil Genius
To terrifie thee, and bid thee meet me
In such a place, where chance shall not part us.



I cannot fear it in Lorenzo's shape,
Who rather should command my love, than fear,
If he could bridle passion, and 〈◊〉

His better reason, and the Dukes command.



Oh thou Rock under smooth waters! thou shalt
Never deceive me, thou base enemy,
Best able to kill at distance, and to
Murder me by whispers.



You wrong me much,
I hate the wretch as much as you, who can
Deserve this character. I would in my
Own house be calm, and make my plea
To these false objections.



 as true, as thou art false.
Now I find in thee a vice, I ever
Thought thee free from, I mean base cowardise,
Which springs from guilt; thou understand'st my rage,
And its just cause, yet would'st by oily smoothness
Loosen my hold, if thou hast any heat,
I will raise it by the remembrance
Of thy Mistress, who sav'd thee from my revenge
Today, 'tis her I'll have too, yet that
Shall never buy my friendship.




You have broke for me all ties of honour,
And good manners. Lorenzo, be gone,
My house is your best defence, pray leave it,
Your last words will force me to imitate
Your rudeness.



I will not go without you,


I came to fetch you out, and punish you.



It is in vain by calmness to flatter
His proud insolency any longer.
I have been tame too long, and that my wrong'd
Love and honour may have their quick revenge
Upon thee, beyond the reach of casual
Assistance to save thee, name some secret place
Where we may meet, if thou dar'st come,
Early to morrow morning.




For this kindness, if I find it real,
I must thank thee: in nothing else thou can'st
Oblige Lorenzo well by Sun-rising
Tomorrow, let us meet at the great Oak
In the Neighb'ring Forest, till then Farewell.



Let not my passion spoil civility,
I will see you safe out of my own doors.



Forbear your cere••nies, I hate them
From you, like him that uses them, it seems
As recantation of your former words.




You might accept them now, for I will shew you
none to morrow. I dare not tell my Sister what has pass'd be∣twixt

Here she comes, I will prevent her questions by telling her my
story first; Camilla I am glad that all things will be soon com∣pos'd
between Lorenzo, and my self; for he came very kindly
to propose a conference to morrow, where we shall upon the
debate grow more calm, I hope for ever; and that my propos'd
affair may not hinder me, I must take my leave, and be gone.
Dear Sister Farewell, and wish me good success.




May all that is good preserve my dear Brother. He's
gone, and now my eyes shall freely speak the rest. He thinks he
has deceiv'd me, and that I did not over-•ear their f•tal assig∣nation,
I will retire to my Chamber, and consider how to save
them both.





Lucinda, your father is so brisk and vigorous of late,
that he seems to have dropt Twenty years of his life.



Yes Madam, he has been fortifying himself these three
months to my knowledge, that he might appear brisk upon
this day of admission.



Prithee pay more respect to the old Gentleman before
your Mother-in-law, he alwayes appear'd cheerful though not
to this degree.



Well Madam, if you have a mind to be my Mother-in-Law,
'tis you will have the worst of it, not I.



Why so merry Cousin?



Because after a very little time my Father must return
to rheum and spitting-sheet, and then how will you away with
it? I love an old man well enough for a Father, but not for a
husband.



Pray Cousin let us reason it, such an old man as your
Father, or my late husband, would make you an excellent
match, come think of it Lucinda, it might prove most proper,
his gravity to allay your levity, his cold your heat, as we cor∣rect
Wine with Water.



Out upon it! I would not have an old man, though he
made me a joynture of the Indies, though he built me a house of
Silver, and turn'd a rich stream of golden Tagus to wash my
garden walls, though he could afford me Cleopatra's draughts
every morning, I should find out another Antony.



O brave Girle, had you rather venture a young mans
frolicks?



Yes, rather than to lye by an old man, 'tis lying with
a Coffin, and I am sure you had rather lye by a certain young
man than my f•ther.



Why do you think so Cousin? an old man is a very
wise bosome friend, whom long use of life has polish'd, from
whom you may learn the wisest rules to methodize your
self.



Very good, you advise me to marry an old man, that
is to say an history incarnate, true Annals writ upon a Skeleton;
and what then, go to bed with this rotten Chronicle? no he
shall lye cover'd with Cobwebs first. I don't intend to em∣balm
matrimonial mummy, to spoile the Apothecary's trade,
and fill my Closet with gally-pots.





Madam, Seignior Paulo desires to speak
with you.



Well, I will go wait upon my Cousin, 'tis to give my
approbation to the design of his musick he presents us with
to night at Supper. Cousin farewell, and think more chari∣tably
of an Old husband.




Antonio is just come to the back door, and I have got
my Mistress luckily away.



Pray bring him into this walk pray make haste,
and I will give you the best gown I have.



I go, I go to serve you both.




I know there is no danger of the Widows marrying
my Father, though she carries it so demurely; she has a grea∣ter
longing after my dear Antonio, and my love is not without
some hope; for though he seems to court the Widow, yet his
looks and words may be as well interpreted to me, I wish my
supposition proves true.





Madam, this happiness you confer upon me is more
than any past or future service can repay: pray Madam let me
know the honour of your commands, that I may express some
thanks by readiness to obey them.



Sir you shall know them presently, they concern
both you and my self: good Nuarcha, oblige me in observing
my Cousin and Father's motion, that I may not be surprized
talking with Antonio.



Well, dear heart, I will, I go most willingly, for a
hundred to one but they will talk about my Mistresses affection
to Anton•o, which amorous discourse will so heat my desires,
that they will exceed moderation: well goodly Couple •are∣well,
I dare trust you both.



Ah Lucinda, give me leave to speak, and whilest there
is time to undeceive you, by all that is good you should be∣lieve:
you are the design of my true love, and the Widow but
the Shadow of the Picture to cheat the eyes of the beholder.



Antonio, you mistake, I am not she you mean, I am
Lucinda and not the Widow, 'tis she has ever had the appear∣ance
of your love by words and actions, which bid her judge
it real. But I wi•h with all my heart he means what he
sp•aks.




Let this propitious hour be for ever blest, in affording
me time to express my heart.



Well, well, you are a merry man to whet your dis∣course
on me, against my Cousins coming.



Madam, do you think I want eyes and ears to distin∣guish
the beauty, and wit of Lucinda?



But to be serious, the only way to procure your Wi∣dow,
is by keeping off my Father; who to speak dutifully of
him seems in the Autumn of his life to pretend a second
Spring: I will assure you your Rival is very brisk with her;
therefore pray Court your Widow to the purpose, and give her
greater assurance of you, that my Father may be diverted from
clapping me into a Nunnery; and that is the end of my giving
you this trouble. Would to God I could tell him plainly that
I love him.




Oh Lucinda, be not so cruel as to condemn me to new
pains: for this falshood of pretended love is as great a torment
to me, as a mistake in you; rather command me to own my
love before your Father, and the Widow.



No, pray Court on, upon discovery Lucinda must
forthwith march into a Nunnery, I believe you will hardly free
her from it without her Portion.



Dearest Lucinda do not think so basely of your Lover,
that the spirit of his love so much delights in dross and earth.
I love not Lucinda as the Heiress of her Father; but for the in∣estimable
dowry of her Virtue and Beauty: I have enough
left me by my Ancestors, and fortune would be prodigal, to
grant me Lucinda to command me and it.



These words will make be believe former passages,

 Well, you are a pleasant man, yet I think it would prove
better for me to think of a Nunnery, and its happy quiet, than
of launching into a troublesome world, and Domestick Em∣ployment,
if it were not for one thing 



What is that Lucinda?



Why it must out if it were not for my Antonio.



Oh pronounce those blessed words again, lest it passes
for a dream of happiness.



Nay, I am glad 'tis out, but if it had not been for fear
of Nunnery and Hair-cloth, I had held out longer: yet you
  26
must Court the Widow, as you used to do, the next time you
see her.



For heaven sake do not relapse, I am weary of the
cheat: I must acknowledge the truth, this unkindness sug∣gests
as if you did not love me; for Lovers like the Deity hate
to have their dues offered to an Idol.



But as you love me, continue it for a while, I warrant
you for some handsome Plot to discover all in a little time.





Madam, your Father and my Lady are coming, pray
set your self in order.





How now! what do I see? is not that a young man,
and that my daughter?



Yes Sir, and a handsome young man too, he happen∣ed
to come by when the Garden door was open, and being de∣lighted
with the beauty of the place, I invited him in, as one
not unknown to my Lady.



Good Sir be disturb'd at nothing, he is a Gentleman of
my acquaintance, I am glad that any thing here has obliged
his stay: and that my Cousin was here so luckily to enter∣tain
him.



Madam, I need not fear to come off in the old Gen∣tlemans
opinion, having so good an Advocate.



Umph, Advocate, and old Gentleman! no more old
Gentleman than your self, for years do not bring age, but de∣bauchery
of youths and such Jacks as you are. Come Sauce-box,
can you jump as I can? come, the old Gentleman, as you
call him, shall try your activity.




How zealously this old Gentleman, like some sort of
lovers, acts one thing and is another, declaiming against youth,
yet mi•••king its gaye•y!



Young fellow there leave off your prating, and
try if your back can bear jumping as mine does: prethee
sweet Widow don't mind his prating, but observe this tryal of
skill.



Pray Madam, speak to my Father to have a care of
straining.



How is that, you Saucy baggage? abuse your Fathers
back to his face, that was one cause of bringing you into the
world? get you gone you undutiful slut, to abuse the spring of
your being.



Madam, what must your influence and virtue be,
which can thus change nature, and metamorphise old age in∣to
brisk youth?



But the victory is greater which conquers the stron∣ger,
and set•les wandring youth within the sober bounds of
constancy.



Come troublesome Companion, if you will have all
prating and no jumping, pray leave this Lady and prattle with
that young Flirt there. I'll warrant her I shall punish her
within few dayes for impiously throwing dirt upon my back.



Madam, since at this time this old Gentleman will be
your only Guardian, pardon me if I am forc't to play the hy∣pocrite.



Well Rag-manners forbear your flouting, or you
shall take what follows. And be satisfied that this Lady is
otherwise disposed of.



Lucinda, it certainly foretells good luck that I have so
easily obtained your Fathers consent to Court you.



But what would become of us if either of them
imagined the plot betwixt us?



Faith, I will directly discover it.



Yes, yes, throw me into a Nunnery▪ and then see
how you can get me out: pray at this time break up company,
lest it seems too much familiarity at first sight, I will contrive to
see you again before midnight.



Well, I will obey you in all things Madam I must
beg you• pardon for my rude intrusion, and yours Antient Sir,
if I have given you any occasion of trouble.



Well Sir, we thank you as much for your room as
your company Antient say you? Widow pray give him his
farewell.



Antonio, I am sorry my circumstances will not per∣mit
me to discover how much I value you: but be assured that
you shall be alwayes welcome to any place, which calls me
Mistress.



Madam, your most obedient Servant, I wish I might
in this place plainly express the truth of my affection. With
your Fathers good leave Lucinda let me be esteemed your most
faithful Servant.
Exit Ant.



Paulo, what think you of him, is he not a most ac∣complished
Gentleman?



No, no, very indiffe•ent, a meer flash, come put
him out of your head. Let's go in, the air grows cold.







MY Master has I must confess above my merits ho∣noured
me with a Commission to wait upon you
and kiss your noble hands, the which Province I embrace with
an eminent Exaltation of joy, since you are a person of such il∣lustrious
honour that Florence scarce contains your equal, I am
sure not your Superiour, which is no small symptom of my Ma∣sters
piercing wit and more distinguishing Judgement, that
have made so Excellent a choice.



You'll never leave your Rhetorick.



The subject needs it not, your vast merits afford so am∣ple
a Field of Discourse, that with Excessive pleasure I could
wander in those delightful paths, but at the present I am too
strictly bound by my Masters too hasty expectation of my too
quick Return.



Prithee to the point if you be in haste, for I am so.



I shall be brief, for brevity, though I must confess it does
too often obstruct the ravishing torrents of an eloquent▪ and
charming tongue, yet in quick dispatch of business I hold it ne∣•essary,
and therefore I shall proceed.



I must be gon else, what would Antonio have?



You being a person strictly allied to him by firm neces∣situde,
and boun• to him by the indissoluble knot of an inviola∣ble
Friendship, and being a person to whom he is mu••is nomini∣•us
obstrictus.



What would he have with me?



He being also a person embarrass'd with an amorous
Intrigue, well may I say embarrassed for res est 〈◊〉 plena •i∣moris
amor, as the Poet sings sweetly, But Antonio being a per∣son 



 That would speak with me, when and where?



I shall inform you, he being a person who not only having
great proclivity to that amorous passion, but being driven by
the violence of her beauty whose Image he wears upon his
heart, she being a person 



 Ounds is she a person too, nay then Farewel.



Hold good Sir, and hear the end.



S'death you will never come to an end.



She being a person 



 I will not stay if she be a person.



I am astonished Sir at your impatience, would you have
me speak vulgarly and abruptly, and in haste like a Nurse∣keeper
that is sent for Aqua-vitae?



I am going out of Town, I shall return and wait upon
your Master to morrow.



Hear me first, I shall be concise, for I am a person 



 You a person? nay then farewel▪ a pox on your person.





I am much mistaken Sir, if your unknown Mistress
be not coming this way and if it be she, I saw her come out
of Lorenzo's house: She's here.




What do I hear? Madam I know your person.
And yet I know not what to call you,
Unless it be Lorenzo's Mistress.



Jealousie is sometimes a sign of great love,
But alwayes of little wit.



I see then you will own it.
Has my so violent passion deserv'd your scorn?



Jealous and angry too! nay then I'm sure
You are fast enough i'th' toyle.




Lorenzo has employed you then
To set your beauteous snares to draw me in.
Then prey on me. This is most exquisite revenge



You are confident I am Lorenzo's Mistress,
Because the Lady who spoke to him to day▪
Is yours.



On my honour I know her not,
But I am sure, you came but now
Out of Lorenzo's house.



Shall I not accomplish my Embassie to you?



Pox on thee, begon Impertinent. Albricio know the
Tools Message if you can find it out.



What luck is this he should discover it 

I visited his Sister who was bred in the
Same Nunnery with me, and whom I love
Equally with my self.



If this be all, I may be happy yet.




Lorenzo is the man on earth I would not have,
I hate his stubborn and inveterate humour,
If he were sole Monarch of the Universe
I would not marry him, but if my too forward
Care of you will make you jealous, you
Shall have less of it hereafter.



O say not so, I had rather my good Angel
Should neglect me, and hover about my
Enemy.



Were there no other man in Florence, he
Should never have my love.
A Bark that's toss'd by Tempests on a Rock
Were safer than a woman cast on him.



Dear beauteous vision, for yet I know not
What to call you, I am convinc'd
You would refuse his love, and were I sure
You would accept of mine.



You are not sure I am worthy of it.



Thou art worthy of the love of Princes.
The greatest Hero that the earth e're bare
In thee might meet the end of all ambition.



Suppose I were one of Lorenzo's Kindred.



Wert thou his Sister, I would headlong fly
Into thy Arms, though he were at my back
Ready to give me the malicious blow
He long has wish'd me.



How I admire and love his generous nature!




By this plain declaration I deserve
Thou shouldst reveal thy self, and make me happy.


For whosoe're thou art, by Heaven I swear
My life and love to thee shall end together.
I am sure thou'rt good, for nature would not slubber so
To place an evil mind in such a body.



Your Generosity has so oblig'd me
That the next meeting which I will contrive
As soon as may be, you shall know my name:
Let it suffice at present to inform you
My vertue is unquestion'd, and my birth
And fortune too may claim the good Marc•llo.




Life of my soul, here let me seal my vows.



The Naturalists observe 



 What have I to do with your Naturals, what
would your Master have with mine?



I am confounded, that I should draw my breath in so
unlearn'd an Age!



Where is your Master?



I cannot say affirmatively what place does circumscribe
him, I suppose you hold with Aristotle, that locus est superficies.



Pox on Aristotle, where's your Master?



Paulina's Mansion did contain him locally, for Corpus
must alwayes be in loco, that's certain, but at this present point
of time I can only say indefinitely he is not at home.



Farewell, a pox of this stuff. Sir, I cannot understand
one Sentence that he sayes.



I see Lorenzo coming up that street.
Now if you would have me believe one word
You speak: avoid him quickly.



I am all obedience, Joy of my life farewell.



Will you not lend your ears for one small moment?



Damn you impertinent Rascal.




The world is envious of my parts I see,
There's no man truly honour'd while he lives.
I will write something, Quod nec Iovis ira nec ignis,

And then I'll dye and purchase true renown.





Disswade me not, I am resolv'd to venture
Through all the dangers Cowards can imagine.



Consult your honour and my safety Madam


As gentle as Marcello is, he would revenge
Your love adventures upon me.




I will protect thee and defend his life,
Or perish with him, 'tis no time to 〈◊〉

With his or with my lov'd Lorenzo's safety.
I'll save my honour too, or lose my life.
Go to Lorenzo's house, and let him know
I am here to speak with him.







I prethee lay thy tedious wisdom by,
We must have desperate remedies for this ill.
If thou'dst preserve my life, I do conjure thee
To do as I appoint thee.






Put a strict guard upon your honour now
And let not love find out its weaknesses.



My honour's safe, he sees me not.





Thou art my Deity, to thee I pay
My vows and off rings, Oh curs'd Marcello

To morrows Sun shall see thy treacherous heart
Throbbing within this hand. Oh Heavens who's this?
My Genius come to stop the lawful rage

Cam. puts her self before him.
Of this avenging Arm? It is her shape
The motion too of her Coelestial body.



I know her by her Governess my Mistress.



Fair unknown Saint of all my vows, to thee
The dear protectress of my life and fortune
I humbly kneel, and from thy powerful doom
Expect my life or death. If thou'lt be kind,
I will look down upon and pity Kings,
If not, the miserablest slave may pity me.


Vinc. speaks to her Governess kneeling.


Fair unknown Saint of all my vows, to thee
I humbly kneel Protectress of my fate,
Pu• up this Cloud and shine upon thy servant.



Whose Fool art thou?



I am Lorenzo's, pray whose Fool art thou?
It is a secret I would gladly know.



I shall never be thy Fool, that is, thy wife.



Break, break distracted heart, there is no cure.



Sir, you ask pity of me who needs it more.



Pray mock me not, such beauty stand in need
Of pity? 'tis impossible, you may
Give law to all that see you, and those wretches
That once could disobey you ought to be
Cast out from all humane Society,
And left to the company of Bears and Wolves.



Oh were these words the dictates of your heart,
I should be happy.



By all the joyes of Heaven
They are, I swear on your fair hand, except
You intercede for vile Marcello's life,
There's no command of yours I'd not obey,
I'd singly stand a breach, leap into fire
Or mount a billow when the foaming Sea
Is most enrag'd with tempests: I for you
Would scorn all danger, but the loss of honour
I cannot bear.



Nor could I e're esteem
One that would hazard that; but to be just
And honourable, you should end this fewd.
'Tis the most brutal custome of our Countrey
For Families to fight they know not why:
Beasts are more civil, for they never quarrel
But for necessity of nature: Good Marcello

Is willing to contract a Friendship with you,
And would on that condition give his Sister
Who's young, and they who have seen her say she's fair,
And all conclude her rich and vertuous,
This Sister he would give in marriage to you.



How! marry one o• his accursed Race?
I'd sooner take one sick of the Plague and keep
My Nuptials in a Pest-house. There's no yoke
Which the most savage Tyrant could impose
I would not sooner bow my servile neck to.




Poor lost Camilla now remains for thee!




But for the life of base Marcello Madam


You are the most improper Orator,
Can a scorn'd Lover hear his cruel Mistress
Pleading for his successful, hated Rival,
And not be more enrag'd against him for't?



He never yet by words or signs made love
To me upon my honour. Heaven I fear
I shall reveal too much.




It is too plain you love him. Oh Devil
With what patience can I reflect on that
And let him live an hour?



He has my esteem because I think him generous,
And he's beside a Friend to our Family,
My love he ne're shall have: But 'tis as plain
You have a Mistress who staid his arm from you.



No Lady e're could touch my heart but you,
May Thunder strike me dead if e're I lov'd
Before I saw your all commanding beauty,
Which I am resolv'd to perish, or deserve,
If all the service of my life can do it.



If you desire to make me credit you,
Meet not Marcello in the wood to morrow.



Hah, has his fear made him betray the place.
And time of Assignation, where I was
T' enjoy my enemy? What riddle's this?
Can you be so concern'd, and yet not love him?



It is your safety Sir which I consult,
Make me not blush to tell the cause of this.



If this be true, as I will ne'r distrust
The words so fair a mouth as yours shall utter,
Say but the cause is love, and tell me who
You are. let my lips dwell upon this hand for ever.



My birth and fortune equal yours,
My honour's yet unblemisht in a ••ught.
If I can love a man on earth 'tis you.



Madam, this is too much, we must be gone.



Peace Screech-Owle, or by Heaven I'll strike thee dead
With Curses. Oh let me hear those Sacred words
Once more, that I may think I dream not.



I have said too much to one who loves so little.



Little! the vertuous love not heaven so much.


They know as little of it too, as I
Of you my Heaven.



Thou art as impertinent and as inquisitive with me as
thy hot-headed Master is with my Mistress.



Perhaps you may be as handsome, and I may have as
much reason. Oh let thy splendid face break out upon me
sweet, and I will be as full of raptures as my Master.



You'l soon be satisfied, as for example.




Benedicite, I am satisfied thou hast punisht me enough.
By heaven a Succubus: Thou Scare-crow to preserve that good∣ly
fruit.



Sawcy fellow, I hope my face deserves better than yours.



If e're I trouble thee with love again, maist thou con∣found
me, and consent.



Grant me but this request, and on my honour
Next enterview which shall be suddain, you
Shall know my name.



How is my nature lost, how soft I'm grown!
By heaven I cannot disappoint my enemy,
And yet by all the sacred powers above
I never can deny thee ought. But yet my honour.



False Braves alone are jealous of their honour,
The true are still assur'd they cannot lose it.
Or grant me this, or I'll conclude you love
So little, 'twill not be worth my seeing you again,
And I will ne'r attempt it.




My life, my honour, all I have is yours,
You shall dispose of all, and I'll obey you.
I will not meet him, though I had much rather
See him in opposition with his Sword
Than have the fairest Lady but your self
Within my arms in dalliance.



Strange passion of revenge! and I'll not trust it.
I have another way yet to prevent their meeting.
Since you are pleas'd to promise you'll not meet,
I take my leave for a short space of time.



Why should we ever part?



It must be now.



First let me kiss thy hand, once more, again, again,
Why should I ever leave it?



Farewell my good Lorenzo, I was saying Dear Lorenzo.

Hold, if you dog me, I'll never see you more.


Vinc. ready to dog her.


Farewell Todpool, Toad, Monkey.



Farewell Hag, Night-mare, Scarecrow, Mawkin, &c.





Heaven, with what pangs she leaves my soul!
That in its last flight will not leave my body
In half so bad.
Methinks she tears my heart-strings, as she goes,
I feel her pulling at'em. But what, have
I promised not to meet my enemy;
To lose my honour and revenge for one
I know not? I was not my self, my madness
Made it. Perhaps she may be one
That's prostituted to the vile Marcello.

By heaven I lye, it cannot be, she is
Divine, the Saints we pray to are not half
So beautiful, or holy.












Marcello sends you this,
I lye, but 'tis no matter, I am well paid for lying, and I believe
'tis for pimping too.




reads. My mind is changed, and I will meet this night at
eight by the Great Oak in the neighbouring wood, 'tis Moon-light. If
I hear not from you, I will conclude that you consent to it.








There needs none, there's something for you.

Luc•y above my wishes,
I only promis'd not to meet to morrow,
I am free, and I will haste to my revenge.

Sister whither are you going?



No farther, I came to meet you at your coming in.




Iulia I have news for you.



What's that dear Brother?



I have appointed time and place to meet
My mortal enemy Marcello, and suddenly
All our vexatious Quarrels will be ended.
I know the bravery of thy spirit makes thee

  37Hate that cursed race, and 〈…〉





Heaven send a good end.



Do not distrust my courage or my fortune.



When and where, is this meeting to be?
Oh my Marcello!





Hah, she sighs, I must not trust her tenderness,
Inquire no more, 'twill not be long.



I see a paper in his pocket, perhaps it contains
The appointment: forgive my theft.

When e're you meet may heaven preserve my



She embraces him and takes the note out of his pocket.


Thanks my Iulia, let's in.



reads. What's this? To night in the neighbo•ring wood
by the great Oak. Heaven, how shall I find this out. Hold, I
shall be observed.






Think Mada• if Paulina discovers my deceit, how we
shall be defeated, what e're my tongue may utter, my eyes will
tell her plainly whom I love.



We women are vain enough to interpret all to our ad∣vantage,
as perhaps I do when I believe you.



To put you out of doubt, this night I will contrive your
escape, and to morrow a Priest and you may make me happy, I
have sent to my Friend Marcello to be in readiness, in hope that I
might perswade you to this reasonable proposal.



Is it reasonable then to run away with a Gentleman at
the second Interview?



Rather than to be •lapt into a Nunnery before the third
Interview.



'Tis fit we should try mens tempers first, and what
they can bear, be coy, and use them scurvily beforehand, for
they are sure to use us so afterwards.



Our Italian Marriages are made for interest, but mine
with you would be for love, and to assure you of it, I could
wish you were a Beggar.



I am like to be little better, if I marry without my Fa∣thers
consent, and he'll not give it because his paying a good
portion to me may be an objection of the Widow against his
Marriage.



Ah Madam, I would have you come all love and no
money into my Arms. Our Italian Ladies in love matters use
to be so wise to consider that opportunities are but few, think
of a perpetual prison, Hair-smocks, Midnight Prayers, lying
on Matts alone, Green Sickness, and continual Chalk-eating.



These are terrible things, and you being less terrible, I
cast my self upon you.



My dear incomparable Lucinda!



None of your raptures, those are alwayes short-lived
affections, that shew themselves that way.




Oh here's my Man, what news?



As soon as I had received the honour of your Com∣mand,
I did forthwith repair with all the haste that was de∣cent
for a Florentine of that Gravity and Education that I pre∣tend
to, to the house of Don Marcello, which I soon found at
that time did not circumscr•be its Master: the noble Pater Fa∣milias
being lately sallied forth upon some important affair,
which at that particle of time urged his absence from his own
Mansion 



Thou eternal Rogue, the presence of my Mistress saves
thy life.



But to proceed, departing from this Mansion almost in
despair







Of any opportunity that might present itself of my en∣countring
with the noble Gentleman to whom my Embassy
was then addressed 







I applied my self to a more gentle and deliberate mo∣tion,
uncertain where I should guide my wandring steps to the
attaining of my wish'd for end.







And though I must confess with anxiety enough duly
weighing the emergency of your occasions, yet I could not
retain my self from reflecting with pity on the erring and illi∣terate
vulgar: who wanting the unspeakable benefit of educa∣tion
and literature were little better than so many two-legg'd
beasts wandring up and down within the several walks of this
fair Urbane Forest.



Dog, Rogue; incorrigible Rascal, there's a reward for
your Damn'd Rhetorick.



Alas Sir, these unseemly blows do you more harm than
me, in as much as they betray your want of Philosophy.








Are these the Guerdons due to eloquence, which might
most justly claim its wreaths of Laurel?



Of Laurel! wreaths of Indian Cane, which thus Sir I
confer upon you.



Hold Sir, he is distracted, this is not the way to cure
him, let him be bled and dieted.



Is she barbarous too?



Madam, I ask your pardon for the rudeness his imper∣tinence
provokes me to; but sirrah tell me what Marcello said
to you or by Heaven I'll kill you.



I had indeed at last post varios casus, post tor dis•rimin•
reru•, a vision of Marcello, but he whether possest with more
important thoughts, or rather diverted by an encounter with a
Nymph, who is a person 



Well Dog, I shall not know, be gone and see my face
no more.





Sir, I beg pardon for intruding thus upon you, but
my Master not being able to find out your mans meaning has
sent me to know what service you would command him.



Desire him if possible to put off his Journey into the
Countrey to night: for I have a business of the greatest con∣sequence
in the world to me, which will require his assistance.



I will tell him instantly.




What a vulgar and illiterate Fellow's this!



Now Madam, with the assistance of Marcello we safely
shall escape, but do you hear Rogue, see me no more as Master.





You are alwayes cruel to my Circumstantio, who is a
man of such excellent parts you are not worthy of him: I'll
not be kind to you if you use him thus: in the mean time my
Lady desires your company to attone for that of Signior Paulo's.



I have such a design which I will tell you of, as I'll se∣cure
you shall break the marriage, I'll go first, do you follow.





Ex. Lucinda and Antonio.


I will take every occasion by the forelock, whereby I
may express my grateful resentments and my services within
the narrow Sphere of my Activity.



I must confess I love men of activity, but at the pre∣sent
I will conduct you where we may in a Corner hear. Paulo's
Musick, and confer about our mutual affections.





You are indeed the gayest young Gentleman of
your age that I have met with.



Age, pox of age, your young washy fellows are all
Jades, I am tough and will hold out the matrimonial •ourney:
young Rogues like tender plants wither presently, but I like a
Bay tree am green and flourish all the Winter. Here's a •o∣dy
of Iron.



And a face of brass.




Faith Widow I shall be brisk with thee, I wish thou
mayest be able to sustain my vigour. Hem, hem, here are lungs
for thee, Hah Widow, I am in the flower of my age, come
faith let's be merry fa, la, la, la.

Ah how I love thee my Widow,
Ah how I love thee my dear!
Of Rivals I soon would be rid ho
If thou wouldst but gracious appear.
Ah how I love, &c.


I •ade this my self, faith I did.





Very good, is there no more?



Ah how I love my Paulina

Ah far beyond each living thing.
Honest Paulo would make her his Queen a
If Paulo were once but • King.
Ah how I love, &c.

  41Hum, ••h, what say you?







Hah! What a Devil does this young Rogue here?



I am bold again to come and kiss your hands, Lovers like
Ghosts, will alwayes haunt the place where their Treasure is.



In the time I would not speak to any man, you did
seek occasions to express a generous Passion. I was not then,
nor am I now insensible of your Flame.



Hah, Flame! Who's that has a flame for my Wid∣dow?
I'll burn him in his own Flame, and make a Martyr of
him. Da God, Young Fellow, I'll make thee smoke.



Though, he being here, 'tis no time for Discourse,
Yet, I assure you, you shall not find me ungrateful.



Do you know I pretend to this Lady? and that 'tis
dangerous to be a Rival to Paulo del Campo.



No indeed neither. Alas, old Gentleman, by those
white Hairs I see you have one foot in the Grave, and should
not think of a young Lady.



Sir, I would have you know I was white at two
and twenty; What can you do? What are you good for?
Hem, hem; there's Lungs boy; I'll spit with you for Twen∣ty
pound: what can you do? can you vault or dance, Fa,
la, la, la? I can.




Fy, Sir, 'tis unbecoming your Gravity to dance, you
are Old, and being Wise should be reserved, lest you should
be found to be otherwise.



Old! Thou art a decrepit young Fellow; Widow,
have a care of young Sparks; all the Youth of this last Ge∣neration
are but half-Gotten, born with the Rickets, knock't
in the Cradle, starv'd at Nurse, basely Educated, neither with
Sense, Learning, or Manners, and grow up at last to be fee∣ble,
foolish, positive, confident, idle, debauched Fellows, full of
Mercury, and empty of Brains, and of no Use in the Dukedom.



Have a care of an old man, with whom you will
have the Name of a Wife, but the Office of a Nurse.



Wilt thou not change a young, hot-headed, crazy
Wencher, for a sound, solid, sober Husband?



One that will keep home, and Sup at home, and af∣ter
Bed well-warm'd, and wrought-Cap air'd, his Posset-drink
turn'd off, enters his Bed, coughs thrice, and goes to sleep.



Well Jade to a Nunnery to morrow.
Had not a man better be sober and civil, and go on a Carri∣ers
pace, than make a Post-horse of a Wife?



What can those Embers, those Ashes of Love be
good for?



A prudent, stay'd man in years, makes a good Husband.



Witness my old Friend Ferdinand, your late Husband.



He was of middle Age; but is it fit for this young
Lady to nurse up Children with long Beards, and Infants of
three Feet, to have a Deaths-head by her instead of a Hus∣band
every night?



Dost thou hear, canst thou fight, Sa, sa, sa?



Hold, that I forbid.



Heaven deliver me from an old man to my Husband,
'twould grieve me to hear him groan all night for the Gravel,
or for the Gout, wrapt in Flannel for his Rheums and Aches,
and in the morning to see my Maid sweep away six ounces of
my Husbands Lungs with a Besom.



I shall provide you Iron barrs instead of a Wedding
Ring, Huswife.



Nay, not that my Father is such a one, but an old
Husband is good for nothing but for a Wife to foretel change
of Weather by.



Will you wrestle a Fall with me, Boy,
Scoundrel?




A Humane weather-glass, a Flesh Barometer, what,
take a Husband for an Almanack, the common mark for all
Influences; now Taurus hurts his neck, and Pisces makes his
feet catch cold.



Young Fellow, Hast thou paid thy Surgeon? I
warrant thou art so full of Quick-silver, that all the Gold in
the Room is discoloured with the Atomes that fly from thee.
Mind him not, Widow, he's a young, silly, flashy Fellow: be
wise, Widow.



I warrant you, I'l do what's best for my self.



Nay then, I am thine own, thy hand Widow.
Young Fellow, despair and hang thy self. Hark,
Fiddles flou∣rish within.
Now my Musick's ready, Widow, pray mind my
Musick, 'Tis very good Musick, in troth.





Let Fools consume themselves with fruitles care,



And with fond hopes search after empty things,
But Beggars with their Love are happier far,
Than are, without it, the most mighty Kings.



Let all the World beside go pine,
And sigh, and weep, and groan,



To dismal Griefs their Breasts resign,
And with sad, sad Accents moan.


Chorus 2 Trebles and a Basse.
Lovers shall laugh while they shall whine.



Fools for it's self will Treasure prize,
Some dazling Greatness blinds.



Beauty alone can charm our Eyes,
And Love delight our Minds.




Beauty alone can &c.


What is the Use of Wealth or Power
By which they men subdue,
If not in order to gain more
To vanquish Women too.
If not &c.


Beauty's the Sum of all Delight,
Without Love Life were vain.
Th' ambitious Toyl, the valiant Fight,
For these, for these Kings Reign.
Th' Ambitious &c.


They who on these fix their Desires
Go right in Natures way,
All others are but wandring Fires
That lead Mankind astray.
All others &c.





Tis very fine, now let's to Supper.



Prithee send away that Puppy with a Flea in his Ear.



By no Means, he is a civil Person, Antonio, your
Company too.



Civil person? a Puppy, a Flash, a Vapour, a Butterfly.
Well I'l rout him.









THERE's Nectar and Ambrosia on thy Lips,
enough for Men and Gods to surfeit on.



Good lack a day! but since our
Hearts are now made one, what rests but
that a Priest to morrow may make us one flesh too.



That would be Joy beyond my Oratory to express,
but my Affairs being yet tempestuous, let me take Harbour
in old Paulo's Service, and then we will consummate. An∣tonio
with whom I liv'd to advise and cultivate him with some
politer Arts, being too obdurate to receive Impressions, I
have discarded utterly, I did even now insinuate this to Sig∣nior
Paulo.



Let me alone, I'le do your Business with old Paulo.



The Churches Seal shall then confirm our mutual
Loves, but I will perish e're I will throw all my good Parts
away on her.






While Paulo is in Discourse with his Daughter, we
have some time that's free from Interruption.



My Affections I have at large expressed already, and
since the Beauteous Creature understands me fully, I hope
she will not cast away a faithful Lover.



I for my part shall never Delight in Cruelty.





Prethee my dear Widdow, send this impert•nent
young Fellow away, I wonder how thou can'st suffer him.



Give me leave to retire a Moment, and I will give
him such an Answer, as shall make him press me further in
this matter.



Do so my Dear, and let him go home and hang
himself.



Sir this Gentleman who is a great Scholard, and has
the most eloquent Tongue, a Tongue tipt with Silver, has
a mind to serve you.



I understand as much from himself, and in Troth I
take him to be a very pretty Fellow.



I suckt my Education and my Literature much from
Imitation, and much from Pad•a, bred with the ignorant
Antonio, who never knew enough to value me; I did 



Introth a very pretty Fellow, hast thou a Certificate
from thy Master?



Behold here it is in prom•in.



These are to certifie you, that CircumstantioPaulo reads.
served me several years, but I was forc'd to part
with him, for a certain immoderate Guilt he has of imperti∣nent
Eloquence.



Oh foolish young Fellow! what does he hate
Eloquence? I honour it, and do receive thee as a Jewel, but
canst thou write as well as thou canst speak?



My Stile in writing is much more neat, terse, and po∣lite,
than indeliberate speaking can be, which you soon will
find, if you please to fix on this occasional Reflection which
Meltetique Paper contains some small Diversion of my
Thoughts.



Good Faith he speaks gallantly.





Upon a Magpy sucking of an Hen's Egg, rare I faith, I love
these pretty things of Witt.
After the too enticing Charms of a soft and downy Re∣pose,
walking abroad one Morning with the beauteous and
excellent Clarinda, most noble Theophilus, just as blushing
Aurora had left the Bosome of the Deep, and the Sun had
with infant Beams begun to smile upon, and dally with the
various Beauties of the Spring, and had gu•lded and adorned
the verdant Meads it chanced that our wandring and indeter∣minate
Steps conducted us into one soe••eld and bespangled
with Flowers, so beauteous and so fragrant, that we were in
Doubt, whether our Sight or •melling was 〈…〉 with
Excess of Pleasure: and all the while the little innocent
  46
Choristers of the Spring, chanted forth their pretty and melo∣dious
Caro•ls to welcome in Clarinda and the Morning, when
loe! on a sudden divinely thus the Nimph broke Silence.
Behold most noble Cunophilus, a Beauty in these Meads, which
Flora her self would blush at and be proud of, behold how
Natures pretty Wildness does exceed all the feeble Endea∣vours
of emulous Art, when her Speech was on the sudden
interrupted by the clamorous Importunity of a pretty chat∣tering
Animal, which by it's Colour did seem to be of the
Dominican Order among the Fowl, and was in Brief a Magpy.
At first we considered whether Joy or Anger or what Passion
it might be, had surpriz'd the chequer'd Fowl, and caus'd
its sudden Extasie, when lo! hard by we spy'd that garru∣lous
and domestick Bird, vulgarly call'd a Hen, which soon
became more lowd and sonorous than the other. The Cause
of which we soon perceiv'd to be a sudden Joy it had concei∣ved
for it's safe and happy Delivery of an oviparous Produ∣ction,
which no sooner had the unopining Bird deserted;
but its false and chattering Neighbour leaped hastily on the
forsaken Birth. And after making a little Fracture on the
too brittle Defence, (I mean the Shell) the gready immoral
and voracious Fowl did in a Moment absorb all the precious
Liquor it contain'd.



Come my dear sweet Widdow, have you given that
foolish Fellow his Answer?





He knows what he must trust to.



Now go about your Business, the size of the Statue
fits you exactly.



As it were made for me, I can conceal my self with∣in
its Hollowness.



You will turn them to Statues e're you have done.



Madam I humbly kiss your Hands,
Old Gentleman your Servant.








'Tis time now to retire, 'tis my Cozens Bed-time.



Let me but see my old-Friend's Statue first.



I'll draw the Curtain, are you ready A•tonio,Anto. within.] I am.



Bless me what is the Matter? The Candles burn
blew, Oh Heaven I am afraid of Spirits!



They do burn blew, what's the matter?



The Tapers shine with a sulphurious Flame, and shed
a sickly and unusual Light.



Heaven what will become of us!



I will turn the Statue, Circumstantio stand by me,
art a Scholar, the Statue stirs.



I am possessed with panick Fear.



in the Statue.] Paulo, Paulo, Paulo.



Ah my dear Circumstantio.




Heaven defend us, what Prodigie is this.



O Lord forgive me my Sins, good Widdow pray
for me, have you some Holy water to cool the Spirits Cou∣rage?



Rather ask hot water to increase your own.



Alas! we are helpless Women, you are a Man, a
good old man, if you were a young man laden with Sins,
you might with Reason fear: Pray speak to it.







Speak reverend Spirit, speak whence com'st thou,
whence art thou, and what disturbs thy Quiet?



My Soul commanded for old Paulo's Good,
Against his Sins informs this carved Wood,
I for some years enjoy'd that Womans Bed,
And bound the lovely Living to the Dead;
For which I was to Purgatory sent,
To expiate my Crime 〈◊〉•unishment.
But if you long for better or for worse,
You should have made a Matrimonial Nurse
Of some old Widdow, who in Country Town,
From Salves and Waters has obtain'd Renown.
She best might fit your Cap, and spitting Sheet,
And ply the Panting Pidgeons to your Feet.
She could with Skill your strengthening Plaister spread,
And by back door relieve your aking head.
Yet Heaven is better pleas'd if you should live
A Widower, and your Lucinda give

  48Into some young mans Arms, for that would be
In Virtue best for her, and l•st for thee.



Oh! I am wounded to the Heart with fear. Oh!
I dissolve, I dye. Has it done speaking?







I thought my old Friend and School-fellow Ferdi∣nand
would not have served me so: What, disswade me from
taking a short Lease of his own House? but what must be,
must be.



Nay, many times it made mouths, and grinn'd at
me, as my old Master used to do in his Fits of the Cholick,
yet I never ventured to speak of it till now.



Well, Paulina, there is a man baulk't, I had a zea∣lous
Passion for you, and, with the Statues leave, no old
man could deserve more than my self; but since a Plenipo∣tentiary
comes to forbid the Banes, I must submit. In troth
it breaks my heart, it is a hard tryal to my Flesh and Blood,
I cannot forbear weeping; the fire within makes my Heart
boyl over. Widow, in troth, I design'd you for my comfort,
my Bosome Friend, in troth I love you, but what Heaven
pleases: In troth I did love you, and hang'd you on my
Heart-strings, but no more of that: farewell, sweet Marriage,
it mu••e henceforth one in a Bed, be the Weather never so
cold.



Alas, I pity this poor old Gentleman.



Well, Widow, my Heart glows still, I have not yet
conquered my self, in troth I lov'd you, but must love no
more.



O yes, you must not deny your Charity, your
Friendship and good Wishes upon occasion, as hereto∣fore.



Oh, Widow, remember Paulo, this has been a sad
surprize to my poor loving Soul, I shall never forget it, but
farewel, I am not well, Widow, I must now take my leave,
perchance I may see you no more, this kiss shews that in
troth I lov'd you.



Good night to you, Sir, I hope a good sleep and
the sure knowledge of the Care Heaven has for you, may
settle this disturbance, but I shall not suddenly recover it.



Madam, It were better to let him compose himself a
little in my Chamber before he goes, Pray Sir do.



I think nothing better; or if he pleases to stay all
night. (I am almost dead with fear) Lucinda, thou shalt lye
with me, and thy Father shall lye in thy Chamber.



With all my heart, sw•et Widdow, and Circumstan∣tio,
thou shalt lye with me. Widdow, in troth I lov'd you, in
troth I did, sweet Widdow.



Let's to our Chambers from this frightful place.





This is the tree, and this the appointed place
Where my dear Brother is to meet Lorenzo.

Both I would save, or dye for both; oh Love,
How much thy Torments overcome thy Sweets!
And yet nothing can be so terrible
Or full of Danger which thy Proselytes
Will not for thee encounter: I am transform'd
From Woman to a man, a fearful Maid
Grows bold, and dares by the Moons sickly light
T' expose her self alone. Here comes
One this way, sure it is he, my Sex returns,
And I am fearful. How this will end, Heaven knows.



This is the time when Death and my Revenge
Shall have their Sacrifice. Were it my Fate,
As I believe it cannot be, to fall
Under Marcello's Sword, I'd bleed contentedly,
Doing my best to vindicate my Fame,
And Death is better far than withering Honour.
The oppress'd Indian did not more abhorr
The place where Spaniards were, than I this Earth
Where vile Marcello triumphs. Who art thou?
I did expect to meet another man.
Does cowardly Marcello send you to beg his Life?



He scorns the thought of it: he'll be just to his word.
'Twas I that wrote the Note to change the time,
Being one of his House, I came to speak with thee.



Being one of his House, I am come luckily.
To kill thee.

  50I came with as much joy to meet my Enemy
As Bridegrooms go to bed. Rash youth,
This great Disparity will make me blush.
Nature has not made thee for fight, but rather
Has shaped thee for my Ladies Page; but yet since
His base Blood runs in thy Veins, I'll let it out.



First, let us parlee and perhaps you'l find
Not so much cause as you imagine.



Death! Parlee with my Sword in my hand,
And with one of Marcello's cursed Race.
Draw. 



I will not draw, till you have heard me speak.



I'll make thee draw. Take that young Fool,
He strikes Cam.
For daring to provoke me thus with trifling,
And when thou fightest I'll give thee more
She draws, he wounds her slightly.
For being of that hated Family.



No. Thou hast done enough to one who was before
so deeply wounded. Heaven preserve Lorenzo.




What do I hear? the Youth did bless me sure
Just as he fainted, the small Wound torments me,
And Gratitude returns it on my self.
I'l chafe his Temples to recover him,
Nothing but Fear has made this Agony.
Oh Heaven and Earth, forgive me! 'tis a Woman.
Hah! my unknown Mistress! wretched, damn'd Lorenzo,

Thou art cursed to all Eternity.
Earth swallow me, and let me be forgot.
She's gone, she's gone: Was ever Mortal yet
So cursed as I? feel a Hell within me,
And all the Furies are raging there; O Speak,
My Saint, my Goddess, speak, look up, Is there
No help of Mercy?




Lorenzo censure not my Modesty,
'Twas Love to you; and care of good Marcello

That brought me hither, this Wound was kindly given,
There is no other Cure for those my Breast
Received from you before: for I could never
Have enjoy'd Lorenzo.





She faints again, Oh dearest Creature stay,

  51One Moment stay, the pen•tent 〈◊〉

Will wait upon there.



Oh! no but if you can

Forgive and love one of Marcello's House,
Let me conjure you by my dying Words,
To love Marcello for my Sake.



She's gone again, Oh Guardian Angel stay,
And hasten not away your lovely Charge
In Flesh as much Angelick as thy self.
Is there no Hopes, weep Oh ye Heavens, and give
Water to sprinckle on her Face, weep thou
Wretched Lorenzo, but thy Tears are hot
Like thy accursed Rage. There is hard by
A Sovereign Fountain famous for it's Cures,
I'll run and fetch some of it's Water.





This sure is the fatal place of Assignation,
Where the two furious Combatants will meet,
Where I like the renowned Sabin Woman,
With Cries, dishevel'd Hair, and Floods of Tears
Will strive to close their mortal Enmity.
Hard by there dwells an honest Country-man
Whom I have gained to give me safe Retreat,
And rest for some few Hours, if Sleep can bind
The Sense where so much weighty Care doth dwell.
Oh blest Inhabitants of Cottages!
Oh that I had been born some rural Girl,
To have fed my Fathers Flocks with chearful Thoughts
As impolluted as the Chrystal Streams!
There if some Flame had warm'd my tender Heart
With good Assurance I might own my Pain.







Speak, what art thou? For I can ask no more.



Help who ere thou art, alas I am robb'd,
And wounded in this Wood.



How rob'd? Heaven how I quake!



Yes worthy Sir, in Charity
Convey me hence or else I faint again.



How my Limbs tremble, I scarce have Strength
Enough to help you. Hard by my Chariot stands,
I will convey you to a safe Retreat.




Savage Lorenzo could'st thou wound me, and
Then leave me, I'll never see the more.



Come lean on me.


Ex. Julia and Camilla.
Enter Lorenzo.


With too much Hast I miss'd my Way, and stay'd
Too long, so much has my Misfortune
Confounded all my Faculties, Oh my Saint
Go not without me, hah, what is she gone?
I left her here: she's dead, and Angels have
Convey'd away her sacred Corps, too good
For Worms to feed on, or has Heaven suffer'd
This lovely Creature to recover Life
Without my Help, who did commit this Crime?
Oh cursed Wretch damn'd beyond Repentance!
Art thou awake, doest thou behold these Trees?
Or dost thou see the bright Moons silver Beams?
Oh hide thy Face, for thou should'st be ecclips'd
In Horror of this Sin.
If Fables feign man for ill Nature
Derived from fiery Flints and stubborn Rocks,
From what hard Metaphor shall fancy draw
Parents fit for Lorenzo: what Floods, what Seas
Can cleanse these bloody hands: if she be
On Earth I'l find her out, if in the other
World I'l follow her, but Ah! alas, I ne're shall see
That happy Place: this Sin will weigh me down.






This is the place Albricio, where my Friend Anto•io
appointed us to be.



I wonder Sir he is not yet come.



The time seems fit for our Adventure, the Moon is
civil, and is just gone down. Who is there?








Well my dear Friend, let's on, and good Luck to
our Enterprize.



I am ashamed of engaging my best Friend in any thing
of this Hazard, but I had none whom so intirely I could trust
as you.



You honour me with your Confidence, but inju∣re
me, if you think I can value Danger, where my Friend is
concerned: he that will not embrace the Perils Friendship
draws upon it, ought never to enjoy the Pleasures it brings
with it.



I know you are a generous Friend, and The Clock strikes twelve.
the World knows you are a brave Enemy. Hark
the Clock strikes, 'tis twelve, 'tis my time, good Luck dear
Friend.



Fear not, 'tis a noble Cause.



Servants stand under the House, while Lu•inda sings in the Win∣dow.
you secure the Door, and I go in hark by
Heavens an Angels Voice! 'Tis Lucinda's, this
is a Quality I never knew: now for my Sign.




I hear the Sign, lie by my Lute.






Lucinda where art thou? Foolish Girl,
Go to Bed ha, there is some Body in the House,

Nuarcha rise ring the Bell, Thieves, Thieves.




I have set my Cabinet of Jewels here in the Hall, I'll
take that and away.



Rings.] Thieves, Thieves Lucinda, where's Lucinda?



Oh ill Fortune! the house is alarum'd, they are co∣ming
towards us, the Attempt without doing the thing
would undoe me.



Let's away, we are strong enough to defend the At∣tempt
and Action too.



No, they will raise the Town, when they miss me,
my Father is in the House too, stand you here let your
Friend secure the Door. Mind what I do, and be ready for
your Cue. They come.




Thieves, Thieves, search every Hole.



Oh Madam have a Care whither you go; I was sing∣ing
and playing upon my Lute, I broke a String and came
down for my string-Box which I had left in a lower Room,
and there I met the Ghost of your former Husband, Seigni∣or
Ferdinand, I cryed out, swounded with the Fright, and
your Coming has revived me: For Heavens sake to your
Chamber, Madam give me the Candle, Oh it burns blew
again.








Ah Heaven bless us.



Now dear Antonio your hand,
Oh Misfortune, another Light.




What may these Disorders portend!



Where are these Theives, Rogues, I'll cut them off
in the middle.










He lets fall his Sword, crosses himself and mambles Prayers. Circumstantio lets fall the Light.










Thou must thy amarous Passion quite forgo;
Or suffer dire avenging Flames below.



Oh, Oh, ever honour'd Ghost, I have done with
my Love, I do not care for thy Widdow now, I can't abide
her, a Pox on her for me, I hate her mortally, I prethee let
me rest, the Devil take her for me.



Now all to bed, quiet repose to ta•e,
No more shall you b'affrighted for my sake.



Now Antonio slip away.



A thousand blessings on thy Wit and Beauty.



Go on boldly, I'll make good the Rear carry her to
my house, my Sister shall wait on her






How much I am indebted, worthy Sir,
To you, in this my great extremity!
My Heart with thanks conceives, and bears me witness
That I shall alwayes pay my gratitude.
Could I but know the kind Author of these
Favours, and hope to be esteem'd his Friend.



Sir, I shall endeavour to promote our
Lucky Friendship and mutual knowledge,
After you have reposed some time.




It is in vain for me to wish for rest
This night, or indeed for ever: but I hope
Providence in mercy designs few dayes
For one whom it decreed unfortunate;
The morning Sun will tell me whether Life
Be worth my Care.



Alas, I pity you
For I feel grief to make me sensible.
I would resemblance might allay our pain;
For I as little value Life as you.
My Fortune likewise in this World depends
Upon good Omens, when the Sun shall rise.



Your Virtue cannot fail of good success
To crown the goodness you have shew'd to me,
But I shall beg of Heaven to keep you free
From my dire Circumstance, howsoe're
My Lot falls out, may yours (resembling you)
Be kind and fair.



Still I deplore you more,
Our Fates appear so parallel, yet here

  56I vow, for your so•' •houghts and tender wishes,
A Friendship firm as Destiny, since you
Please to ask it, with fervent zeal to serve
A Friend, which cannot wrong that Sacred name.




Dear Sir, You make me long for Life, and love
My grief, because in that alone I must
Pretend to equal you, blest be this Grove
Where first we meet, blest be this silent Night
Where we two Friends contracted Friendship first.
These few happy Minutes shall be an Age
To me, and when cold Death (perhaps to Night)
Shall shut my Eyes, I may with Reason say,
This close of Life, has fully recompenc'd
It's sad Beginning, and in Confidence
Of our true Friendship, I will tell my Friend
The great Secret of my Soul, who I am,
And why I hither came.




As you deserve, and teach me what I ought
To do, begin my Friend, and whilst you make
Your sad Relation, I will sigh for you,
And you shall do the same for me.




You may remember when you saw me first
I told you that I was robb'd and wounded
And so I was: but 'twas by Love. My Heart
Was stol'n and wounded, by such a Thief
Whose Charms are irresistable, let not
My following Words stagger our Friendship,
I am a Woman.



Still may your Words add
Fresh Delight, and so am I; no less robb'd
And wounded than your self: but what
Occasion drew my Friend this way to Night?



I cannot speak for Joy, I came to save
The Life of one I prize above the World,
And he loves me as much, you may know him
When I call him Marcello.





What do I hear? Iulia thou art lost





What sayes my Friend?



Only remembring what sad Accidents
Lovers undergo.



'Tis most true. This Marcello

Has promised to morrow morning to fight
His deadly Enemy, called Lorenzo,

And in that fatal place where you found me;
To quench their Hate in Bloud, my Death would be
A pleasure to save their Lives, to morrow
I am resolv'd to meet them there, Dear Friend,
Will you be there and help me?




My new Friend is turn'd my Rival, and such
A Rival, whose great merits, my small worth

Dares not pretend to ballance. Now I am
Truly wretched, bound in my Soul to love
My Death, and bless my Executioner.



Friend, you do not mind me, you seem disturb'd,
Are you not well?



Never so ill before.



Forbid it, gentle Heaven, where lies your grief?



A murdering pain at your last words surpriz'd
My Vitals: 'tis impossible for me
To last out long. Now pointed Tortures shoot
Through every part, oh! give me some relief,
For you are she must help me.




But the means, and I will dye to serve you.



I only beg of you to give your Friend
Some Physick, the best for my Distemper,
I have it here about me.




Come give it me, by all that's good I will
Most faithfully apply it.





This is my Cure, remember your promise,
Start not, it must be so,
If you love your self or me: By my Death
You shall remove your Rival, and confirm
Your Monarchy in Love. Oh! that I had

  58Never seen your Face, or else had never
Heard your Story. My Feaver makes me mad,
Pray let me blood.



Perdition seize me first 
Oh, my pernicious Fate! put up your Sword.
Can you not love me still?







And not in Life. Why do you talk of Death?
There is no danger in your Love, 'tis I
Am lost: Yet I could still love you.




You break your Oath, and are no more my Friend;
You love to keep me on the Rack: be gone 
And give me not new Torments by your stay.
When the Day dawns, expect me at the Tree
Where both must die, because you kill'd not me.
Exit.



Hurry'd with rage, she will not hear me speak,
Oh, that my hated Life might sooner end,
To ease my pains, and cure my pensive Friend.
For what good Omens can attend my love,
Since Friendship does so unsuccessful prove?
Exit.








I Lately saw my Friend Antonio

Made happy in the Marriage of his
Dear Lucinda, which by comparison
Discovers what a Wretch I am: condemned
To pains and fatal Errours; till Death shall free
Me, or my Enemy. And in this Wood
I must expect him and the Sun together.
These Summer days are good Types of Man's Life,
For the most part through Heat insufferable,

  59T• Morning and the Evening best for Use
And Pleasure, but yet how short! whilst Manhood
Like Mid-day-hours, too much ferments our blood,
And gives long Feavers from our eager Passions.



O stay, O stay!




Who is this that invokes
My pity? a most lovely Youth! sleeping
And yet disturb'd; sure he is full of Grief:
For in his ugly Dream he sighs and weeps



O, Why has sleep
Forsook me! Why could it not last for ever?
Sleep had compassion on me, and by Dreams
Deluded all my Sorrows. My fair Rival
Just now was very kind, she smil'd and seem'd
To give me Joy, I sigh'd and cry'd, because
She fled before she told me how.



By Heaven the Voice of my fair unknown Mistress,
It hath perform'd Lorenzo's will, and pierc'd
My heart: each syllable did stab
And burn me in the passage.



'Tis now the break of Day, a fatal Morning!
But I will sing my Troubles to these Woods.
SONG.

'Tis too severe, ye Powers, that Love,
The Noblest Object of the Mind,
Should now so fatal be,
That the sole pleasure of Mankind,
And the chief Ioy of those above,
Should be a Curse to me.
Why should the spightful Stars contrive
That in such Torments I should live?
That I should love the Man that must hate me,
And still pursue impossibility.


Ah, fatal Love! like other fire,
Thy Heat to Objects does impart
Most different Effects,

  60Whilst thou dost melt thy soft desire,
Thou harden'st my Marcello's heart,
Till he my Love neglects.
Thy Godhead I with Faith have serv'd,
And have not this from thee deserv'd
Yet, though to me his heart no love can give,
He still might let me in Lorenzo live.





Sure my Mistress then is Sister to Lorenzo.




Alas! who is there? who are you?



Madam, it is your Creature.




Who are you? you frighted me.




With Patience, and forgive my crime, I am

Marcello, your Foe Marcello, guilty
Of Death, yet begging Life.



'Tis he, blest Heavens!
It proved a happy fright Rise Marcello,

And let Lorenzo's Sister kneel to you:
Can you forgive my Brother's daring rage?
And hide some Crimes for head-strong Nature's sake,
Some, for a wretched Sister, some for one
That loves you; Pardon this bold confession
From her that became bold to save you both.



Oh Balsom to my wounds! by Providence
That brought me hither, my Love, my Dear, my Soul.
'Tis you have sav'd my Life and Fortunes, You
Can bring eternal Quiet to my Mind.
By Heaven I value Life only for you,
And love you far above it.
Consider Sir before you speak, I am





And I'll be for ever

Lorenzo's Friend, I can no more fight with him
Than with my Father, were he now alive.

•'ll meet him unarm'd and catch him with Arms
Of Friendship, sure he cannot hurt the breast
Which you blest Image guards.



The time draws near
Which proves my Happiness, and your Virtue.

  61•arcello how can your appear so cruel
With false Hope to deceive a harmless Maid?
You'l find a much more potent Guard to save you,
My charming Rival, she expects you there,
She will preserve you safe from Injury.



Oh! Madam be not cruel in mistrusting me,



Nothing in Nature is so wild, but grows
Gentle before her, and lays down it's Fierceness
At her feet, nay she makes me love her, who
Have most Cause to hate her, and when I had
Her in my Power, I had no Power to hurt her.



This is wonderous strange! by all my present
And my future Hopes, I understand you not.
My Breast now feels its Virgin-Flames, which ne're
Can be extinguish'd.




Time gives us leave to talk no more, but bids me
To the fatal place, where I soon shall meet
You, but I charge you if you love me now,
Do not pursue me too close.
Exit Iulia.



When you command I will obey even Ruin.
Now by my strange Captivity I prove
My former Sins against the Power of Love:
In sharpest Tortures without Hopes to gain
Through so much Doubt, an end of so much Pain.
Exit.






Now Widdow 'tis clear, what is become of my most
undutiful Baggage, and yours too, if Heaven and the Statue
had so pleased. It seems your Skip-Jack Antonio was about
the House, for he was seen by your Coachman as he thinks,
to go out of the Door in her Company.



'Tis very strange, and it vexes me no less than it
does you, what should be the meaning of it? But if Antonio
is concern'd in it, without Doubt Circumstantio and the Offi∣cers
may discover them.



The Meaning of it is plain now upon second
Thoughts, but if your civil Antonio be concern'd in it, can∣not
  62
you guess that no young Wench runs out at Midnight
with a young Fellow, but she has a mind to eat Flesh with
the Fryers Leave? I pray God it proves no worse. I ever told
you Widdow, that these young Fellows were never without
their Rogues Tricks.



He has rais'd a strong Jealousie in my Head, which
I never thought of before.






Well Mistress Nuarcha what News of my Daughter?
have the Officers and Circumstantio discovered where she may
be?



Sir, Circumstantio is just return'd to give us an Ac∣count,
Having been all night about it.





Well good Circumstantio let me beg of thee to be
as brief as thou can'st, what is become of my confounded
Daughter?



Ah Sir exerce Patientiam, for my Relation do•• require
it above Mode and Figure.



I know it will, but prithee at this time be very
plain.



What Sir, shall it be said that Circumstantio speaks
without Embroidery.



Ah! Good Circumstantio oblige me so far, as to tell
me if you have found her, and in whose company.



Well, Madam, If I must do violence to my self and
Rhetorick, and take a sorrowful farewel for some time of
my familiar Tropes, it shall be the less injurious to my Re∣putation,
since 'tis in obedience to the Commands of so hy∣perbolick
a Lady, to whom my depositions bear a particular
respect.



I charge you to tell forthwith what you can say of
my Daughter, where she is, and what is become of the Off-Officers,
upon the penalty of a Quarters Wages; dost hear
Fellow? though I love Eloquence very well, yet now 'tis
very unnecessary in these Circumstances.



Ah, gentle Sir! May Heaven forgive the rashness of
your Expression: what, can Eloquence be unnecessary? but
to imitate some well-designing Poet, I shall begin in the mid∣dle
of my Story, and declare the former part in some succeed∣ing
Narrative.



Pox on you, you will distract me, what is become
of my Daughter?



Gentle Madam and ungentle Sir, to come to the so
much desir'd Proposition. Your Daughter I declare catego∣rically
is no more Lucinda, she is chang'd, she is alter'd, she
is metamorphosied.



How! What do'st thou mean thou man of Ambig∣uity?
How changed?



Yes reverend Sir, she is chang'd, there is a Transmu∣tation,
or rather a Transcorporation.



Into what, good Circumstantio?



Yes, yes, do you think this Ghost came for no∣thing?



But prithee, young Fellow, explain thy self.



What Mortal, endued with natural prescience could
have had prospect of this most affecting alteration in the be∣ginning,
or Ã  parte ante as the School-men sweetly phrase
it. O most occult Antonio, I must confess I never did rightly
conceive thy Antoneity.



He names Antonio and makes me almost mad with
Fear.



Prethee Fellow do not distract me, at your Peril.



Good honey Circumstantio, discover your meaning
for Love's sake.



Forbear your Arms of Concupiscence, Pace vestra di∣xisse
liceat, there is a Change, Lucinda is changed, Antonio
is changed. Proh Deum atque hominum fidem!



Dost thou hear Fellow, God I will not suffer thee
longer.



Ah prethee dear Bird save thy Nuarcha's Longing.



Why then Quaeso animos Advertite, they are neither
He nor Shee, but both from henceforth, by the Application
of a Fryer, Antonio and Lucinda are fastned together about
the Middle, and here they are.





Sir in all Duty I desire your Blessing.



And I beg your Blessing on us both.

They kneel to Paulo.


O most false of Mankind!




What do you mean you impudent Runagate, what
Change is this?



Sir it is for better for worse. This Gentleman
is my Husband, I am glad with all my Heart that he has re∣scued
me from a Nunnery, which terrified me as much as the
Ghost did you.



Out upon thee, thou incontinent profane Baggage,
what think of Marriage in that very Moment, when the dead
declaim'd against it?



Yes Sir they dissuaded you, but I thank them I
found good Friends in Purgatory, and took the first Oppor∣tunity
to obey their Counsel.



How dar'st thou look me in the Face, thou base
perfidious man?



Madam, I blush, I must confess after my Falshood to
behold your Face, but my violent Love to Lucinda (since by
no other Means I could approach her) forc'd me to it.



Was I a fit Property? must I be thus abus'd?



You might have perceiv'd the Love I seemed to
make to you was all the while address'd to her: pardon the
Extravagance of my Love, for next to my Lucinda, there's
not one on Earth I have more Honour for, and if all the Ser∣vice
of my Life can but attone my Crime with you, I then
shall dye contented.



Think not false Wretch I'll honour thee so much
as to be angry, I cast thee from my Heart and Memory, and
spoil thy Triumph, O thou base Companion of my Solitude,
and Partner of my Secrets false Lucinda.
Exit Paulina



Widdow I thank thee for being so angry in my
Concern, it shews thou lovest me, Pox on the Ghost I say,
what gone on a sudden come hither you young Fellow,
that will be my Son whither I will or no? How durst you
marry my Daughter ha well sauce Box since you have her,
and I can't take her from you, here take her, but do you
  65
mark me, As her Mother gave her me naked without
a penny of Portion, since your Stomach is so good, you
shall eat your Meat for me without any Sauce, in troth 



Sir, I am contented.



I hope Sir, you will give me a Wedding Dinner.



Yes, perhaps I may give you a Wedding Dinner,
since you have rid me of so much trouble in finding another
Keeper. Ah! what a happy man had I been if the Ghost of
old impertinent Ferdinand had not been giving Advice to
night, freed of my skittish Daughter, and in an hopeful
way for my Widdow, but the Will of Heaven be done.



A right Godly old Gentleman!



Well, I will pluck up my old courage, and give con∣solation
to the disturbed Widdow.
Exit Paulo.



Madam, Heaven bless this happy change to you;
indeed you have surprized us very much.



I thank you, good Nuarcha. I hope your change
will come suddenly.



When the accomplisht Circumstantio pleases.



Sir, Injuriarum remedium est oblivio. May Hymen and
Venus look propitiously upon you, and conferr upon you
Infinity 



Thanks, good Circumstantio, no more Speeches to
night, I beseech you. Come, dear Lady and Mistress, your
hand.



Here, dear Lord and Master, with my Heart to
boot.







How my Heart beats, and calls up my Passions,
My Hope, my Fear, my Love, my Jealousie.





You are here before me 



I am here to serve you, and to assure you
I am that Friend I once pretended, and
Am here to give you to the hand of him

  66I love, and beg one favour for so rich





Ah, my charming Sophister!
You know your Beauties strength, and so would put
The Prize upon too unequal Combat.
I in this Cause can fight, and boldly dye.
Injurious Rival, draw thy Sword, and free

Me or thy self from Jealousie and pain.





A•, •adam, why do you unsheath your Sword,
When Life 〈◊〉•eath depend upon your Eyes?



O 〈◊〉Marcello, there you mean these words;
On those Eyes Life and Death depend oh, turn
A way, and look not on her, for that face
Will make you fals•, if you be not already!



Sure I should know that Face Camilla,





Who changed her Habit to preserve Marcello.




Camilla, How I love thee for this Action!





Marcello, Can you so soon
Deride your Vows and me?




My happiness, when you know her to be
My vertuous Sister, you will love with me.



Ten thousand Blessings on that name, it gives
Me Heaven on Earth. O pardon me, my Friend!
O pardon fierce Lorenzo's unknown Sister,

And place her in the state from whence she fell.



O Joys which Angels fell! O blest Brother!
By such an unexpounded Miracle,
I could hold my dearest Friend for ever
In my Arm•, 〈…〉 (with Reason)
Would not chide.



I will thus embrace you both,
And with these two impenetrable Shields
Will meet Lore•zo.






Such unexpected Joy must hurt
Like Grief.



The Sun ne're shin'd on such a Wret•h as me,
My Mistress wounded, nay, for ought I know
Kill'd by this hand, and the sweet Body lost.
My Strength decays, and Life feels Winter in
My chilly Veins: a Child would now disarm me.
How d•• I meet Marcello at this time?
How does his Genius baffle mine?
Weary of Life and sick of my few Minutes?
I needs must bow beneath his just Revenge.



See Lorenzo approaches, but he does seem
To have more of Sorrow than of Anger in him.



What do my wretched Eyes behold?
My Mistress in Marcello's Arms?
Giving my Foe by Looks, and hand her Heart.
O stabbing Object! plac'd there to compleat
My Sorrows. Now it is time to dye, but not
Without Marcello's Company. That Sigh
Boils up my Blood within me, and swells my Rage
Like a swift Torrent beyond Banks and Bounds,
I will speak and turn him to an Eunuch.

Marcello view this Sword, whose Sight may chill
Thy hot Desire, what can'st thou think of Love
In Death, how dar's• thou touch that Beauty
Which only I must worship?
Draw short liv'd Wretch and try thy feeble Right.



O Dear Lorenzo pacifie your Wrath
Towards Marcello for his Sister Sake,
She lays hold on him, and kneels.
Who loves you and came here to tell you so,

Camilla will not rise nor let you go,
Unless you promise Peace.




Imitate my tender Mothers Mildness
She lays hold o• him, and kneels.
And be not altogether the Picture
Of my furious Father: For Iulia's Sake

  68Whom you have often said you dearly lov'd,
Proffer and take Marcell•s Amity,
For he loves me, and I love him as much.



Speak gently, and do not kill your Lover,



O calm your Breast, and then you'l give us Comfort.



I am amaz'd at this surprizing Sight!
And this strange Riddle of Happiness! it is
My lovely Mistress, with my much lov'd Sister,
But how these Impossibilities should meet
My mind cannot unfold! O Providence!
How dark are all thy ways? And yet how kind?
Doubling all Favours by their great Surprize.
O! rise good Angels both, and pardon this
Forgetfulness. Such Wonder takes away
My Sense, alass forbear your Fears, the Storm
Within my Breast is now laid on a sudden,
My Soul is alter'd, or a new one given,
O let me go, ye Glories of your Sex
Who have aton'd the Sins, all Women kind
As ever yet committed. Forgive my Faults

Marcello, for my beloved Sisters sake,
I embrace you with the same Zeal as Friends
Meet after Storms and Battels, O Marcello

Wipe away past Records, and take your Friend
Regenerated.





Let me plead in your words: Remember not

Marcello as he was, but as he is.
And when you think of him, at the same time
Think of his happy Sister good Camilla.




Yes happy indeed in such kind Brothers,
This place though we must leave it now, deserves
It's Consecration, and should be yearly
Visited. But now how shall we get home,
For the bright day recalls my Sex to mind?



I brought a Coach last Night with me to serve
One of you, who for his Wounds might use it.



Still you deserve more thanks, it may bring
Us to my Cousin Paulina's where both may change
Their Habits.



Well mentioned, and as we go
Explain our Stories, and their strange Success.



Beauteous Camilla, canst thou pardon one
So barbarous, so inhumane as I was?
To wound my Mistris, Oh, this cursed Arm!
But, had I known my Saint, I sooner would
Have torn my Heart out. On my knees I beg
Your Mercy, the Damn'd have not suffered worse pains
Than all this night have wrack'd my tortur'd Breast.



Rise, dear Lorenzo, it was but a scratch by a mistake,
I know it.



I went to fetch some Water from your Fountain,
And I had lost you: then my Pangs 



No more, this happy Agreement has heal'd all,
And every one had a worse wound than this.



In Nature as in Form thou art an Angel.
All Griefs and Enmities far hence remove,
And let us consecrate the rest of Life to Love.






My dear and constant Circumstantio, I am glad I
have met you.



Why? what Novel, or Business of importance do
you bring?



The greatest of my Life; I have been seeking of
you all over the House, being stirr'd up by the good and
happy Example of Lucinda, and your late Master Antonio,
to confirm my happiness, and I shall endeavour to make it
yours by the mouth of a Priest, this sweet inviting Morn∣ing.



'Tis a very ill juncture for so weighty an Affair.
Abi & suspende te.



Well, Delight of my Eyes, I admire you, though I
understand you not; but dearest Dear, what do you mean
by this?



Mrs. Nuarc•a, you are a Person upon whom I design
to bestow 



A thousand Blessings on my most lovely Love 




Forbear, I say, and cool this amorous Flame. To
be short, and to affect Laconick brevi•y, Mrs. Nuarcha, as
I was saying, you a Person that I am forbidden to
marry.



Oh! where shall a poor Maid find Fidelity, if Cir∣cumstantio
prove unfaithful?



Hear me, I say, and with pri•ked up Ear attend to
my Ratiocination.



I will hear nothing but Marriage. O unfortunate
Maid, to place confidence in man!



Cease your objurgatory Language. For, Heac comme∣moratio,
quasi exprobratio est; I have a great Respect for
you; but for several reasons am much deterred from
Marriage. Ask the performance of any Command rather
than this Entreaty of necessitous Conjunction Copula∣tive.



I will ask nothing but Marriage 



Put a Bridle I say upon your immoderate desire.
Here comes your Lady with other Company.





Well, Widdow, I am glad to hear your Noble Re∣solution,
not to concern your self with Mankind, and I rest
pretty well satisfied, that since I could not have you, that
no Body else shall. Widdow, I believe it is for my sake 
Ha, Widdow! yet we might comfort one another by the
by, the Ghost did not forbid that.



It's a very hard thing to find your Constancy with∣out
your Years, I believe Sir; and therefore I bid Marriage
farewel.



Yes, yes, and so will I take my leave of Marri∣age,
'tis time for me, in •roth W•ddow: but I shall always
take delight to visit you now and then, Widdow, and take
  71
a caper or two in your Parlour Ha, Widdow, 
that, I presume, my old Friend Ferdinand will admit of.



You take a prudent course, Sir, I shall follow your
Example, be Mistress of my self; free from the Treachery
of any Governour.



Widdow, in troth I rejoyce at this bravery of Spi∣rit,
and in token of it I jump for joy.




Antonio, Your Widdow bears her loss of you with
great indifference.



You see, Lucinda, how small your prize is.



I value it the more because I shall possess you abso∣lutely
without fear of a Rival.



Well, This new Son of mine, Antonio, puts me in
mind of my self, when I was at his Years, I had my
tricks then as well as the best of them. I was once in
the mind to have stollen that Baggages Mother just so
from her Father's House, when he made a dispute with
me about Articles. Since the Widdows Resolution has thus
pleased me, my good nature returns; I will forgive him.
Come hither, Antonio. 







Sirrah, you are a Wag, a very Wag, I believe,
but I forgive you. Come hither, Hussy, you are a
Wag too, so there's Wag for Wag Get you together in
Gods Name; and remember, Antonio, when thou mak'st me
a Grand-father, I will settle a good Estate upon the little
Raseal.



S••, I will deserve your Favours by my Indu∣stry.



Well, you are a Wag introth.





Oh, Madam, I bring you the strangest News, be•yond
belief. Your Co•en Marcello, and Lorenzo, with two
other young Gentlemen, are coming up.














I hope Cousin Paulina, that you will easily excuse
me for this early Trouble, when I have told you it's Occasi∣on,
and the solid Happiness that is befallen me and my Fa∣mily;
These two in mens Cloaths, are the perpetual Orna∣ments
of your Sex, this is Iulia my ador'd Mistress, Sister to
my beloved Friend Lorenzo; this is my Sister Camilla most
happy in her Lorenzo's Love.



This Surprize is as welcome as 'tis wonderful, and
does no less astonish us than the strong Accidents that have
happened to us on our side last night; but in Civility I should
refer my asking Questions to our better Leisure, and at pre∣sent
wish nothing but continual Joy to my Cousins.



Oh! Cousin I am this Morning the happiest Woman
in the World, who was last Night the most unfortunate.



And give me Leave to be your Sister even in both
Extremities of good and bad Fortune.



May Heaven continue every day like this.



Marcello you amaze your glad Friend with the
Strangeness of your Story, who most rejoyces that Heaven
rewarded you so soon with Love, for assisting him in his.



I succeeded the better in being any way serviceable
to you and your Lucinda, pray know the worthy Lo∣renzo.



Lorenzo shall always command my Life, since he calls
Marcello Brother.



After the name of Lorenzo's Brother, I cannot
find any more pleasing than that of Friend to Antonio.



The Learned observe that the mind of man in great
Passions of Joy and Grief cannot curiously attend the El•∣quence
of Speaking. Ergo, I will defer my complemental
Entertainment, till I have woven my Thoughts into an Epi∣thalamium.



In Troth this Sight is almost as strange as our Appa∣rition
to night, and silences me almost as much. The Devil
take the Ghost for me, that all should speed in the Flesh but
  73
I and the Widdow. Well, what must be, must be. Yet I
am heartily pleased for two Reasons, first, to see these old
Quarrels between two good Families so handsomly ended.
And then that my Son in Law carries himself so prettily
amongst 'em. In Troth I find he is a pretty Fellow, and in
Troth you are all pretty Fellows, and may you all live to
be as lusty as I am, at my years Hem There's your
Lungs in Troth.




Antonio you have a merry Father in Law, but Cou∣sin
Paulina, let me beg you to assist our Mistresses in chang∣ing
of their Habits as soon as you can, and let me beg the
same Favour of Lucinda.



Marcello has laid such an Obligation upon me,
that I can never deny him any thing.



I would most willingly see dear Camilla in a Wo∣mans
Dress, for in this she still seems to upbraid my last Nights
Inhumanity.



Well Gentleman you shall be forthwith oblig'd
whilst my Cousin's in Recompence shall relate us their Sto∣ries.



Thanks good Paulina, and in the mean time Anto∣nio
and we will explain to one another what has happened.
For in such Happiness 'tis new Delight,
To tell the Ioys of this successful Night.


