




I Am at my Wits ends, Sam.



Faith Sir, like a kind Friend, I'm following
you as fast as I can.



My Wife will be forc't from me, my plea∣sure,
my delight.



How shall we help it, Sir, dull, dull dogg as I am, my
invention was never so gravell'd since I first set out upon't.



But this is not all my misery for I am branded with
the breach of Friendship: for Sanders do's suspect that I make
Love to his Mistress the Widows Neece Eugenia; when Heav'n
knowes, 'tis my Father that works against the peace of both
our spirits, and courts her for me.



Let him go on, Sir, She'l hardly yield to an Old Man's
Courtships, especially when she finds you appear not in it 
but Sir, here's Mr. Sanders with looks as melancholy and angry
as a Looseing Bulley of Marribone.





My treacherous Rival there! draw Sir 



What means my Friend? 



Not a word, but defend thy life.



I'le dye before I'll draw against the man that I love;
what reason? 



Thy Perjuries have blotted out the name of Friend, and
out of Cowardise you endeavour to excuse an act, not Heav'n
it self can pardon, much less I, but thus I will repay thy
falshood.




Hold, hold, Sir, here's like to be fine work 
Pray hear him first before you kill him, Sir, upon my life,
your anger is in an Error all this while; for 'tis my young
Masters Injury and not yours, you would kill him for 
Come Sir, I must have ye friends, a pox on weapons 
Mr. Sanders your hand, Sir, 
Now yours, Sir, So, so 
Now all's right again: This is
a new way of reconciling Friends, which I learnt the other
day among the Town Blades 


Sam. takes Sanders by one
hand, and P. S. by t'other, and
shakes e'm.


Th'art a mad Slave.



Now Sam, tell him the Secret, which none knowes
but your self and I, and he will confess he has wrong'd the
patience of his Friend.



Be patient then and attend You must know, Sir,
That about Seven Years since my Lady, his Mother, went over
to Flanders, to coop the Young Chick his Sister in a Nunnery,
she then being about Nine Years old; but on the Road to
Antwerp, they met Thieves, were robb'd, stript, and parted;
for the Kites convey'd the Young One-away, and left the Old
one to cackle over her loss.







From which time they were not heard off, till about
Three Months since, News came of all had past, in a Letter from
the Mother, who was then but in an ill condition at Colone; for
thither she had wandred to find out her Daughter, but de∣spairing
of that, she sent over for Money to bring her home
with My Old Master no sooner heard of the Sum, but told
it out, gave it him, and sent us over; but we unfortunately
calling at Antwerp by the way, a little Gypsie at an Inn, had so
look't her self into his heart, that the Mother was forgot, and
he doated so, that he brought her over, and this day marry'd
her; but pretends it is his Sister; for which she now passes with
the Old Man.



But how came you off concerning her Mother?



With a Tale of my own devising, That about 3 Years
since she dyed at a little Village within Two Leagues of Ant∣werp.



Let me admire thee and withal confess my ground∣less
Jealousie.



Which thus I pardon and renew our former friend∣ship 




But here's the Devil on't, my Old Master concluding
her his Daughter, has found out a Match for her, an Old Rank
Fox, one Gazer.



What he that woes by the Almanack? observes the
Full and Change oth' Moon, and makes it his business to con∣form
all his actions and designs to the Influence of the Planets?



The very same, he will not shave his Beard, clip his
Nails, nor cut a Corn before he has consulted Erra Pater, whe∣ther
it be a lucky day or no.



Even he, because the Fool demands no portion but
if my skill fail not, I shall give him the Go-by.



As how, good Sam?



Honest Rogue say how.



Thus when the Fool's cashier'd, as that he shall be,
I'le tell my Old Master, that you admire his Daughter, and
your Love's so great, that provided you might have her, you'd
take her without a farthing it's no sooner heard, but the
bait is swallow'd, you are admitted, and the Match conclu∣ded.



But how will you shift off the Marriage?



I have a Trick for that too and each shall have his
own and both being lodg'd in one house, as 'tis his pride to
have his Childrens Children got successively, on his fore-fa∣thers
Beds in the Day time to please the Old Man, ye may
dally and print a kiss on the wrong Lip, and no harm in't;
for Brothers and Sisters may do't: But for the Night, let each
know his own business, and there I'le leave you.



Honest Rogue, how I applaud thy Witt.



See, my Father's coming let us retire 



About it straight, my Master's time is precious 
and let me alone with my Old Master 




Manet Sam. To him Sir Oliver Santlow.



How now Sirrah, does the Love-business go well be∣tween
the Young Ones?



Between your Son, and Mris. Eugenia the Line is Even,
Sir 



And shall I be a Grandsire then?



Oh questionless, Sir but Sir methinks there's no
proportion between that Equinoctial and my Young Mistress
Clarina.



You mean Gazer: why the better Man; the better.



How Sir, are you glad there's no proportion in't?



Yes marry am I Sir; for I would have you to know,
I hate all words that end in portion for I'le give her nothing.



Say you should not, Sir, as I'le ne're urge your Worship
against your Nature is there no Gentleman (think you) of
Worth and Credit, that will not open his Bed to warm a plump,
handsome, charming naked Lady? believe me, Sir, there are
Thousands in this Town wou'd be glad of such Service; nay,
and wou'd give Money rather then not be so employ'd.



Say you so? then they shall give me money for my
Girl, or they shall go without her.



Yes, they do give, keep, and treat, but not marry Sir,
which I suppose you are for.



For quoth I? my Daughter shan't be a Whore, no not
to get money, which is the best plea the Jades of the Town have
for their lewdness, and in troth I love wealth so, that in my con∣science
had I bin a Maid, I had turn'd Strumpet mearly for mo∣ny
sake.



A Smiting one 'yfaith but Sir methinks there's a
great inequality in years Mr. Gazer is too old in conscience
for my young Mistress.



You lye Sirrah he is but fifty five years of discre∣tion,
and will make a Staid Husband.



As tame as a Drone that has lost his sting but Sir,
under correction, I fear he is past getting of Children, which
young Women love extreamly, and I should be loath my young
Mistris should lye fallow before she has yielded fruit.



Sarrah do not provoke me to wrath not he get
Children, when 'tis well known that a tough old Fox of Three∣score
  5
and Nine got a Girl of ten with Child but however
should he prove impotent, it would be the better I say still.



Would you not be a Grandfather by your Daughter,
Sir?



No Sir my Son will make me that, and should my
Daughter too, 'twould undoe me, double charges Sam. dou∣ble
charges.



Then I know a young Gentleman, between you and I
Sir, as impotent as an Eunuch, that has all the passions of Love,
but incapable of Action; besides he has a great Estate.



How say you? a rich Eunuch? what a blessings that!
and is he in Love with my Girl! blessing on blessing name
him, honest Varlet, who is it?







How, Mr. Sanders? why Sirrah, had not he last
Session a Bastard laid to his Charge, for which he was fined
twenty Pounds.



True Sir, but 'twas his Footmans Bastard, which he
only Fathered, for his credit; the case of many Blades now a
days to keep up reputation.



But he 'l have a portion too.



To my knowledge not, Sir; alas he has a vast Estate al∣ready,
which he intends to settle on your Daughter, and then
Sir when he dyes 'twill all come to your Family.



Art sure of that?



He told me so himself Sir, and said likewise, he would
leave all to your Discretion.



Nay then it's my own, and the Devil a penny he gets
of me.



Sir shall I fetch him, ere it be too late; for he's so raving
Mad, that shortly he'le either be in Bedlam, or break his neck off
some Steeple.



Now bless the young mans gristles, I should be loath
to loose such an Estate, and see a begging Courtier go away
with what might have been mine therefore prithee find
him out that I may pronounce words of consolation to him 
before he be past all recovery; for I would not loose the blessing
of an Eunuch Husband for my Daughter, for the World 



But Sir you'l send the Gull, the weathercock going
First?



Presently, instantly, my Daughter shall not be his Ephe∣meris,
since I can Prognosticate a happier Fortune for my Girl;
prithee Sam, about it man, and bring Mr. Sanders to me 



But Sir, take no notice for the World, that he is an
Eunuch.



Not a word, begon, begon man 







Let me see, let me see, what comfort gives my Al∣manack
to day 
Luck I beseech thee, good dayes evil dayes, June, July, August,
speak a word for me now, the Girl's my own; let me see the
Eighth day between Hawk and Buzzard, (I remember I was
drunk then) the Ninth day on a slippery pin, the Tenth day
the Markets marr'd, the Eleventh day against the hare 
against the hare! a pox on the hare, wou'd it had bin left out,
had it been against any thing but the hare, I had not valued it 
however I'le try the fortune of a good face, tho my Almanack
leaves me in the Sudds.



Mr. Sanders and an Eunuch too! well, 'tis a prodi∣gious
Match! nay I thought I should have good luck to day,
because I rise with my butt end formost this morning as they
say.



Oh here's my Father-in-Law that must be, Sir Oliver
your most dutiful Son-in-law and Servant.



An Eunuch! by Gogmagog he's happier then all the
Whoring Gallants of the Town.



How? an Eunuch! I scorn your words, Sir, 'tis well
known I have three chopping Bastards at Nurse but, Sir
Oliver Sir Oliver Santloe 



Oh, Mr. Moon-Calf, are you there? prithee depart,
for I am very busie at present 



When shall I wait on you then, Sir? 



Why, let me see, about a quarter of a year hence 



A quarter of a year hence? what shall I come in Sep∣tember
or October?



No Sir, nor in November neither, good my Friend 



You are not mad, Knight? you will not let your
Daughter hang past August, will you? if Sir you do, she'l soon
drop under the Tree, for she's no winter fruit I'le assure you 



By Gog and Magog 'tis no matter for that, my
daughter is not fruit for your tooth therefore be not im∣pertinent,
but march off 



Your Promise is past 



A fart for Promises I tell you y'are troublesome
 what think you I'le marry my daughter to a Planter of
the Skyes, pray what Settlement will you make, of the 12
Planets, and once a year they march out of your Lordship; I'le
not bestow my daughter on one who can make no Joynture,
but of Castles in the Air 



But I have an Estate 



For ought I know 'tis one by Conjuration, and the
Charm may be out if you dye, and when my Girl thinks she's
on substantial Land, may find her self in the midst of an Irish
Bogg in short, Sir you shall have none of my
daughter 



Then may the Devil choak ye with Money, and may
a Fidler run away with your daughter, not have your daugh∣ter?
a Pox on your daughter. Adieu, Sir; now for my Wi∣dow,
I'le never leave an open hearted Widow for a narrow
ey'd Maid agen: go out of the Road-way like an Ass to leap
over Hedge and Ditch I'le fall into the beaten Road agen,
and invite the Widow home to a Banquet and make amends
for my neglect of not waiting on her yesterday 


My Almanack told me true, how I shou'd fare:
Let no man think to speed against the Hair.




So, he's gone, may all the Stars by whatsoever Titles
they are dignified and distinguisht look a skew upon all his
Enterprises 
Oh luckey Rogue, ha'ye brought Mr. Sanders he looks so
sad, he grieves my very Soul, poor Fool 





Sir, there's the old Gudgeon, now catch him neatly
and your business is done.



Oh, Mr. Sanders, what you are in love it seems; One
might guess by your hanging look you are possest with that
troublesome spirit 



I am so, Sir 



For my daughter 







And you'd kill your self for her 



My Life will be a burden if I have her not 



In good time, Sir but then you expect no Por∣tion?



Something by which you do acknowledge her your
daughter, Sir 



Acknowledge her your daughter! what a wheed∣ling
Phrase was that to get Money but 'twont do in
a word, Sir, if you like, love, and will marry my Girl without
a Portion so, if not Lord have mercy upon you, and so go
hang your self.



How dexterously he wheedles himself into the noose.




But, Sir, if you'l bestow no Portion, you'l give her
Cloaths and Wedding-dinner 



Yes that I will, Sir, and more; you shall board in
my House gratis for three Years, if that will do: look out no
further, for I'le reprieve you from your grinning destiny 



Then thus I joyfully return my acknowledgments for
your kind compliance, and admire your judgment and discre∣tion,
for a Woman's Virtue is the richest Dower she can pos∣sess 



Now I love thee for thy wisdom, rise, rise, and a Bles∣sing
on you both 



How now Son, whither so fast 


To visit my Mistris, Mr. Sunset's daughter, Sir 



A good Boy ply it hard both of ye; these young
Sluts are as skittish as unbackt Colts Do ye hear, agree't
so soon as possible, and one day, one dinner shall serve for both.


How soon my Joyes for my Girles good Fortune have drown'd
the Sorrow for my Wife's Loss well 'twas a good Soul
 but why should I grieve, since I enjoy her Picture in my
daughter 
  9
Enter Boy.
How now, the News with you, Sirrah 



A Dutch Merchant, Sir, desires to speak with you 



With me? what shou'd his business be tro I have a
Cousin in Holland, perhaps some News from him, the old bu∣siness,
some Firkins of Butter with Counterfeit Farthings, but
tho the gain may be great, yet by Gog Magog I'le be no Tray∣ter
I, so I'le roundly tell him 







disguis'd like a Porter.


Well I must be reveng'd on this impertinent
Leacher, he will not be repuls'd, yet in spight of poverty and
all its curst attendance of Calamities, I'le keep my Virtue still,
and my pretious Sir, the Goat, will appear under the Ass's
skin 




Thus far I am prosperous, Love, if it be thy will
make her comply: Poverty! thou blest Bawd of Love, confute
her sullen Virtue, make her yield, and then I'm happy 

Now, Madam, what answer shall I give to the Worshipful
Knight that sent me?



I'le comply seemingly till I have an opportunity to
be reveng'd for his unlawful Sollicitations.

Friend, you may tell Sir Gregory, That the small Favour which
in his Letter he requests was no sooner read but granted 



Oh divine Beauty! let me embrace my Treasure 




Sir Gregory Lovemuch in the Habit of a Porter, it
amazes me.



Oh Madam, Love, Love has a thousand ways to
discover it self and its Deity and this was mine speak,
Madam, and with the harmonious sound make me all rapture,
new create me Young, say, shall I enjoy that mighty Blessing
I have so long toyl'd and labour'd for?



I will consider further of it, Sir 



Oh dally not with time, my fair, let us now im∣prove
  10
this blest time of your Husband's absence I met him
at the Temple, I suppose gone to his Lawyer's Chamber 



Very right Sir 



Shall we, shall we withdraw then to your Cham∣ber? 
fair one?



And wrong my Husband, and the Widow whom
you are about to Marry? 'twoud be unkindly done of me 



I marry her Wealth, not Person when I've
the Blessing of her Estate, it shall be at your Command, I
marry her only to supply my Purse.



I must confess 'twill be a home revenge upon
her, for she now enjoys my Estate, which her Husband by
Knavish practises, couzen'd my Father of just before he
dyed 



That's my design to force her make a restitution
of your Estate; for all, all she has you shall be sole Comman∣dress
of 



Your Promises are great 



The performance too shall be so, her golden
showers shall fall into your lap, and one kiss shall ransom
inestimable Jewels from their imprisonment of her Cabinet;
come, come, my sweet, let me partake of the boundless
bliss of Love.



Let me a while consider Sir 



Time enough to consider when we have tasted
of Love's pleasing banquet, and this minute lost may be
ominous for the future. 



I ask but one days time, Sir Gregory then, let the
rest be yours.



Happy, happy I, 'tis granted Madam; one kiss,
my Dear, and then I'm gone 

Oh how divinely does she kiss!

So great a gift must be thus rewarded 




Within Wife, Sweet heart, where are you?



Oh Heav'ns, Sir Gregory, my Husband! should
he find you here? 



Fear nothing, Madam, the Devil can't know me
in this disguise.



He's come as I cou'd wish Sir Gregory, let me
prevail with you to step into my Closet; for shou'd he come
  11
and see you here, I am so young a Sinner, my guilt wou'd
quickly betray me.



Do with me what you please I wish I were well
off. 






Now, my Dear, what comfort does the Law
afford, shall werecover our lost Estate, or are we doom'd to
eternal Poverty?



'Tis past retrieve, Sweet heart, the Fox was
too subtle for us; but I am resolv'd to attempt something shall
either end my life, or redeem our Estate 



'Tis not thereabout yet, Husband, despair not,
for I have thought upon a way which I am resolv'd to prose∣cute,
and if it take effect, say once a Woman's undertaking
may prosper and we may be said to share in wit, as
well as in your sorrows; but till that opportunity happens, I
have a rare old Fool in Limbo, a precious vigorous Lover, of
Threescore and odd, who thinks our low fortunes may make
me stoop to his unlawful desires 'tis Sir Gregory Love∣much 
see here what a precious bate his Traps are fur∣nish't
with to catch distressed Virtue. 



'Tis a rich Ring but where have you bestow'd
that lump of Leachery and Impotence? 



In my Closet, he's disguis'd like a Porter, do
what you please with him 


crying out, scat, scat whore 
within.


Hell and the Devil, out Cats, out.



What's the matter with him 



See if you please 


the Dore slipt aside, Sir. G.
runs out a Cat is seen.


Gad take me, Madam, Is your Husband gone? 
a confounded Spawn of the Devil has almost frighted me out
of my wits; I wonder what makes people fond of Cats, when
their young they are absolute Succubusses, and Witches when
old your Tabby Satan, a Pox on her, has made me impo∣tent
with her looks, and I am at present perfectly be∣witcht 
but I shall return to morrow, sweet, with
  12
new joys and vigour, when these Charms are ended.



Provided my Cat be not in the way 



True, Madam, therefore pray let me pre∣vail
that Puss and Husband may be decently removed, for the
sight of either will make my Ague fit return. 




Ha! her Husband, then world farewel, for now
I shall be kill'd.



How no Sir, what are you?



A poor fellow, an't please you. 



Stay friend, I must speak with you before you go. 
Sweet heart Ha, a Letter, from whence came this? 




Now welcom Death he'll discover all 



Nay, prithee Husband restore my Letter agen, 'tis
from our Cousin in the City wou'd have me 



How in a man's hand? 



A Plague on it, that I cou'd not counterfeit a
Womans hand 



One of her Apprentices writ it for her 



Do not tell me Stories I partly know the hand;
therefore will read it. 



But there are some secrets in it which she conjures
me not to let any one see 



Yet her Apprentice might write 'em Now I am
resolved to read it. 



Now I am past all hopes, I shall be kill'd for being
my own Pimp Pox on him, he's poor, consequently de∣sperate,
and undoubtedly he'l cut my Throat, that he may be
hang'd, and be out of his misery.



You see, Sir Gregory, what a misfortune your stay
has brought upon us. 



Ay too late, I see Madam were I well off of
this business, the Devil shou'd have Married Wives for me;
the very thoughts of their Husbands coming up, does in the
midst of Enjoyment pall the appetite so, that half the plea∣sure's
lost.



A secret indeed, which you of all the world shou'd
have kept from me Is this the fruits of your pretended
  13
sanctity? are all your admonitions of Patience come to this?
must I be made the monster to maintain your lust, ungrateful,
false Woman? this now confirms what I too much have
heard abroad, concerng you and Sir Gregory that Goat, but I
shall spoil the Amore. 

How now Rogue, whether so slyly this too's the Bawd to
that Sir Fisty but I'le reward you e're you go. 



Upon my knees, I begg 



Rise, not a word, out of my sight, go for fear
my passion make me rashly act what I may too late repent
of prepare for the Country to go to your Relations
agen for here, I Vow never to live longer with you, 
out of my sight go 





Then she's my own, I'le meet her at the Coach
when she is to go, take new Lodgings, and give her a false
name, and the dear delights of the Town will easily prevail
with her to stay and embrace my offer; besides, 'tis the Com∣mon
practice of divorc't Wives to have Gallants under their
Husbands Noses ha she's gone, I like not his staying. 



Now Sir, for your reward, thus I make

acknowledgment, for I can ne're expect to be out of your debt.



Hold, Sir hold, oh hold, what means your Wor∣ship 



To pay you for your pains. 



I was paid before I came Sir; there's Porter paid,
writ on the Letter, Sir 



Now, Sirrah, take this and deliver it to that Dog of
a Knight, or I'le cut your Throat 



Lord Sir, do you question it Sir? I am an honourer
of your Worships 



Tell him if he meets me not, he must expect to be
posted for a Coward 



Gad for give me a Challenge? very fine, what
have I got, to day a dry basting, and to morrow must be run
through the Lungs 




Rogue do you grumble take that to remember
you to save your Wind-pipe 



Nouns, I'le do't, I'le do't Sir.









Yes, with a good basting, and a Challenge, which
I'le undertake will keep him waking beyond the Cure of
Opium for this Night 





Oh Sister, cursed Luck the Dice and Devil prove
my Enemies, my last, last dear stake of ten Guinnies are
flown and now I begin to reflect on our last discourse about
the Widow, is your design perfect 



It is take no care, for I am resolved to set all
right, and Brother, what I can spare, take and try once more,
what kindness Fortune will show 



Thanks kind Girl but still my mind runs on this
damn'd Widow, no revenge, prithee consider Girl, 



Leave that to my Care for you are not like to
know any thing, till I see I shall succeed 



Well, honest Soul, I leave it to thy management; but
let each other exchange Prayers for our designs.




Now for my design, you'l be assisting.







We'le about it then straight 


Wit now perform, what Justice could not do;
All ways are just, when we our Rights pursue.





Mr. Gazer, Widow, Mr. Noddy.



WElcom, welcom Widow, to a Batchelor's house
here, a single man I, but for two or three
Maids that I keep.



Are you double with them sometimes then, Sir, 



An exceeding good mourning Wit, by Capricorn 



I protest Widow y'are a most intolerable pro∣found
witty Lady and so I kiss your paws 




Well said, Mr. Noddy.



I am oblig'd to you for your Complement, Sir, 





A curse on Hadland, I shall not forget him in hast,

however I'm for the Widow, and will strike up the Match the
sooner, that I may send into the Country for one of her Tenants
Daughters for I must have a bit of young flesh.



Sir Gregory! You honour me see our Mistress,
keep her Company, whilst I step aside and look after
affairs 




Your Servant Brother Rival You see Widow,
what power your beauty has to make Rivals Friends and em∣brace 
as thus Mr. Noddy, your Servant.



Your Slaves slave, to the third and fourth Genera∣tion,
Sir Gregory.



Sir Gregory you were remiss in your duty to day 



Your pardon, your pardon Widow but when,
when will the blest day arrive that I shall take possession of my
treasure in thee, Widow?



In a day or two I shall make my Choice Sir Gregory,
and then? 


  16Sir G. L.
And then to bed Widow, ha Lady bright! 
this Noddy's a very Ass, Gazer a Gull. 



A couple of Fops but Sir Gregory!



I understand you, a kiss for the Conceit sake,
Widow.



A murrion on him, how my mouth waters what
a cursed thing is modesty.




If conceit will strike the stroke, have at the Widows
Plumb-tree, I'le put 'em all down for a Banquet, Widow, and
Gentlemen, my Friends and Servants, I make you wait long
here for a Batchelor's pitance 



Oh Sir, you are pleas'd to be modest 



No by my troth Widow, you shall find me otherwise.


with six Men, being the Twelve Signs.


How's this? the Twelve Months for our Plates, and
the Twelve Signs for our Treat,



These are the signs of my Love Widow 



I am sorry you should be at such Charges, Sir, to feast
us a whole Month together 



Widow th'art welcome a month, a year, for ever to
me 



What are those brought in the Banquet?



My Tenants they stand for Fasting dayes.



Or the weeks in Lent.



Y'are in the right, Sir Gregory, sweet Widow take
your place here at Aries, that's the head sign; a Widow is the
head till she is married 



But married, what is she then? 



The middle, the middle Widow Sir Gregory Love∣much,
pray sit here at Taurus, they say y' are a good Town-Bull.



Spare your Friends, Sir 



Mr. Noddy don't fall back so here's Gemini for you
Sir; for you had two chopping Boyes by your last Wife 



No harm in that, Sir, the Widow may like me the
better 



But, Sir, methinks your Signs are not perfect, your
Tenants would do well to help fill the Table 



By th' Mass it's true, Widow Tenants for once
sit down with your Harts on; but spare the Meat I charge you,
as you hope for new Leases, I must make my Signs draw out a
month yet, with a bit every morning at breakfast, and at Full
Moon with a whole one; that's restorative, sit round, sit
round, and do not speak good Tenants, You may be bold
enough, so you eat but little: How like you this, Widow? 



It showes well, Sir 



By my troth, Widow, I'm sick that day my Table's
empty; I wish some Ghest or other to fill that gapp there 



Indeed the Feet for want of covering may catch cold,
and then the head will quickly feel it 



Why then you may draw up your Leggs and lye roun∣der
together.



In troth, Madam, my Neighbour's a Notable
Wagg 



His Witt encreases with his eating.


Mrs. Hadland disguis'd like her Serving-man.






Another Suitor? then Pisces will be covered.



Madam, youl'e pardon my Intrusion; I heard your
mirth, and thought a sober Gentleman might be admitted to
partake 



There needs no excuse, Sir, and with that Gentleman's
leave I intreat you to sit and do as we do.



Young Gentleman pray sit, Y'are heartily welcome by
Ceres.



Pray make room for the Gentleman 



Sit still Tenants, I'le call in all your Old Leases, and
wrack you else.



Sirrah, Take my Hat and Sword 



Then Sir, you mean he shall sit as he comes?



I, and he were a Lord he shall not sit above my Te∣nants,
I'le not have two Lords to 'em; so I may look for my Rent
in another man's breeches.



Gentlemen sit still, I'le disturb no body, but here
take my fortune 




If you love Fish, pray fall too, Sir; had you come
sooner, you might hapned among some of the Flesh signs, but
now they are all taken up; Virgo had bin a good Dish for you,
had not one of my Tenants bin somewhat too busie with
her.



I'm extreamly pleas'd with my Fortune here, Sir,
'tis the conceited'st Banquet I ever met with 



What say you to a bit of Taurus?



The Bull's too rank for me 







Too rank, Sir? does it offend you?



Forbear, or I shall strike you as dumb as your wa∣tery
Kindred 



With your heels or horns?



Perhaps with both 



It must be when I am asleep then.



It's a brave Girle, and nobly managed.




Hold Gentlemen, for the sake of Mankind let not the
Planets fall out; for if they destroy one another, what a world
of abortive births, we shall have Sirrah, run and fetch my
Sun Cupp, his Beams shall disperse these clouds of Conten∣tion.



Sir, I make it my request to you, to sit 



Madam, you are obey'd 



Each look I take encreases my desires, such charms I
never saw before; and shou'd he not be a Servant, my hopes
will be all defeated.




How is't Widow? Gentlemen chear up, fair weather
in all Quarters; the Sun will rise anon, I've sent for him 
Oh here he comes Sing sirrah, sing the Song I gave you.



1.COme fill to the brim, for the Sun does go round,
And visits the World in a day;
Our glass is our Sun,
Through our World he does run,
And each little drop is a Ray.

2.As the Sun with his Rayes does ripen the Earth,
And guild all the World with his Light;
So powerful Wine
Our Witts does refine,
And ripens our Joyes to delight.




Now fill it to the Widow 



What's here a Sun?



It does betoken, Madam, a chearful day to some
body.



Gentlemen, my Service to ye all; for ye know the
Sun must go through the Twelve Signs 




Most witty Widow, you jump with my Conceit;
there's not a hair between us.



Give it Sir Gregory.



I am the next through whom the Golden flame
must shine, the poor Feet there must wait and cool a while.



My time will come, Sir 



So round it goes 
Fill it him again, Sirrah 



Fill't me? why I drank last, Sir.



I know you did, but Gemini must drink twice, unless
you mean that one of 'em should be choak't.




Well Mr. Gazer, y'are a merry Man 



Fly from my heart all variable thoughts; she that's
entic'd by every pleasing object, shall find small Pleasure, and
as little Rest 




With your pardon, Madam, is this Sir Gregory,
Lovemuch?



I am, Sir, I dare own my name 



There's a rank Villain bears that name; are you
of that Family, Sir?







Nay Sir, by Heav'n stit still leave roaring, I in∣tend
anon to bait you 



Yet agen? if you love me Gentlemen, let's have no
roaring here If I had thought of this, I'd have sent my Bull
to the Bear-Garden.



Sirrah, commend my Love and Service to the Wi∣dow,
desire her Ladiship to taste that Morsel 

Layes Sir G. L. Letter on a Trencher,
and Mrs. H. carries it to the Widow.



This is the Bitt I watch't for all this while.




And wherein has this name of mine offended, that
you are so liberal of your infamous Titles? I am a stranger to
thee, but it must be known Sir, e're we two part 



And good reason Sir I don't intend to end so
calmly with you; for my pretious Sir, I design to cut your
Throat.



Oh strike me dead! what's here this should be your
hand, Sir Gregory.



Undoubtedly, 'tis one of the Letters I sent to you,
Widow.



Much good may do ye Gentlemen 




Niggers, noggers, what ailes the Widow 



The Widow paints White, some Aqua Coelestis there,
quickly 



Oh Treachery unmatch't, unheard of Villany!



How do you, Madam? 



O impudence! does my Disease ask how I do? can it
  21
torment my heart, and look with a fresh colour in my face?



What means the Widow?



What qualm is this, Madam? I hope my Ram does not
stick in your stomach.



No, but an Old Leacherous Goat, a false Villain does 
He that wou'd know a Villain when he meets him, let him look
here; Here is a Glass will reflect his perfect Character 
Oh thou preserver of my state, pray tell me, Sir,


that I may pay you all my Thanks together, what blessed acci∣dent
brought that Letter to your hand, which has been long
kept secret from me in my Enemies power?



Please you to retire, Madam, I shall unfold this Rid∣dle 



Thou Basilisk to Virtue out of my sight, and ne're come
near me more Gentlemen pray come in and partake of a
Story which may prove beneficial to you 




We follow, Madam 



Niggars, Sir, why don't you budge? s'heart thrust
him out.



Out of my dores thou treacherous Fox 



All Curses scatter you 




Do you thunder? if you had staid I'd have made bold
to have ript out some of my Bull out of your belly again 



Now for the Widow, since the Knight's remov'd,
I am resolv'd to get drunk, infuse confidence, be very rude,
and then they say a Widow will yield.



Come, Brother Rival, let us to the Widow, and learn
of her what Treachery this is 




Thus far my Wifes designs are successful; now to
my Charge, I must find out her Brother, and bring him hither
to my Wife; what she intends I know not.








My designs work rarely! well, if I go on and prosper,
my Statute, when I dye, shall be set up in Brass with an Inscri∣ption,
Here lyes the Machiavel of Love Intreigues The two
Young Blades are close at it on a wrong scent, whilst the Old
Men are ready to dissolve with joy.




Oh come, come, are you there, Sir? 



Life! what's the matter now?




There's a new Reckoning come in since I saw you
last.



Pox on't, I thought all had bin paid, I hate after-reckonings.




Pray come near Sir, let's be acquainted with you 



You honour me too much, Sir. 



Sirrah, Y'are impudence is great, nay you have bin
bold enough too with my purse abroad, if I am rightly in∣form'd;
by Gogmagog if it be true, I'le have thee hang'd,
drawn and quarter'd.



Who, I bold with your purse, Sir?



Yes you Sirrah did not you bring me word about
Ten Weeks since, my Wife was dead?



Yes, true Sir, very true Sir.



Pray stay, Sawce-box, and hear me out; and did not
you likewise say, That with the Money I sent to defray
my Wifes Charges, she being, as you did aver, dead, you
brought home my Daughter, whom by accident you met
with at Antwerp?



Right as can be, Sir, I never found your Worship in a
false Tale yet.



I thank you for your good word, Sir; but I'm like to
find your Worship in two at once.



I should be sorry to hear that, Sir. 



I believe you Sir within this month my Wife was
alive (which a Dutch Merchant, Father to this Boy who was
just now with me, will justifie), so there's six Weeks of your
Ten abated.



Strange! how men are grown to lying; that it is
false, I'le justifie it with my life, Sir: I'm sure, poor Lady, I
dropt a Tear over her Grave; so did my Young Master too 
if this Merchant were here, I'de tell him to his face that he
wears a double Tongue; that is, Dutch and English will the
Boy say it, Sir? 



Yes that he would, could you understand him; for
he speaks nothing but Dutch.



All the better, I'le gabble something to him 





Ick wet neat watt bey zackt, Ick vnverston ewe
neat.



I thought as much 



What sayes the Boy?



He sayes his Father is troubled with an imperfection
at one time of the Moon 



Does the Boy say so?



I knew there was something in't your Wife alive!
will you believe all Tales, Sir?



But Sir he told me he saw this Wench you brought
home, at Antwerp in an Inn: he tells me I am plainly cousen∣ed,
and that she's not my Daughter.



All's discovered how Sir, not your Daughter? I
must to't again.

Quisquivikin Sadlamara alla pisskickin sows clows, hoff tofte le
cumbershaw, bouns buss boxseeno.


Ick an sawth no int hein clappon de heeke, I dinke vte
zein zennon.



Oh ho! zein zennon! I thought I should find it out
at hast; The Boy sayes they never came near Antwerp, but a
quite contrary way, round about by Parnia.



What means he by Zein Zennon, Sam?



That is, he saw no such Wench in an Inn; 'tis well I
came so opportunely to get it out of the Boy before his Father
  24
comes: pray be wary Sir, the World is subtle, come and pre∣tend
a charitable business, meerly to work out a piece of mony
on you.



Mass art advis'd of that?



The Age is cunning, Sir; besides, a Dutchman will
live upon any ground, and work Butter out of a Thistle.



Troth thou sayes true in that; they're the best thri∣vers
in Turneps, Cabidges, and Hartichokes, our English are
not like 'em.



Oh fye Sir, whe the Treat that a States-man of Hol∣land
gives, would either choak or starve an English man, dryed
Stock-fish, pickled Herring, or the like, Sir. 



Sam. ask him from whence they came when they
came hither.



That I will, Sir Culluaron lagooso, lageen, lagan, rufft,
punkatee.



Nime aweigh de cack.



What, what? I cannot blame him then.



What says he to thee?



The poor Boy blushes for him, he tells me his Father
came from making merry with certain of his Countrey-men,
and he's a little steept in English Beer; there's no heed to be
taken of his Tongue now.



Why this is strange, how camest thou by all this?
the Devil take me if I heard him speak above three words to
you.



Oh Sir, the Dutch is a very wide Language, you shall
have Ten English words go to the Explaining of one Dutch 
As for example, Gulldergoose there's a word for you, Master.



Why what is that same Gull Gull Gullder∣goose,
ha?



The English is How do you and all your Genera∣tion?



Why 'tis impossible, 'tis impossible, man 



Thus I prove it by the Explanation, Sir, Gull how
do you? der, and; Goose, your Generation.



Methinks the Language is a little sawcey Goose,
my generation quoth a? but sirrah, how came you to under∣stand
Dutch so well?



By going to fetch home my Young Mistress, Sir, we
had in our Company a Young Frokin, who taught us it in a
trice, Sir. 



What in a moneths time?



I'le undertake, Sir, in a Fortnights time you shall speak
as good Dutch as any Native of Holland, if you would learn,
Sir I shall be tript anon pox on't wou'd I were fairly off 


Ile go seek out your Son, Sir; You shall hear what Thunder
he'le bring with him 


Do so, for I le have ye all face to face 



Cuds me what Else, Sir, If you take me so near
the Net agen, I le give you leave to wring my Neck off 
I am come off fairly: We are undone in Dutch, all our Three
months Rognery is come over in a Butter-Firkin.




By Gogmagog an intricate bus'ness this; I am so
lost between two Tales, I know not which to trust, The Boy
is the likeliest to tell truth; for he is not yet old enough to un∣derstand
iniquity but then why should the Father tell me
a lie, he gets nothing, certainly expects nothing; but by my
troth if he does expect, he gets nothing of me, and so much
good may it do him but however, I'le in and examine the
business further 






Mrs. Hadland and her Man Husband.


I Have sent in to the Widow 



Thou plyest thy business close the
Coast is clear yet that was a good surprise you put upon
Sir Gregory 



I found him the sensiblest Fool of the three to
whom the Widow was inclin'd; therefore ought to be re∣mov'd 
be sure, Husband, to stand Sentinel, and let me have
warning when they come, and I'le rout 'em all 



I'm gone my Witty Sweet 






My Lady, Sir, begs your pardon for making you
wait, and she will be with you so soon as she has dispatcht some
of her Tenants come from Kent.



Thank you Sir, 'tis fit I should attend her leisure.

Those were my Tenants once, but what relief now; yet e're
we part, Widow, I shall have full revenge Your heart is
mine already, and when the whole Cargoe's in my power,
I'le hoist my sailes, and with my streams playing in the Aire,
make to the blest Harbour of repose 





Wife, the pair of Fools are come just now lighted
out of the Coach, 



Now to your duty for I shall deal a little rough∣ly
with you, but you must not take it ill; for my obedience is
in my Pettycoat Pocket, and not about me at present.



Use me as you please 



I hear 'em coming help me a
little Now step back and be very cere∣monious 
Where be those Fellowes, who
looks out there? Is there ne're a Rascal
She pulls off Hat, Crevat, Garters, and makes as if dressing her self.
in the way to conduct the Gentlemen in I find I am like
to be finely served among ye, but I shall set a new face on the
house e're it be long how sneakingly do you stand there:
but I shall make you flye to receive and execute Commands,
before I have done.







This is most insupportable! what
beating your Man! hold Sir, what mean
you? 


Noddy goes to keep Mrs. H. from beat∣ing, and she beats him.


I begg your pardon Gentlemen your Servant 
Sirrah call your Mistress, tell her I wonder she stayes so long?
Gentlemen you must pardon Womens frailties, their decking
and trimming themselves, make 'em often commit such rude∣ness.



How's this? nay then we are chous'd and I have
spent both time and money to a fair end 



What a new Lord in the Widows house? would I
were fairly off; for I'le lay my life he has struck the Widow
in a fair Planet let me see, let me see Venus in Cauda?
then 'tis too true, for that's a damn'd Leacherous •lanet.



Sir, Your Servant 




By my faith you shall not stir till you have seen
Isbel, make haste and desire your Mistress to come down 



She desires to be excus'd, Sir, the Milliner has
brought Gloves to show her 



How plain Isbel? Then I know how the world goes,
ay, ay, too true, he has Isbell d her a Pox on these Wi∣dows,
there's no trust in 'em 



They are gall'd the Rogues begin to sneak 



Come, let us steal off, and take no notice of him,
for he'l jear us to death should we stay Love is not by desert,
but such fluttering half-witted Hectoring Blades are the only
taking men with you buxome Widows come away.



What, Gentlemen are you for the Wine-Cellar? 
Sirrah conduct 'em down, by that time you have drank your
Mornings draught Isbel will be ready 



Spare your Wine Sir, I beseech you for since
the Widow is dispos'd of we have no business here.



I'le see the Wine in a Drunkard's shoe first, and drink't
after he has brew'd it Hang her, let her go, she's fitted
yfaith; a proud domineering young Coxcomb he'l quickly
rattle her bones, and go to Dice with her Money, or at least
pick up some common Orange-wench, set up her Coach, gay
Cloaths, teach her to confront his Wife, and laugh Modesty
out of Countenance, or I have no skill in Astrology; if he is so
sawcy now to call her plain Isbel, she'l be Bitch and Whore be∣fore
a Month comes about 




They have given you the slip 



Hang 'em there are three rubs past and
now for the Widow. Thus like a younger Brother I'le begin
my fortune, put on impudence, talk wantonly, and ruffle
her lustily.



But if she should yield, what then 



Well consider'd, to prevent that, you must step in
most officiously, and interrupt us but she's coming 



Adieu witty Wife, and I le be sure to stand Cen∣tinel.






My life, my Dear!




I fear I have tired your patience with my long stay
Sir 



Who wou'd not be devout, and out-wait patience,
when such a Heaven is the reward but Widow, y'are in∣debted
to me 



As how, I pray 



I love you Widow; nay, laugh not, for I expect
return, or look to your self, for I'm resolv'd to sue thee in
Cupid's Court, and there I know what decree will pass 



But if I would compound, pray Sir, what will
satisfie?



The endless enjoying thy sweet self, Widow, no∣thing
less 



So by compounding a small Debt I may run into a
greater 



Your credit will be the better, there's many a
young Blade would give you half the purchase to trust you, 
nay, and pay use for it.



Some of those roaring Bawdy talking young fellows
would be idle, were it for such interest.



Then 'tis a match Come Widow, short service,
a kiss and to bed, for I am desperately hungry yfaith 



Y'are in great haste, Sir 



Troth Widow, I have an excellent stomach 
and to provoke thine; know, that my kisses are Virgins,
embraces perfect, strength sollid, love constant, but to come
to the point, all extasie, rapture!



Since you value your self on your honesty, I'le put
you to't Sir, Will you swear you never knew Woman 



By all that's good, and by thy sweet self I swear,
that never as Man I ever yet knew Woman but if we do
not agree, faith Madam, I expect you keep it secret, for it may
spoil my future being; for a sober man is more ridiculous in
this Age, then he was priz'd in the last 



How his mein and wit surprize me Well, I find
I shall love him; for I am very apt to believe what he says 



Are you considering whether you may believe me
or not, Madam then take altogether for I add further,
that you are the first Widow, Maid, or Wife I ever made
love to 



There's ne'r a Jury of young Women in Town that
were to view you, but would be inclined to find you guilty 
therefore, Sir, I am apt to believe there is some secret reason,
and not Devotion keeps you from it 



None by Heav'n I kept it in reserve for thee 



For Me, Sir? 



Where can I bestow it better 




What means this insolence and rudeness, Sir?



Fye, Widow, fye, 'tis pleasing violence, that be∣gets
delight.



I'le call my Servants, Sir, 



Do, and I le use thee ten times worse even before
witness, and then thou art my own Widow Come, come,
dear, sweet, inticeing Widow, we must withdraw we
must yfaith, now, now, or never Widow.





Does your Worship call?



Pox on you Dog, are you peeping?

Thanks good Tom, thou camest in the critical Minute




But Sir, let us breath a while, what Encouragement
have I given you to make you thus confident and forward,
Sir? 



Love, powerful resistless Love you see what
Mad-men you Women make us Come, Madam, few words,
kind consent and no Ceremonies are most pleasing 



Well, I cannot withstand, for I begin to grow as im∣patient
as he is, within there who waits? 


If Mr. Gazer and Noddy are below, bring 'em up. 



I've lost my Widow, I fear, there are but two
ways that I know, which leads to a Widows bed; they are,
Wealth and Impudence Now if I have took the wrong,
how I shall curse my self; here they are, now love if it be
thy will.






Gentlemen, y'are welcom, I am now fully resolved
to choose one of ye here, let me see but first, Mr. Gazer,
you are a judicious Astrological Person, do the Stars smile to
day? if not, I will defer my choice.



Let me see Oh the best time in the world, Ma∣dam;
for just now Mars being Lord of the Ascendant, is en∣tering
into the house of Venus about three Minutes three
quarters after Eleven this morning 



That's well and Mr. Noddy, your judgment of
that person walking there, what think you of him.



What I think? Why I think he's well made, has a
aiery mein, I believe he has a pretty Judgment, for his Trim∣ings
and Cloaths are not very contemptible but I believe
he's a Whore-master, for he has notable waggish Eyes.



Then bear all witness, this is the Man whom I have
chose to be my Husband and ye will infinitely
oblige me if you come to my Wedding, and so your Ser∣vants.






The Devil go with you 



I ne'r suspected my Almanack till now.



Now Gentlemen, I can give you a true invitation
and welcom, before 'twas but a flourish; but you see Fortune
will be the bold Adventurers friend 



That I should over-look this damn'd Eclipse of the
  31
Moon, which was this morning, tho not visible to us; but I
wish it may have power here, and by a forked Influence, make
him beat her, she Cuckold him, he turn her out of Doors, and
with her Estate maintain a Whore 




Amen say I, Sir, your Servant, your Servant.





A fair riddance of a brace of Fools.



But see your Brother's come 



I intend to set his wit to work.





Sir, this is my Master. 



You see, Sir, I have obey'd your Summons sent me
by your man, and now I wou'd know your pleasure?



Thus receive your welcom, Sir, and now I
have a request to you.



Name it, Sir, if it consists with honour, and within
my power you may conclude it granted Sir 
'Tis for your Sisters sake I make it.



You have named the dearest friend I have, and I can
deny nothing is desir'd in her Name.



'Tis this, that you would honour my Wedding,
which is to be to Morrow, with some small entertainments of
your wit and you are void of all Excuses; for I have been
an ear witness of your Sisters frequent commendations of your
parts.



You oblige me with the Injunction; Is it with the
Lady of this house you Marry, Sir? 







Then I must recall my promise Sir 







Her last Husband was an extorting Villain, and has
undone our Family, and now enjoys what is mine and my
Sisters due.



But Sir, for her sake, comply for once She
shall not know who you are, but shall be obliging to you and
your Sister too to my knowledg will give you thanks.



You have prevail'd, Sir 



Pray Sir, be pleas'd to walk in, that, I may recom∣mend
you to my Wife that must be 



I wait on you, Sir, Now if I should in my Sisters
absence strike up the Widow Gad I'le try and this will
be a good opportunity to attempt it.






Madam, I pitty your misfortune, and if there be any
thing wherein I can serve you, you may command it.



You are all obliging, Sir, My Husband is now below,
trying what he can do with his Mother, who is unexpectedly
arrived, after being reported to have been dead two years 



That was a contrivance of my Friend Santloe's, occa∣sion'd
by your Beauty, which had such an Influence over
him, that he ventur'd a Fathers Anger to oblige his
Passion 





Oh friend, Fortune begins once more to smile upon
my Actions, and has favour'd me in this last Enterprize be∣yond
my wish 



As how Prithee inform us, that we may partake
your joys 







Who helps a lame Dog o're the Stile as well as the
best.



Put me upon perswading my Mother to make my Fa∣ther
believe, that my dear Wife here is my Sister; but the
reason she knows not 



And my Mistress, like a kind overjoy'd Mother to see
her white Boy, most readily consented, so that, Madam, if
you at last should not be well gifted by Nature, as the rest
of Females are, with Dissimulation, all our designs are spoiled,
and you must trudg to Antwerp agen; for as sure as death, my
old Master will turn ye both out of Doors. 



'Tis an hard task for me, however I'le endeavour, what
is't I wou'd not undergo, or suffer, for my dear Husband's
sake 



They are coming Now Sweet heart carry thy self 
bravely now and let fortune do her worst for we are for
ever happy.










And have I thee in my Arms agen? Look see, I weep
for Joy had I my Daughter too; but the Dutch Merchant
told me the thing I have of their bringing over was a Servant
in Antwerp, and not my Child 



They cannot deceive me, Sir, let me see her, and I
shall soon discover their cheat, if it be one Now heart hold,
and let my tongue for once belye thee 




Take courage Love 



Lass how I tremble! 



See there, Sweet heart, what a piece of flesh they
have brought me, that is the creature would be my supposed
Daughter; but by Gogmagog, if she is a Cheat, I'le have her
stript and whipt through every Parish, and cross the Seas till
she arrives to her old Kitchin at Antwerp agen.



Bless her Eternal Powers! my life, my comfort, and
my nine years grief; but now my joyes, thrice welcom to thy
Mothers arms, 'tis she, my Daughter receive your Child,
and thank Heaven for her wonderful restoration 







Kind Mother I shall love Dissimulation for thy
sake, who would not, that heard thee swear, conclude this
not Counterfeit. 




My Daughter! it cannot be no, no, I shall ne'r
believe it 



Down on your knees 





Rise into my bosom, and receive a Mothers blessing.



Soft Wife, soft, have a care how you place your
blessing; for the Dutch Merchant who came over with you,
affirmed, he saw her a Servant at an Inn in Antwerp 



She was so, Sir, I often saw her there; but see∣ing
she had acquir'd to an honest way of living, I would not
disturb her rest by discovering her misfortunes forgive
  34
me truth, if I abuse thee with a false story, since 'tis to pre∣serve
mutual love betwixt an injur'd Father, and beloved Son.



Daughter Clarina! Let me kiss thee wench This
unexpected joy has forc't tears, and my heart's so full with this
surprize, I know not what to say My joys are now com∣pleat,
and this days happiness has countervail'd all my past
years of sorrow for my long lost dearest Wife, and Daugh∣ter 
Mr. Sanders here, by Gogmagog, the Girl is yours.



I'm proud of this mighty present, Sir, and thus I hug
it as Misers do their Gold.



I hope, Sir, I may be once more credited.



Honest, honest Son, I have wrong'd thy faith; but
thou wilt pardon me, I hope; old men are apt to suspect
Youth for Wags, that was the reason.



Now I may securely venture my head out of my
Covert.




Where's Sam: that honest merry fellow? I must
have his pardon too.



Look you Sir, I am very merciful, good natur'd, and
prone to forgive; and to show that I have no malice in my
heart, if you have another Wife or Daughter to find, and
Money to spend, I shall be very ready to serve you, Sir 



Come hither, Sirrah, let me hugg thee, and take
my Curse from your Knave's Shoulders.



For Heav'ns sake do, Sir, I feel it on my blade here,
your Curse is at least ten Stone weight, and a pound
over, Sir.



I'le do thee right Boy, I ne'r knew thee but speak ho∣nest
English, marry in Dutch, I found thee a knave lately.



That was only to hold you in play, Sir, till further
proofs came over.



By Gogmagog, I love a harmless wit with my life 
Well, 'tis my Girl, methinks her Eyes, Nose and Mouth
strangely resemble her Mothers there ay, ay, 'tis she, and
there's an end; however I'le try further Wife, Wife, pri∣thee
now kiss me, do I say 

Clarina, be obedient, and come and buss your Father 

Very good, 'tis so, now I'le swear 'tis she; for they have both
the same way of kissing too; now Wife, since I find that my
Daughter is my Daughter, I'le prosecute my first intention,
and this Gentleman shall have her for his Wife.



I am proud of the honour, Sir, 



Observe Wife, observe, he is one that handles his
Tongue as well as most men, a very Genteil Person, and as
pretty a Spark as e're made love, or kept Miss, I le say that
for him I'le be sworn by his looks no one wou'd take him
for an Eunuch 




My design succeeds as I cou'd wish 




Nay, I have not forgot my Son too, for I have found
a Wife for him, it is the Widow Landwels Neice, the Daugh∣ter
of old Morley lately dead, her own fortune, it's true, is
none of the greatest; but her Aunt questionless will give her
a swingeing Blessing when she dies; it is the same Maid Euge∣nia,
that was Nurst with our Clarina; well, it is a pretty crea∣ture
by Gogmagog, she's a Nosegay of Beauty and sweet Con∣ditions,
how say you to't Boy ha? 



The Blessing will be greater than I could ever have
expected, Sir, 



What fortune was this! that I should come so op∣portunely
to see my happiness compleated in the Marriage of
my two Children.



Well thought on Wife, I had almost forgot, we are
invited to the Widows Wedding, with a bold brisk young
Spark that has clapt her on board yfaith Do you and your
Daughter put on your Hoods and Scarfs, and we'l expect you
below in the Parlor; come, Mr. Sanders, come along with
me 



Manent Peter Santloe, Clarina, La. Santloe, Sam.


Oh Mother, I am so transported with those new
Joys, you kindly have created, I know not which way to be∣gin
to pay my Duty.



But Son, the more I look on her, the more thy Sister
runs in my mind.



Perhaps she's like her, that will carry on the Cheat
the better, Madam.



I must examine her of what Countrey and Pa∣rentage
are you?



Of England, Madam, and many are the afflictions
I have undergone so that my Parentage I have forgot 



If it will not renew your sorrows, give us a small
relation of what has past.



So much as my memory will give me leave for I
was not above seven years old when my Mother carried me be∣yond
Sea, which was about ten years since, with a design to
put me into a Nunnery; but by the way to Antwerp, we met
with Robbers, who stript us, convey'd me from my Mother
into a Wood; but they having committed several Outrages,
were persued by Soldiers, so they left me, and I wandring
about, came at last to Antwerp, and was received by the Mi∣stress
of an Inn, where I continued a Servant till this Gentle∣man
perswaded me to come to England.



Oh my blest fortune! my dearest Child, thrice wel∣com
to my Arms 



S'life if this should prove his Sister now 




Look you Mother, my Father's gone now you may
be plain 



I am sorry he is but l'le hast to him to confirm what
before I only for your sake averr'd, but did not then know the
truth.



But I hope you are not in earnest Mother, that it is
my Sister.



Witness Heav'n it is your Sister 



Hold, hold, good Mother Kill not your Son 
Why I am in love with her Mother, and have made her my
Wife.



But now your love must end as to Marriage, and with
a Brothers Eyes you must look upon her Come Daughter,
let us go down to your Father, who shall redouble his joys
when he shall know the Truth 



Heav'ns! I love him so, I cou'd wish my self any thing
but his Sister farewel for ever Love, since thus I am de∣ceiv'd
in my first desires.




My Sister, that Northern blast has nipt my bloom∣ing
joys must all my Courtship, Expence and Constancy,
  37
ay, Constancy, Sam. be jilted by the resurrection of a long
lost Sister.



A Pox on her, say I, she was ever a cross Brat when
she was young, and now she has liv'd in spight to cross
your love.



It cannot be my Sister for I find no alteration in
me, I am in good temper, and my mind's not shook at that
dreadful name of Sister therefore I am certain there is
some damn'd riddle in't, which we cannot at present ex∣pound.



To make us wise enough, Sir, let us to the Widows
Wedding, drink briskly, and then with nodding gravity un∣sold
this mysterie if it be one.






Tho Love was cruel, Fortune has bin kind,
Since I, a Sister in a Mistress, find.








COme Gentlemen, since you are pleas'd to honour
me with acting my little Essay of fancy, please you
to retire and dress, for they are ready to enter.



Worthy Sir, we follow you 



I shall attend you within.




By Mercury, a neat contrivance, Sir Gregory I applaud
your wit.



Tis a profound device, an extravagant fancy, and
an insupportable design; and Sir Gregory, I am in an intolle∣rable
Consternation of your Penicranium 



This will be a brave opportunity to affront her for
deceiving us are all perfect in their parts, Rail and spare
not, for that is all that we are like to have for our Expences on
the Jilting Widow.



I am ready in mine 



And mine is in Capite.



Let us in to dress then Widow, look too't, we'll
all your scorns repay.



Your Sun of Joys shall be Eclips'd to day.



Your Market shall be marr'd too, as they say 





But prithee tell me, art thou in earnest, my Sister?



So our ill fate will have it, but so much I love, that I
cou'd wish I were not.



Pox on Kindred like noble Savage, I wou'd range
and choose my Mistress where I pleas'd now must sacred
Love be curb'd, and pleasures lost, and all long of dull fanta∣stick
Law.



We must submit, for Reason tells us it wou'd be a Sin,
should we pursue our Love 



Friend, I can but pitty thy misfortunes in losing of a
Mistress, but must congratulate your Joyes in finding of a Sister.
Now, fair Eugenia, shall I at last receive the fair reward for all
my Constancy? speak kindly, and return my love with
yours and then I'm happy 



Faith Madam, yield do not cast away a handsom
proper man, for so small a toy; my Sister here has bin more
kind to me, than hitherto you have prov'd to him 



My Aunts to rule my fate, and I must choose a Hus∣band
with her liking, I'le make it known to her, and if she
approves of it, Heav'n knows, I can enjoy no greater happi∣ness 
for without blushing, I confess, I love 



Oh my kind Saint!



Sanders, to your Post, see where they come But
do'st hear, prithee do not make love to her, for by Heav'n,
tho she's my Sister, I shall grow wondrous Jealous, and conse∣quently
quarrelsom.


P. S. to Eug. 
  39Enter the Widow as Married to Mrs. Hadland, Sir O.
Santloe, Lady Santloe, Mr. Hadland as a Serving∣man,
and Attendants.


Come my long wisht for Lady, your happy return is
a second feast to me.



Ye'are all most freely welcom 



We thank you, Sir 



But is my Brother, do you say, so much in love
with my Widow?





I overheard him but now complaining on his destiny
that should make him so desperately in love with your Enemy,
that I thought he would have rebelled against himself, there's
such a mighty feud between the two old Enemies in his Breast,
Love and Honour.



Lass poor man I wish he had my place to day, he
is abler than I to perform the duty that belongs to a young
Widow.




Come Gentlemen, pray sit that worthy friend of
yours, Madam, is pleased to entertain us for a while, and
now I suppose they are ready to enter 






Madam, here you may before-hand read the Argu∣ment
of what I do design Now Love, prove but so kind
to inspire her with an equal slame, make her a true Widow,
and my young Spark I shall soon grast on your Stock 




Ha, what's here? a Letter inclos'd, this must be
conceal'd till a fitter time to be read 

We are oblig'd to you, for this Nights diversion, and shall
study a requital If my young Blade here proves a fa∣shionable
keeping Husband, this Gentleman, if his Letter
speaks of love, shall not long languish, nor despair for
I like him strangely 

See here, Sir, the Argument is pretty 



Good, she has convey'd the Letter as I cou'd wish,
now half my toyle is over Madam, they are Entering 


Then a thing like a Globe Ascends, Sir Gregory Lovemuch sitting
on it, in an habit representing fire On each side the Stage,
ascends Noddy, representing Water, and One representing
Earth Gazer Descends, who represents Air Noble goes
behind Sir Gregory Lovemuch to promp him.


The flame of Zeal 



 The wicked fire of Lust
Does now spread heat through Water, Air, and Dust.



Ha! He's out at the beginning The wheel of Time




The Devil set fire on the Distaffe 



What a Devil means all this? 




I, that was wont in elder time to pass
For a bright Angel, now am made an Ass,
And so corrupted with the upstart fires
Of hated Avarice and hot desires,
Which in unlawful sheets were kindled first
By forward Girls, false Wives, and Widows lust.
That I, even Fire, who purest Gold did try,
From these base heats, my self can't purifie;
I once was reverenc't, Charity did thaw,
And did keep up the Hospitable Law,
But stead of me, a Bastard heat now burns,
And to supply my Landlord's lust, it turns.
Now Matron Widow's Leachery so great
They ne'r consult their years, but lustful heat

And wed young Fops that may perform the feat.




Heart! Who should this be? Some Rogue 
but I'le let'em take their swing and afterwards will be fully
Reveng'd.



Upon my word, Monsieur Fire is a notable hot Sati∣rical
Blade 



What should my Brother mean to rail so 




After this hear, you Ladies fat and fair,
Open your Casements wide, and take in Air;
But not that Air, false Women make up Oaths with,
No, nor that Air Gallants perfume their Cloaths with;
I am that Air that keeps about the Clouds,
None of my Kindred were smelt out in Crouds;
Yet some there are that are my Chief Polluters,
Widows that falsifie their faiths to Suiters,
And will give fair words, when the Sign's in Cancer,

But at the next remove a scurvy Answer;
Come to the poor mens Houses, Eat their Banquet
With smock-fac't Boy, at Night be tost in Blanket.
He that believes a Widows word shall fail,
When Venus Gown-skirt sweeps the Dragon's Tail;
Fair weather the first day she makes to any,
The second Clowdy, and the third day Rainy;
The fourth day a great Storm, Lightning and Thunder,
A Bolt strikes the Suiter, a Boy keeps her under.



'Tis so, some Rascal's crept in on purpose to disgrace
me; but I'm resolv'd they shall share in my disgrace 




By Gog Magog, a notable sharp Air this, Madam 



He has perfumed the Room well 



A man may smell her meaning two Rooms off, tho his
Nose wanted reparations 



Prithee step out, and knovv vvhat his meaning is,
is this the Entertainment I promised to my self? 



His love sure has made him mad but I'le go
know the Cause 




Now Gentiles all, since fire has made ye hot,
Come bath in me, for I'm a Water-pot:
Water's my Name, I come your Pipes to fill
Without the Charge of Water-house, or Mill 
But first, I will a Widows Cheeks besprinkle,
Which glow with heat, her leacherous Eyes do twinkle.
And I'le endeavour too, to lay the dust
Of Widows hot desires, and boundless lust,
Then will display her shame From such as she
I first took weakness and inconstancy;


I sometimes swell above my banks, and speed,
Widows are oft with Child before they Wed.
Where I'm least seen, there my most danger lyes;
So in those Parts hid most from humane Eyes:
He heart, her love, or what may be more close.
I know no Mercy, she thinks that no loss
In her poor Gallants, Pyrates thrive in me,
I help to Cast away, and so does she 



Curse on his Wit I am all confusion 




Earth stands for a full point, me ye shou'd hire
To stop the gaps of Water, Air, and Fire
Your Husband lov'd me, he lock't me in his Chest,
I was the only Idol of his Breast.
Now he is dead 
He shall have Gold, enough to glut his Soul,
And as for Earth, I'le stop his Cranes throat full.
With ease a Miser's appetite we please,
But Lust in Widows, is a damn'd Disease.
And proves the most insatiate avarice.



And now to vex you, Widow, to your face,
See, once four warning Elements, embrace.


and Earth are let down to the middle with two Devils Fire
and Air, are carried up half way into the Air, with two
Devils 

Sir G. Gaz. Noddy.
Help, help, help; Murder Murder 



Widow, for Heav'ns sake, intercede for us to the
Devils 



Oh law, what will my Mother and Sister say,
when they hear I am carried away by the Devil 



Who are ye, discover your selves then?



By Charles's Wain, don't you know me?



Why look you, d'ye see, it is I, it is I 



My old Suiters, we are all oblig'd to you, my Masters,
you have taken great pains to make your selves Ridi∣culous 
  43
 ha, ha, Pray Sir release 'em for my sake 



You may Command, Madam, let 'em down there 








Whe faith since we were to lose you, Madam, we
thought losers might have leave to speak, and therefore by
offering our Service to this Gentleman, we got this oppor∣tunity
to speak a little of our minds to you 



And I think we have pretty freely, and at our own
Costs too; for I owe Money for some of the Painting but
the Planets are sufficient to pay the Painter 



If ever I court Widow again for your sake, may I
be made a Pissing-post of; well, I find Widows are confounded
insupportable witty Devils.



We are all oblig'd to you, Sir, for this discovery.



My shame, Madam, urg'd me to contrive some way
to discover the Authors of my disgrace But, Madam, to
divert you I have brought a Servant of mine to entertain you
with a Dance 



I am indebted to you for this favour, Sir Please
Gentlemen to walk in and partake of a small Collation, and
then, my Dear, we will retire to surfeit on Loves sweets 



We follow you, Sir 






Curse on ill luck! What a Devil should be become of
this Sister of mine, had she not promised to get the Widow for
me, I had not slipt the opportunity which now is irrecovera∣bly
lost, she's Married! now the Pox or Impotence be his
Curse, for I cannot with patience see my self thus chous't 
ha here comes my brisk Bridegroom good, I have
thought on an excellent way, if possible, to retrieve her 
I'le wheadle him to drink, make him damnably drunk, so
consequently impotent, and a Widow disappointed, turns De∣vil,
will sue a divorce, and then she's mine. 





Oh Sir, most opportunely met are you alone? 



Yes, Sir, Your Pleasure 



I am come to cut your Throat.



How Sir! cut my Throat, you'l give me a rea∣son,
Sir, for it, I hope 



I saw what amorous glances past between my Wife
and you at Dinner, and since too I have discovered that which
has rais'd such a Storm within me, that nothing but thy death
can restore my former calmness 



Jealous by this light I hope he has not met with
my Letter I convey'd to the Widow 

Heav'ns Sir, what jealous on the first night!



I am all rage with jealousie, your Letter, Sir 
see there the reason, Villain, and then judg if I can pardon
such an injury Therefore prepare to yield up either Life,
or Love 



Nay, Sir, since you have discovered my passion, then
know I do, must, and will love your Widow, nay, dote upon
the sight of her, and yet no harm to you, since you possess the
wealth, you cannot barr a longing stander by, to wish and
sigh, since you know 'tis in vain; therefore I will persist 
ah 'tis a charming Creature!



Hell and Furies! shall I stand tamely still, and hear
a fellow boldly to my face proclaim my Infamy!



A fellow, Sir▪ Provoke me not, I say provoke me
not; if you do, by Heav'n, if possible, I'le cuckol'd thee be∣fore
thy face 



This is beyond all patience, base Villain draw 



Pish Sir, your little Bodkin frights not me, see I have
one can match it Yet I believe thee Valiant, or such a
little whipper-ginnie durst not have been so desperate to have
ventur'd on a longing Widow 



How, Sir, have at thy heart! 



Good Child, thou art too forward, reserve thy
vigour for another place, it will be little enough, I'le engage 
for young, Sir, there can be no comparison between you and
I, in love affairs 



How mean you Sir?



You may perhaps be well enough for the Theory, to
cringe, and whine, and wheadle your self into a Virgins heart;
but a Widows wise discerning Eye must of necessity read
here the only man that's fittest for the Practick part 



Heav'ns! Do but hereafter look upon her with one
pleasing glance, and I'le damn thy Soul.



A Bully in Swadling-clouts by this light, 'tis the
youngest Hector I ever met with in my life a gad, little
Squire, were she the great Turk's favourite, I'de look and gaze
altho I knew my death should follow, and let me tell thee,
had somebody been true to their promise, your fortune had
been mine therefore, little one, you may thank my cross
Stars for your good success. A Pox on an absent Sister 




How Sir, oblig'd to you? Oh insupportable! thou
base detracter of my honour, who not only would supplant
my love, but blast my reputation, and make me undeserving
of a Ladies favour.



If you come to that point, Sir, what can you boast
of, should be so attractive? I must confess thou appearest a
hopeful Stripling, and I question not you have the pretty im∣pertinents
of one of your Age, as Dancing, Singing, affected
Gestures, be peirtly witty, making bold with every new Play
comes out, and extravagantly tawdrey in every new
fashion.



Death and the Devil!



These accomplishments, I must confess, may be very
surprizing to a poor young thing of a Boarding-School, who
never had love made to her but by her Dancing-Master, or
some such follow.



This is beyond all sufferance 





This won't do and now, little one, I le dis∣charge
my Conscience, between you and I, I do verily be∣lieve,
the Widow that was, and your Wife that is, Married
you only for a Drudg or Steward of her Estate, while she
spends it on pleasures, with such vigorous Blades as my self,
and who knows it may be my turn; which if it be, faith
  46
I'le be very reasonable, and Cuckold thee as seldom as possi∣bly
I can 



I'le hear no more; but thus will make a passage to
thy Soul, for I swear thy Ruine, Death, Damnation 



Say you so, then 'tis time to look about and since
you provide me, little one, know this, that if I kill thee, I
swear to marry the Widow the next day 



Thus I prevent thy boasting 
dull, dull, Brother, not know your own
flesh and blood.
Nob.
makes up to
her with his Sword,
Mrs. H. discovers
her self.



My Sister▪ I'm all amazement▪



Now Sir, what think you of my design?



Design quotha! 'twas well you discovered your self,
or I had spoil'd all; but I'm a Dog if I understand what you
mean? you are Married 



I am to the Widow, I knew not how to cheat the
Parson; but I question not, but to deceive the Widow e're I
sleep 



As how, as how? I long to hear 



See, my Husband comes with some intelligence .



Is that my Brother Hadland? 





Sir, My Lady is retir'd to her Chamber 



Leave off your distance now, sweet heart; for I have
told my Brother all.



Kind-Brother I obliging Sister! 



But Brother, do you like my Widow in earnest?



Like her! Heavn's! I love her infinitely! were she
not Mistress of a farthing, agad, I believe I should have Married
her, there's such an aiery sweetness in her face 



Say you so, then along with me, I have one design
more, and if that take, we are once more happy 



Lead on whil'st I follow, and admire thy wit.




ACT V. SCENE I.
The Ante-Chamber to the Widows, &c.
Mrs. Hadland sola.


T Thus far I am prosperous, Widow, I have not
done with you yet; I have wheadled all her
Keys out of her Custody, and in her Closet I found the Writing
of my Estate, thou dear, dear Parchment, how I am over-joy'd
to hug thee in my Arms once more the Widow comes 


My life, my Soul, my only joys on Earth, haste, haste to Bed,
that I may be compleatly bless'd with an Heav'n of Pleasures
and delight.


Oh let me embrace the mighty Treasure I have this
day gain'd! 



Delay not the Consummation of our bliss, to bed,
to bed, my dear, and there we'l surfeit with delights un∣speakable.



I go, but prithee stay not long behind 



I'le but to my appartment, and undress, then fly
to rifle all thy Charms now, Widow, thou art safe 




Hist, Brother, are you ready?




Kind Rogue, I am I cannot avoid laughing to
think how surpriz'd the Widow will be, well Girl, I'le en∣deavour
to behave my self so, that she shall have no reason
to complain, nor you to repent the trick you have put upon
her.



Do that, and I am well pleas'd, I believe I am the
first Bridegroom that ever procur'd for his Bride the first
Night.



The obliging'st in the world, and the kindest Si∣ster
too.



Away then be brisk, and disgrace me not.



Dear, honest, kind, obliging, witty Rogue, adieu now
for the Widow.




Widow, y'are caught at last 
Thy Husband's subtleties shall be repaid,
Thus Women are by Women best betray'd.






Sir O. Santloe, Sanders, Gazer, Noddy Sam.
Drinking at a Table.



Well done, my friends, put it briskly about 
now the Bride and Bridegroom are preparing for bed, let us
Drink their healths Sam. give me a Glass Son Sanders,
top and bottom to you 




I'le do you reason, Sir Mr. Santloe, the Bride and
Bridegrooms healths.







I'le Pledg you, Sir, tho by Aries the Sign is in the
Head with me already, Mr. Noddy have at you 




Ay, ay, let it come, hang Sorrow, it must be
drown'd, I find 




Nay, nay, Sir, I'le not bate you an ace of top and
bottom, off with it, off with it for shame, I say again, top and
bottom is my word 



Lay aside Indignation, Sir, I'le do't, tho I dye for't,
but yfeck I have so topt and bottom'd it already, I can hardly
breath 




Hye, that's he, that's he What, Son Peter, no
frollick, no frollick, Sirrah Boy, be merry, or I'le dis-inherit
thee Ah, when I was of your Age, and at the Temple, I
was the Cock of all the Jovial Blades in Town I was always
the Captain of a Temple-Rebellion, broke Benchers heads
with the Temple pots most dexterously, lye with my Laun∣dress,
got her with Bastard, and made her lay it at a Benchen's
door, by Gogmagog 



So, so, all will out now shall I have pious instru∣ctions
to follow the Example of a sober Father 




I have beat Watches, have had my head broke, and
been in the Compter so often, that it cost your Grandfather
above a Hundred pounds one year to cure my broken head, and
to ransom me from Limbo and yet you see, Sirrah, I am a
sober discreet man now 



Wondrous discreet thus to display your weakness 




Son Sanders, what ne'r a Song in Budget by Gog∣magog,
this whoring Age has spoil'd all good harmless mirth
and Company All the young fellows now a days single
out their Does, and retire as if it were nothing but rutting
time with 'em but in my Days we should not have sat half
so long without a Catch or two, and top and bottom going
briskly about yfaith 



Prithee let's have the Song, you made the last drinking
bout, and one glass more will lay your Father to rest 



I have a Song, Sir, which if you please well sing 
but all must joyn in the Chorus. 



Yes marry shall they, Sir and so will I but
first let every one take top and bottom in his hand 


1.COme troul it away,
We'll drink up the day,
Let none from his standing retire,
We'l Laugh, Drink, and Sing,
And Bacchus's Spring
We'l drain, and our prowess admire.

Cho. We'l Laugh, &c.


2.Old Age we despise
Whilst Wine we can prize,
And briskly can take off our Glasses;
Wine, life does repair,
And banishes Care,
But Temp'rance wou'd make us all Asses.

Cho. Wine, life, &c.



  503.Let the Pollitick fool
Live dully by Rule,
While our Wits we refine in our Liquor,
My Soul's in that Wine
Which puts the Divine
To a Nonplus, and turns up the Viccar.

Cho. My Soul's, &c.





Well done yfaith my Lads and now off with
top and bottom 

ho, ho, ho Boys, Peter I'le give thee an Hundred pounds a
year more for this Boy 



Say, and hold Sir, that you have often done in your
Glasses; but has forbid the banes when sober 



Oh the sweet days of Youth I have roar'd it in
my time yfaith and so topt and bottom'd it, that by Gog∣magog
we have all bin top heavy before we have parted 
Now Son Peter, ne'r a Jig or Horn-pipe about you? how has
my Money bin spent at Dancing-School, I pray? 



He would make me as ridiculous as himself 

Those Dances are quite out of fashion, Sir, and Genteiler are
now in Mode, Sarabands, Minuets Entries, and the like 



Pox on your hard nam'd Dances and Wine too, they
never prove good, nor wholsom but Sirrah, to convince
you, nothing can be finer than a Lancashire Horn-pipe 
Fidlers strike up 




I Vow, Sir, 'tis in supportably admirable 



Before I left the Temple, I was the only Reveller as
old as I was; I cou'd have footed the Measures, and Danc't
Horn-pipes with e're a young fellow of 'em all. Sam, Give me
top and bottom Mr. Noddy, my Service to you 




Yfeck I'le pledg you 





And is not his Wife a Whore?
For she will go drunk to bed,
And yet she'l have one Pot more?



Our Cat is to be hang'd,
And all to be tumbl'd i'th' mire,
For scratching my Wifes Huquissin,
As she sat by the Fire. 


Ah, when I was young, I had a thousand such frollicks as
these, off with your Liquor man, off with it, I say.


Top and bottom, as you say, Sir Oliver, yfecks 




So ho, my Boys, who says I am old, see there my
conquest over Youth this Whoring weakens 'em so, they
are not able to take of a chirping Cup or two now adays 



Now Sam, thy frollick?



What grinding of Knives Sir? have at it then 
Knives to Grind, Knives to
Grind 

Takes off his Perriwig, and runs
a Chair before him, like a
Wheel-barrow.


How now Sam, what art thou frollicking too 



A Well-willer to mirth Sir, and now you shall see me
grind Knives as dexterously with a Chair, as the Fellows in
the Street with a Grind-stone 




Well done my Lad Here's something to encou∣rage
thee 



What's here, a Newgate Groat, by this Light he's
short lived, he is so confounded liberal ah Sir, this is
nothing; I can tumble with any Bartholomew Fellow, Run
up a Wall like a Cat; but I can act a Breast of Mutton so natu∣rally,
that our Cook-Maid the other night had like to have
spitted me for one, I did it so to the life 


with a Spit 


Hold, hold, hold, Murder, Murder 



Out you old Leacher, invade my Honour?







Wats the matter, Sir Gregory?



I only desir'd a kindness or so, being set agog with
  52
the Widows Marriage, and the Baggage had not only the in∣civility
to deny me; but has most unmercifully chastis'd
me too.



By Gogmagog well enough served, for leaving top and
bottom and old Letchery will be catteryauling, tho they
are sure to come by the worst.




For Heav'ns sake, Gentlemen, come to the Bride-Chamber,
some accident or other has hapned; for the Bride
cryes out, and seems by her Speech to be in some strange con∣fusion.



It's nothing but her being coy, and yfaith the young
Bridegroom seems a man of Mettle, and will put her to't, I'le
warrant.



What should this mean?




Let us go see, I fear my young Blade's too brisk for
her gently, gently good Youngster, be not so boyste∣rous 

Again, what a stubborn Baggage 'tis on my lise he is ravishing
her let us in and see Gentlemen 





The Widow discovered sitting on a Bed in a Night-Gown,
Noble in Bed, holding her by the Gown.


Heav'n protect me! Villain unhand me 



I say, Widow come to Bed, or I shall grow very an∣gry;
for I'm impatient, and will not be delay'd any longer.



Guard me, ye Powers above! Protect my honour, or
I'm lost for ever should my Husband come 



Whose fault will that be; therefore be speedy, let
me antedate my young Squire, and I'le be gone 
Nay, no struggling, but yield quietly I need not a resi∣stance,
for I am all on flame already not yet? agad persist
in stubbornness, and I'le publish it in all places that I have layn
  53
with thee, no matter whether it be truth or no and then
Lady bright, that trifling title Honour, must be surrender'd;
but be kind, and I shall be all silence and obedience 



I'le rather dye, than yield 



Say you so? Then I find I must try strength.

They strive, she gets from him is going out of the
Door. Enter Mrs. Hadland meets her.


Ha! my Husband! 





What coming for me Widow? This was kindly
done let us to Bed, for now I am ready to perform the
Rites of Love.



What shall I do? undone, for ever wretched 




What means this strange Confusion!



Alass, Sir, I'm not well I was just going to call up
my Maid, for some Cordial Tis but too true, for my
Spirits fail me.




Such vain excuses belong to Virgin Modesty, but
Widows should know better then, lay aside this veil, and
meet my love with equal flames, that both may be transported
into Extasies 



For ever I am ruin'd 




Sure y'are the first Widow ever fear'd th' imbraces
of a second Husband Come, come tremble not but to Bed.


discovers Noble standing in a Night-Gown
upon the Bed 
Ha! Noble here Hell and the Devil!


Base perfidious Woman, now I see the cause of your disorders,
was your Lust so hot you could not stay till the first Night
was past?


Good Sir, hear me 



May'st thou be for ever dumb, or I deaf, rather
than lend an Ear to thy bewitching tongue Now Sir, how
durst you attempt the dishonouring of my Bed? Do you
laugh? I shall spoil your mirth 



Who can forbear at such an Idle question rather
Sir, how durst you Marry, and fondly think to preserve such
a tempting Creature entirely for your self, Sir, where I
love, I dare do any thing to enjoy; and a Pox on your offi∣cious
hast and jealousie, had you but stayed two minutes lon∣ger,
your business had been done, and you ne'r the wiser 



Confusion! This to my face?



Yes, faith Sir, 'twas most uncivilly done, and very
unlike a Husband to intrude; but I pardon you for once, for I
hope in time you will understand better 



Base Villain! Did I for this cast a friends Arms
about thee? gave thee the welcom of a man of Honour? and
is this your return of gratitude? Hence, begon, and take that
Volume of corrupted Beauty; for henceforth shesh I be to me
like the Book of Fate, for ever claspt.



Wretched Woman, was this the promis'd blessing of
an indulgent Husband! Speak Sir, and clear my Honour, how
you got here; for Heav'n be my Witness, I was as great a stran∣ger
to his being here, as you.



In vain are idle words, out of my doors, for ever I
discard you from my house 



I find too late your drift, my Wealth (Curse on it)
was the Original of your design, take it to save my Honour;
and what is't I would not give to be rid of so base a fellow.



I thank you for my own, sweet Lady but I
scorn to be out done in courtesie therefore in return, make
you this present provided you'l confirm you Estate on
me 




I will what laugh you at my misery 




Faith Widow, you are caught; for know, I am
already Married to another 



How Married to another! I am all astonishment: Vil∣lain,
how durst you attempt so desperate an act; an act by
which your life is forfeited? and question not, but I'le have
full revenge for this affront y'ave offer'd me.



Rail on, 'tis Musick in my Ears, but faith you are
not like to stir till we are friends 



What's your design? who are you 



Come, come, no more questions, my design was
  55
only to provide a Husband for thee how say you to my
Friend here, methinks he would make an able Husband for a
Widow.




So ho, Mr. Bridegroom open the Door, and
let Sack-posset enter 



How say you, Widow, is it a match or they
all enter, and I'le forswear all I have said, and make you infa∣mous
to the world 



And faith so will I, Widow if you consent not.



Hold, hold Gentlemen What shall I do? my Ho∣nour
this way will be lost Leave me to my own choice,
you know not what then I may do 



All one for that, Widow, so it must be 



Or Egad they come see I am ready to unlock, is it
a Bargain?



Take half my Estate, my House, Goods, any thing,
rather than force me to so rash an Act 



How rash! to Marry an able fellow! this is an affront,
I cannot put up; therefore thus I revenge my self 




Hold, hold Sir, let me consider but one Minute 



I'le give thee a looking and a thinking time, that is
but fair; for I am certain the more you view me and consider,
the more you'l like me 



On my Conscience they are reconcil'd, done
their business, and fairly turn'd to sleep. 



Now, Madam, what is it you resolve?



Not to consent 



Egad they come then 




Hold, what are you? 



No questions, for Conscience sake 



I yield, I yield 







By all that's good, I will be yours 








Gentlemen, pray enter 


Enter Sir O. Santloe, P. Santloe, Mr. Sanders, Lady Santloe,
Clarina, Eugenia, Sir G. Lovemuch, Gazer, Noddy,
Attendants. Mr. Hadland without Disguise 


What's here, two Bridegrooms? I'le warrant her
crying out, was, for want of the Second 



Gentlemen, bear witness, I here discharge the
Widow, from her Marriage with me. 



How, parting before ye have bedded? what's the
meaning of this?



Some private Reasons, Sir Oliver, which more at
leisure you shall know 



Before these Gentlemen, I take him for my Husband.


Sir G. L. Gaz. Noddy.
The Devil give you Joy then 



See here the transformation and Widow in a
young huffing Bully, see your Friend and
Servant Eliz. Hadland 

Mrs. H. and her Husband disco∣ver themselves.


And Thomas Hadland, her Ser∣ving-man
and Husband.



Am I out-witted by my Enemy then!



What a notable frollicking Woman is this! Is she the
Bridegroom, and my worshipful Serving-man, are you there?



A poor wrong'd Gentleman, Sir, willing to serve
for his own 



Pox on her, was it she disgrac'd me at the Treat,
I'le steal off before they take notice of me 




By Capricorn, and so will I 




Look you, Madam, d'ye see, I have spent at least
Forty Pounds in Cloaths, Coaches, Journeys and so forth, in
Courting of you, and since you have chous'd me of your self,
I expect satisfaction which I will have if there be Law 



Take your course, Sir 



So I will, by Jehosaphat 




Now Madam, no more your Enemy, but Sister;
for I must call this Gentleman Brother.



Then my fortune's better than I could have expected,
  57
since I am assured he is a Gentleman in all respects and
thus all animosities shall cease. 



Why, now the Bells they go trim, they go trim 
Wife, with this Ladies leave, we'l make no more hours on't;
for this is as fine a contracting time, we could have wisht for,
and the Parson to morrow shall finish this Nights work, come
to the Book, to the Book young men 



'Slid Sam, what's to be done now.



Your Friend and Servant knows no more than the
post, Sir 



How say you, Madam, is it a match between your
Neice and my Son? do't, and I am resolv'd Mr. Sanders shall be
my Son in Law 



I freely consent, Sir 



Mrs. Eugenia, your hand 



But not my heart, for that is Mr. Sanders's 




But with your leave, Sir Oliver, I'le joyn 'em 



With all my heart, Madam.



Mr. Sanders, take this Lady.




Oh, Madam, blest be your goodness for this inesti∣mable
treasure.



Cuds boddykins, what means she?



Here Mr. Santloe, in a Sister find a wise 




Sure the Widow has dealt with the Devil, or else
hath heard of our mutual love, and thus sooths our passions 




By Gogmagog, the Widow's mad my Son Marry
his own Sister! what Riddle is this?



One of Seventeen years standing, Sir You re∣member
my Sister Morly Nurs'd your Daughter, who at that
time had a Daughter too 



What of all this 



My Sisters fortunes decaying, she gave you her Eu∣genia,
and kept your Clarina with her self afterwards fortune
smiling on her Husband's industry, she on her Death-bed did
reveal this secret, and wisht me when occasion served to make
it known 



Hyeday the Town's our own agen 



Oh, Madam, this is beyond all president, not to
be equal'd and now Sir, I may with confidence own I was
this day Married to my supposed Sister.



By Gogmagog, you were a desperate Boy; how could
you tell but that it was your Sister in earnest?



Nature was not so dull to let me languish for a Sister;
for notwithstanding what my Mother said, yet love retain'd
its native heat, and bad me still love on Oh my blest
Soul 




Daughter come into thy Father's arms, see, excess of
Joy will make affection melt.



What tears have I bestow'd on a lost Daughter, yet
left her behind me.



This is beyond all thought surprizing and now,
Girl, since your wit has been the kind directer of my Fortunes,
with my Widows leave here, freely command whatever's in
my power 



I shall comply with you in everything.



I thank you for your obliging offer, and I shall de∣sire
nothing more, but the confirmation of that Portion which
your rigorous Husband had deceiv'd my Father of, before
he dyed 



Your generosity is so great I can deny you nothing 
consult with your Lawyer, and I shall willingly subscribe to
any thing you shall desire 


Mrs. H. Mr. H.
We are oblig'd to you 



Cudsboddy kins, this was a notable waggish trick, and
by Gogmagog, much like a second Wedding, and I give you
joy with all my heart.



Madam, fear nothing; tho I have appear'd a wild
Debauchee; yet you shall find an Indulgent Husband and
now, Gentlemen, let us in and congratulate each others good
success and fortunes.


Thus in the Storms of Fortune you may find,
Where Justice is deficient, Wit proves kind.

