


Farmer ASHFIELD discovered with his jug and pipe.






WELL, Dame, welcome whoam. What news does thee bring vrom market?



What news, husband? What I always told you; that Farmer Grundy's wheat brought five shillings a quarter more than ours did.



All the better vor he.



Ah! the sun seems to shine on purpose for him.



Come, come, Missus, as thee has not the grace to thank God for prosperous times, dan't thee grumble when they be unkindly a bit.



And I assure you Dame Grundy's butter was quite the crack of the market.



Be quiet, woolye? aleways ding, dinging Dame Grundy into my ears what will Mrs. Grundy zay? What will Mrs. Grundy think?  Casn't thee be quiet, let ur alone, and behave thyzel pratty?



Certainly I can I'll tell thee, Tummas, what she said at church last Sunday.



Canst thee tell what parson zaid? Noa  Then I'll tell thee A' zaid that envy were as foul a weed as grows, and cankers all wholesome plants that be near it that's what a'zaid.



And do you think I envy Mrs. Grundy indeed?



What dant thee letten her aloane then I do verily think when thee goest to t'other world, the vurst question thee't ax 'il be, if Mrs. Grundy's there Zoa be quiet, and behave pratty, do'ye  Has thee brought whoam the Salisbury news?



No, Tummas; but I have brought a rare wadget of news with me. First and foremost I saw such a mort of coaches, servants, and waggons, all belonging to Sir Abel Handy, and all coming to the Castle and a handsome young man, dressed all in lace, pull'd off his hat to me, and said  Mrs. Ashfield, do me the honour of presenting that letter to your husband. So, there he stood without his hat Oh, Tummas, had you seen how Mrs. Grundy looked!



Dom Mrs. Grundy be quiet, and let I read, woolye? (reads) "My dear Farmer" (taking off his hat), Thankye, Zur zame to you we all my heart and soul " My dear Farmer" 



Farmer Why, you are blind, Tummas; it is " My dear Father" 'Tis from our own dear Susan.



Odds! dickens and daizeys! zoo it be, zure enow! "My dear Feyther, you will be surprized" Zoo I be, he, he! What pretty writing, beant it? all as strait as thof it were ploughed  Surprised to hear that in a few hours I shall embrace you Nelly, who formerly was our servant, has fortunately married Sir Abel Handy Bart. 



Handy Bart Pugh! Bart. stands for Baronight, mun.



Likely, likely Drabbit it, only to think of the zwaps and changes of this world!



Our Nelly married to a great Baronet! I wonder, Tummas, what Mrs. Grundy will say?



Now, woolye be quiet, and let I read  And she has proposed bringing me to see you; an offer, I hope, as acceptable to my dear feyther 







Bless her, how prettily she do write feyther, dant she?







Ees, but feyther first, though  As acceptable to my dear feyther and mother, as to their affectionate daughter Susan Ashfield  Now beant that a pratty letter?



And, Tummas, is not she a pretty girl?



Ees; and as good as she be pratty  Drabbit it, I do feel zoo happy, and zoo warm,  for all the world like the zun in harvest.



Oh, Tummas, I shall be so pleased to see her, I shan't know whether I stand on my head or my heels.



Stand on thy head! vor sheame o'thyzel  behave pratty, do.



Nay, I meant no harm Eh, here comes friend Evergreen the gardner, from the Castle. Bless me, what a hurry the old man is in.





Good day, honest Thomas.



Zame to you, measter Evergreen.



Have you heard the news?



Anything about Mrs. Grundy?



Dame, be quiet, woolye now?



No, no The news is, that my master, Sir Philip Blandford, after having been abroad for twenty years, returns this day to the Castle; and that the reason of his coming, is to marry his only daughter to the son of Sir Abel Handy, I think they call him.



As sure as twopence, that is Nelly's husband.



Indeed! Well, Sir Abel and his son will be here immediately; and, Farmer, you must attend them.







And, mistress, come and lend us a hand at the Castle, will you? Ah, twenty long years since I have seen Sir Philip Poor Gentleman! bad, bad health worn almost to the grave, I am told. What a lad do I remember him till that dreadful  (checking himself.) But where is Henry? I must see him must caution him (a gun is discharged at a distance). That's his gun, I suppose  he is not far then Poor Henry!



Poor Henry! I like that indeed! What, though he be nobody knows who, there is not a girl in the parish that is not ready to pull caps for
  9him The Miss Grundys, genteel as they think themselves, would be glad to snap at him If he were our own, we could not love him better.



And he deserves to be loved Why, he's as handsome as a peach tree in blossom; and his mind is as free from weeds as my favourite carnation bed. But, Thomas, run to the Castle, and receive Sir Abel and his son.



I wool, I wool Zo, good day, (bowing.) Let every man make his bow, and behave pratty  that's what I say Missus, do'ye shew un Sue's letter, woolye? Doye letten see how pratty she do write feyther.




Now Tummas is gone, I'll tell you such a story about Mrs. Grundy But come, step in, you must needs be weary; and I am sure a mug of harvest beer, sweetened with a hearty welcome, will refresh you.










Drabbit it, the wold castle 'ull be hardly big enow to hold all thic lumber Who do come here? A do zeem a comical zoart ov a man Oh, Abel Handy, I suppoze.


Sir Abel Handy 
(without).
Gently there! mind how you go, Robin.
A crash.

He enters SERVANT following.

Zounds and fury! you have killed the whole county, you dog! for you have broke the patent
  10medicine chest, that was to keep them all alive!  Richard, gently! take care of the grand Archimedian corkscrews! Bless my soul! so much to think of! Such wonderful inventions in conception, in concoction, and in completion!


Well, Peter, is the carriage much broke?



Smashed all to pieces. I thought as how, Sir, that your infallible axletree would give way.



Confound it, it has compelled me to walk so far in the wet, that I declare my waterproof shoes are completely soaked through.











What's that? Oh, good day. Devil take the fellow!
(aside.)



Thankye, Zur; zame to you wi' all my heart and zoul.



Pray, friend, cou'd you contrive gently to inform me, where I can find one Farmer Ashfield.



Ha, ha, ha! (laughing loudly.) Excuse my tittering a bit but your axing myzel vor I be so domm'd zilly (bowing and laughing). Ah! you stare at I beceas I be bashful and daunted.



You are very bashful to be sure. I declare I'm quite weary.



If you'll walk into the Castle, you may zit down, I dare zay.



May I, indeed! you are a fellow of extraordinary civility.



There's no denying it, Zur.



No, I'll sit here.



What! on the ground? Why, you'll wring your ould withers 



On the ground no, I always carry my fear with me 
(spreads a small camp-chair.)  Here I'll sit and examine the surveyor's account of the Castle.



Dickens and daizeys! what a gentleman you wou'd be to shew at a vair!



Silence, fellow, and attend  An account of the castle and domain of Sir Philip Blandford, intended to be settled as a marriage portion on his daughter, and the son of Sir Abel Handy, by Frank Flourish, surveyor.  Imprimis The premises command an exquisite view of he isle of Wight. Charming! delightful! I don't see it though (rising) I'll try with my •ew glass my own invention  (he looks through the glass) Yes, there I caught it Ah! now I see it plainly Eh! no I don't see it, do you?



Noa, Zur, I doant but little zweepy do tell I he can zee a bit out from the top of the chimbley zoa, an you've a mind to crawl up you may zee un too, he, he!



Thank you but damn your titter! (reads) "Fish ponds well stocked" That's a good thing, Farmer.



Likely, likely but I doant think the vishes do thrive much in theas ponds.







Why, the ponds be always dry i' the zummer; and I be tuold that beant wholesome vor the little vishes.



Not very, I believe Well said surveyor! "A cool summer-house."



Ees, Zur, quite cool by reason the roof be tumbled in.



Better and better  The whole capable pable of the greatest improvement. Come, that seems true however I shall have plenty to do, that's one comfort I'll have such contrivances! I'll have a canal run through my kitchen. I must give this rustic some idea of my consequence (aside). You must know, Farmer, you have the honour of conversing with a man who has obtained patents for tweezers, tooth-picks, and tinder-boxes to a philosopher who has been consulted on the Wapping docks and the Gravesend tunnel; and who has now in hand two inventions which will render him immortal the one is, converting saw-dust into deal boards, and the other is, a plan of cleaning rooms by a steam engine and, Farmer, I mean to give prizes for industry I'll have a ploughing match.







Yes; for I consider a healthy young man between the handles of a plough, as one of the noblest illustrations of the prosperity of Britain.



Faith and troth! there be some tightish hands in theas parts, I promize ye.



And, farmer, it shall precede the hymeneal festivities 







Blockhead! the ploughing match shall take place as soon as Sir Philip Blandford and his daughter arrive.









Sir Abel, I beg to say, my master will be here immediately.



And, Sir, I beg to ask who possesses the happiness of being your master?



Your son, Sir, Mr. Robert Handy.



Indeed! and where is Bob?



I left him, Sir, in the belfrey of the church.







In the belfrey of the church.



In the belfrey of the church! What was he doing there?



Why, Sir, the natives were ringing a peal in honour of our arrival when my master finding they knew nothing of the matter, went up to the steeple to instruct them, and ordered me to proceed to the Castle I have the honour 




Wonderful! My Bob, you must know, is an astonishing fellow! you have heard of the admirable Crichton, may be? Bob's of the same kidney! I contrive, he executes Sir Abel invenit, Bob fecit. He can do everything everything!



All the better vor he. Izay, Zur, as he can turn his hand to everything, pray, in what way med he earn his livelihood?







Ees, Zur How do he gain his bread?



Bread! Oh, he can't earn his bread. Bless you! he's a genius.



Genius! Drabbit it, I have got a horze o' thic name, but dom' un he'll never work never.



Egad! here comes my boy Bob!  Eh! no it is not! no.




Why who the devil are you?


I am the postboy, your Honour; but the Gem'man said I did not know how to drive, so he mounted my horse, and made me get inside Here he is.






Ah, my old Dad, is that you?



Certainly; the only doubt is, if that be you?



Oh, I was teaching this fellow to drive Nothing is so horrible as people pretending to do what they are unequal to Give me my hat  That's the way to use a whip.



Sir, you know you have broke the horses knees all to pieces.



Hush, there's a guinea
(apart).




You see Bob can do every thing. But, Sir, when you knew I had arrived from Germany, why did you not pay your duty to me in London?



Sir, I heard you were but four days married, and I would not interrupt your honeymoon.



Four days! oh, you might have come
(sighing).



I hear you have taken to your arms a simple rustic, unsophisticated by fashionable follies, a full blown blossom of nature.







How does it answer?















I must be introduced where is ihe?



Not within thirty miles; for I don't hear her.











Oh, a pretty behaved tittering friend of mine.



Zarvent, Zur no offence I do hope  Could not help tittering a bit at Nelly when she were zarvent maid wi' I, she had a tightish prattle wi' her, that's vor zartain.



Oh! so then my honored Mamma was the servant of this tittering gentleman I say, father, perhaps she has not lost the tightish prattle he speaks of.



My dear boy, come here Prattle! I say, did you ever live next door to a pewterer's?  that's all you understand me did you ever hear a dozen fire-engines full gallop? were you ever at Billingsgate in the sprat season? or 







Nay, don't laugh, Bob.



Indeed, Sir, you think of it too seriously. The storm, I dare say, soon blows over.



Soon! You know what a trade wind is, don't you, Bob? why, she thinks no more of the latter end of her speech, than she does of the latter end of her life 







But I won't be laughed at I'll knock any man down that laughs!



I beg your pardon but how in the name of Babel did she wheedle you into matrimony?



Why, she dealt with me as the devil deals with a witch humoured me for a time, that I might be her slave for ever! I thought I was marrying a notable woman, who would have eased my head of part of its burthen:   instead of which 



She has added to its burthen.



You know, my dear boy, my aim is to make my head useful 



And her aim, I suppose, is to make it ornamental.



Bob, if you can say anything pleasant, I'll trouble you; if not, do what my wife can't  hold your tongue.



I'll shew you what I can do I'll amuse you with this native
(apart).



Do do quiz him at him, Bob.



I say, Farmer, you are a set of jolly fellows here, an't you?



Ees, Zur, deadly jolly excepting when we be otherwise, and then we beant.



Play at cricket, don't you?



Ees, Zur; we Hampshire lads conceat we can bowl a bit or thereabouts.



And cudgel too, I suppose?







Ees, Zur, we sometimes break oon anothers heads by way of being agreeable, and the like o'that.



Understand all the guards?
(putting himself in an attitude of cudgelling.)



Can't zay I do, Zur.



What, hit in this way, eh?
(makes a hit at ASHFIELD, which he parries, and hits Young HANDY violently.)



Noa, Zur, we do hit thic way.







Why, Bob, he has broke your head.



Yes; he rather hit me he somehow 



He did indeed, Bob.



Damn him The fact is, I am out of practice.



You need not be, Zur; I'll gi'ye a belly full any day wi' all my heart and soul.



No, no, thank you Farmer, what's your name?



My name be Tummas Ashfield anything to say against my name?
(threatening.)



No, no Ashfield! shou'd he be the father of my pretty Susan Pray, have you a daughter?



Ees, I have anything to zay against she?



No, no; I think her a charming creature.



Do ye faith and troth Come, that be deadly kind o'ye however Do you zee, I were frightful she were not agreeable.



Oh, she's extremely agreeable to me, I assure you.



I vow, it be quite pratty in you to take notice of Sue. I do hope, Zur, breaking your head will break noa squares She be a coming down to theas parts wi' lady our maid Nelly, as wur your spouse, Zur.



The devil she is! that's awkward!



I do hope you'll be kind to Sue when she do come, woolye, Zur?



You may depend on it.



I daresay you may. Come, Farmey, attend us.



Ees, Zur; wi' all respect Gentlemen, pray walk thic way, and I'll walk before you.




Now, that's what he calls behaving pretty.



Susan Ashfield coming here!



What, Bob, some intrigue, eh?







Consider, Sir, you come here to marry the beautiful and accomplished Miss Blandford  and consider on the other hand, you have already got a slight memorandum of the Farmer's agreeable way.






(MORRINGTON comes down the stage, wrapt in a great coat He looks about then at his watch, and whistles which is answered.)




Here, Gerald! Well, my trusty fellow, is Sir Philip arrived?



No, Sir; but hourly expected.



Tell me, how does the Castle look?







I hope, Gerald, you were not observed.



I fear otherwise, Sir: on the skirts of the domain I encountered a stripling with his gun;
  19but I darted into that thicket, and so avoided him.

(HENRY appears in the back ground, in a shooting dress, attentively observing them.)


Have you gained any intelligence?



None: the report that reached us was false The infant certainly died with its mother  Hush! conceal yourself we are observed this way.


They retreat. HENRY advances.



Hold! as a friend, one word!
They exeunt, he follows them and returns.
Again they have escaped me  The infant died with its mother This agony of doubt is insupportable.









Have you seen strangers?







Two but now have left this place They spoke of a lost child My busy fancy led me to think I was the object of their search I pressed forward, but they avoided me.



No, no; it could not be you; for no one on earth knows but myself, and 



Who, Sir Philip Blandford?



I am sworn, you know, my dear boy; I am solemnly sworn to silence.



True, my good old friend; and if the knowledge of who I am can only be obtained at
  20the price of thy perjury, let me for ever remain jgnorant let the corroding thought still haunt my pillow, cross me at every turn, and render me insensible to the blessings of health and liberty  yet, in vain do I suppress the thought who am I? why thus abandoned? perhaps the despised offspring of guilt Ah! is it so!
(seizing him violently.)



Henry, do I deserve this?



Pardon me, good old man! I'll act more reasonably I'll deem thy silence mercy.







Yet it is hard to think that the most detested reptile that Nature forms, or man pursues, has, when be gains his den, a parent's pitying breast to shelter in; but I 



Come, come, no more of this.



Well! I visited to-day that young man who was so grievously bruifed by the breaking of his team.



That was kindly done, Henry.



I found him suffering under extreme torture, yet a ray of joy shot from his languid eye for his medicine was administered by a father's hand it was a mother's precious tear that dropt upon his wound Oh, how I envied him!



Still on the same subject I tell thee, if thou art not acknowledged by thy race, why, then become the noble founder of a new one The most valuable carnations were once seedlings  and the pride of my flower-bed is now a Henry, which, when known, will be envied by every florist in Britain Come with me to the Castle for the last time.







Aye, boy; for when Sir Philip arrives, hou must avoid him.



Not see him! where exists the power that shall prevent me?



Henry, if you value your own peace of mind if you value an old man's comfort, avoid the Castle.




I must dissemble with this honest creature Well, I am content.



That's right that's right, Henry Be but thou resigned and virtuous, and he who cloaths the lily of the field, will be a parent to thee.



