

assuming the Name of Morat. Zemet his Servant.


AH! poor Vincentio, alter'd more by Passions
Than by this new Disguise, who now cou'd know thee?
Thou'rt grown a Stranger to thy very self.
'Tis scarce a Year since I fled hence to Afric;

But oh! how Sorrow, Sickness, and Fatigue,
And most my anxious Love, since that, have chang'd me.
I doubt I wear this borrow'd Black and Dress
Rather to try Placentia, thus unknown,
Than to reclaim and save my wicked Brother.



You're but too kind to him, my Lord. I hear,
That when a fatal Duel forc'd you hence,
He stab'd the Friend who strove to get your Pardon,
To hinder your Return.



With what unnat'ral Joy, he, in the Morning,
Heard us confirm the Tidings of my Death!



My Lord, if he's as wicked as he's thought,
'Twou'd have been ill in him to have done better.


Bad Men still act themselves in ev'ry thing that's bad,
And are not to be blam'd for barb'rous Actions,
More than the Beasts of Prey for Cruelty:
Nor is it for their Vices, but their Natures,
We shou'd destroy 'em both.



Yes, he's my Shame;
But still my Brother; therefore yet a while
Let Lisbon think me dead, as I'm reported.
In this Disguise I thought fit to confirm it;
For, shou'd they think I live, the King wou'd never
Grant him his Pardon for Don Carlo's Murther.



It seems he's sure of it, for he has left
The Sanctuary, and lords it in your House.



Upon the confirmation of my Death,
The King has sign'd the Warrant for his Pardon;
So to prevent th' Extinction of our Name,
Which Royal Gratitude still makes him value.
Then let him revel, till the Seals are past,
As a sole Brother in my large Estate;
That done, I will revive, a severe check
On all his future Life.



I wish yours be secure, my Lord!
Tools of Destruction still stand ready prest
To a bad hand, and Murther watches sure.
Then, give me leave to fear.



I'll keep Prevention's Eye upon the Watch;
But I disdain to fear. For Death must come,
And 'tis no matter when: Once in the Grave,
Long Life and short are both become the same.
Death levels all: Age, Beauty, Wealth, and Titles,
Lye undistinguish'd, huddled up together,
And none complain of what, or when, or how.
Oh! I cou'd wish my Dust with thy dead Parents
Lay blended in one Urn on Africk's Shore,
Rather than languish thus in hopeless Love,
And see my Father's Glory
Turn rusly in this Brother.




That rusts not, since it shines so bright in you.




Zemet, no more. I here expect Placentia;

This is her way from Chappel 
See, she comes. Withdraw.


She comes, and weeps for me,
For the false News I brought her. Cruel Fate,
Deal me less Pity, and some Love 






How my Heart beats! Ev'n thro' this hue, I fear,
She'll read my Soul's Disorder Now I burn.
Let Love be drawn no more with golden Darts,
But arm'd with Fires: I feel him in my Veins.
How shall I speak?



Oh! gen'rous Don Vincentio,

As soon shall I forget my self as thee.




Now, by my Love, there's Life in that kind Sorrow;
It bids me hope, and speak.
To her.]
Why, Madam, will you lavish thus your Tears
On my dead Friend? He ne're cou'd gain your Love;
Yet, if departed Souls see things on Earth,

Placentia is Vincentio's present Object,
And not one Tear she sheds but he must prize
At a much greater Value than his Life.



Can I do less than weep for that brave Lord?
Oh! Sir, you were a Stranger to his worth.



No, Madam; none cou'd know Vincentio better
Than did Morat; and you will think so too,
When I relate some Passages he told me.
He said, you were the Cause of all those Sighs
He had betray'd so often, and I pitied;
He said, such Beauty and such Cruelty
Ne're met in one before; and yet methinks
Your Tears and Sorrow contradict his Words 
Aside.]
If I talk long, I shall betray my self.



Since my best Lord (for so I always call'd him)
Made you no Stranger to those humble Thoughts,
The only Blemish of his noble Life,
I will a little clear that passage to you 
His Vertuous Mother, for what Cause I know not,
Took me from humble Birth, to breed me as her Child.



Madam, he told me this, and that his Mother
Had made your Fortune equal to her Daughters;
Commanding him to see you nobly married, or a Nun.
But Love, he said, doubled that Pious Charge,
And he ne'er wish'd for any Wife but you.
Oh! why did you refuse to make him happy?



To clear my self to you, I'll tell you that
Which shou'd not be reveal'd, were he still living.




Now I begin to tremble.



His Mother found out that unhappy Love;
And, lest it shou'd dishonour his great Name,
Taught me t'obey him, as my Lord and Brother;
But charg'd me, as I tender'd Heav'n, my Soul,
Her Memory, or any Thing that's Sacred,
I ne're shou'd marry him.








This was her daily, and her last Request;
And, that I might Religiously perform it,
Resolving with my self a single Life,
I solemnly did swear, Never to wed above my humble Birth.




'Twill be in vain to live after this Story.
Oh! Mother you mix'd the worst of Curses with that Breath
That gave your wretched Son his latest Blessing.



You're strangely mov'd! But see Ricardo!

I wou'd shun him.




You were my Brother's Servants; I dismiss you 





My Lord, our Wages.



Do Men like me pay Wages?







Talk with my Steward! hence! Be gone!









So scornful still! I will no longer bear it.




How I dread his vile Love, since now he's Master here!



How now, Morat? What, you've been talking now
Of my dead Brother, and the Creature weeps.
'Tis true, the humble Fop indulg'd her Pride
With honourable Love, tho' still she scorn'd him.




Hold! Patience yet! Thus most Heirs treat the Dead.
To Ric.]
My Lord, I was your Brother's worthless Friend,
And know how much he did esteem this Lady,
As I believe, not without due defert.



Oh, dull Morat! thou dost not know this Trifle;
Thou art a Moor, and look'st on outward Toys,
Fine Cloaths and Jewels; why, these Things are mine;
I'll strip her of 'em all, if she consents not
To yield to my Embraces.



My Lord, I fancy 'tis not in your Power.



Hark you, Morat; I suffer'd you my House
For the good News this Morning you confirm'd.
But ne're believe I made you of my Council.



No; if you had, I shou'd advise you better
Than thus to forfeit all your House's Honour
By most ignoble Actions.







By all my former Honour, that Name Slave,
Did not you share your noble Brother's Blood,
Shou'd cost the dearest Drop about your Heart.



Sure, he's run mad Out of my House, thou Frenzy.



I will not stir.
Your Brother made me Joynt-Executor
With this fair Lady; I'll soon prove his Will,
And till I've seen it all perform'd, I'll stay.



You mean, till th' Inquisition seizes you.
Do you not, Moor? you two Executors!



Laugh not too fast, my Lord: Your Inquisition
Can't fright me; for tho' my Complection's black,
My Soul is white and Christian, which, I fear,
The Holy Font has not made yours.



Insolent Slave! who waits! what hoa! not one
Of my new Train to rid me of this Moor?
Nay, then I'll do't my self.












Here, take your Sword, and put it up, proud Lord,
But oh! insult no further, if you'd live.







Disarm'd! and by a Moor! But he's not worth
A second Danger. I've some trusty Bravo's,
Who safely shall correct his Insolence.
To his Servants.]
Hence, Slaves! there's now no need of you.





My Lord, yet think from what great Stock you sprung,
And how a Nobleman shou'd keep that Name:
'Tis not to be preserv'd by dead Mens Actions;
You must have living Vertues, or 'tis lost 
Come, I perceive that you attend with shame
My too severe Reproof, and I repent it;


I'll leave you to repent too for the Cause.
Madam, some other Time I'll wait on you.







A brave good Man, well worth Vincentio's Friend∣ship!















No you've forfeited at last all the Respect I ow'd you.



Yes, you shall stay: I'll know what you've been hatching,
That I'm thus brav'd with a forg'd Will. 'Tis vain:
Your Reign is out; The Fool my Brother's dead,
And I'll command what hitherto I begg'd.
You're now my Ward, my Prisoner if I please:
You're not in those cold Climes, where Maids and Wives
Rove where they please, as shameless as unquestion'd,
To wrong the dull contented Herd of Men.
If you'll be paid my Mother's Legacy,
That lavish Gift, a Portion for a Princess,
Your proud pretended Vertue laid aside,
Meet my Embraces willingly to morrow,
Or soon by Force you shall. Till then think of it.



I'll think on Daggers for the Ravisher,
To cool his Fires, or save my self from shame.
Yes, ev'n the fam'd Lucretia I'll out-vye;
Not let the Tarquin force the brutal Joy,
But kill him first, or with my Honour dye.





Thou fir'st me so, that for Revenge
I cou'd I cou'd even marry thee, young Fury.
But at a cheaper Rate I'll ease my Rage:
She and my Sisters harden one another
In rigid Coyness, and in hate of me,
But they shall Wed, and leave this House to morrow;
Then by Wiles, Threats, or Force, I'll deal with t'other.
Who waits?








Call both my Sisters.








I must prepare 'em to receive new Lovers;
Tho' now few Women need such Preparations.


Enter Morella and Melinda.



D' you grieve at my good Fortune? Come, I've got
Young Husbands for you: That, I take to be
The surest way to dry a Virgin's Tears.
To morrow Don Fabiano shall be yours,
Morella; and Don Paulo yours, Melinda.




His lewd Friend Paulo!





Fabiano! poor Placentia's Lover!



What, Dumb? Are they not Noble, Rich, and Young?



Oh! Let us hear of nothing, Sir, but Grief.
Alas! we cannot even think of those
My Brother's Choice design'd us once for Husbands.



You need not: For, their hopes, like him, must dye.
No more Compose your Looks to meet my Friends.





Don Ferdinand, My Lord, is just a lighting




The Governor! He brings his Son Fabiano!

I'll meet him Sisters stay till I return.




Oh! dismal News! now we indeed are wretched.
Compleatly wretched. Alas poor Vincentio!

How soon we feel thy Loss, thou best of Brothers!





Dear Orphan Ladies, let us mingle Sorrows.
Alas, I'm an unhappy Orphan too.
Like you, methinks, I mourn a Brother's Loss,
And what's yet more, a Friend's.



A Friend's indeed! alas, my Dear, I doubt
Your Tears, like ours, will flow from several Springs.
I'm bid to wed to morrow your Fabiano.




Hah! But why am I startled and disorder'd?
Tho', to my Soul's eternal dear Disquiet,
We love each other, ev'n to meer Distraction,
My hopes are lost, for I must keep my Vow.
I wish a mutual Love might link your Fates.



Oh! wish not this, my Dear, my Heart is fix'd:

Don Philip, or a Cloyster.




Fabiano, with his Father! Oh my Heart!
I must not stay; yet I am rooted here.



Sister Morella, let my Lord be us'd
As his great Merit, and my Choice deserve.



Son, scorn Ignoble Love! See there your better Fate.




Let's not seem to observe 'em, while he whispers
His first Love-Complement. All Infancies are bashful,
And that of Love is most.




Amazement! sure he loves her! how they whisper!
What do I feel? 'tis more than Love; 'tis Jealousie, I fear.
Am I then Jealous? What, of him I'd lose?
I will not: Sure he came in hopes to see me.
Away, curst Jealousie! Thou needless Physick,
That turn'st our Health to voluntary Sickness,
I dash thee from me like a Poyson yet I will look.




My Dear, you're Jealous?




Not at all yet I must gaze I'm rack'd I cannot bear it.






I must follow her.





What's that bright Vision which now shot from hence,
Swift as a Star?



A falling one, a glaring fatal Meteor,
The worthless Creature of my Mother's Favour,
Her Fortune ample, but her Birth unknown.



'Tis a fair Destruction!
I blush to own I've heard my Son was dazled
By her deluding Beams. This made me hasten
To fix him quickly in a nobler choice:
Which was my Motive to demand your Sister
When I engag'd to get your Pardon sign'd.




Madam, you know the tye upon my Heart,
The longings of my Soul, Placentia's Love:
My Trust in your kind Pity brought me hither,
Which all my Father's Threats cou'd scarce have done.
Then let's retire, since by your gen'rous Suff'rance
I may see her once more: For, if I stay,
I shall act Love so ill, it will betray us.





She's his, My Lord: The Conqu'ror leads his Prize.




Now, as I love bright Honour, this sight charms me,
And makes my Age, in spight of Time, run back.


'Tis true, this Lord has dimm'd his House's Glory;
But now I hope 'twill clear. High Birth, tho' clouded
With fashionable Vices, will at last
Exert it self and shine.





My Lord, a Lady in a Veil desires to speak with your Lord∣ship.



My Lord, I'll leave you, and in an Hour return.



Your Lordship's Servant 


Conduct the Lady in 
I fear 'tis Laura But why shou'd I fear?
She's kind, she's fair But oh! I'm bound to wed her:
I on that score, was trusted with her Fortune,
And lost it all at Play. She's heard the News,
And comes prepar'd to share my Joys I dread her:
Let me wed nothing but variety.
But I'll dissemble yet; for tho' when pleas'd
She's smiling as the Morn, cool as the Evening,
And calm as is the Night, when urg'd, she rages
Like the Meridian Sun's collected Beams;
Proud of her Charms, tho' lavish of her Love;
Gen'rous, and free, and daring, like a Man;
But Jealous and Revengeful, like a Woman 
'Tis she 
Now help me, Cunning, once to feign
A Joy as great as hers My Laura!






Fly off my Veil! Oh! let me rush at once
Into his Heart, into his very Soul.



My Life, my all!



Oh let me gaze I cannot speak for Joy-Oh happy Change!
When the Profuseness of my Love had left me
Nothing to give to save thy Life, but mine,
To see thee rais'd at once to Honour, Wealth, and Freedom,
From Shame, from Death, and Ruine,
'Tis Rapture, 'tis Delight transcending Words,
Too vast for Thought, and ev'n too strong for Souls,
'Tis perfect Joy, and Pleasure in extream.



Oh! do not talk of Honour, Wealth, and Freedom:
Your self, your self's the greatest, dearest Blessing.



In being so to thee, thy Laura's blest,
Life of my Life, and Genius of my Soul;
Thy very Shadow brings me more delight
Than all the Substance of the World besides;


For I've no Being, when I'm torn from thee;
Or, if I find I've one, 'tis only by my Pains.



Oh! sympathy of Hearts! My only Joy!
'Twas not less Pain to me to be forc'd from thee,
Than now 'tis Pleasure thus to meet thee kind.



Oh! now I hope we're met to part no more.
Let me no longer hear nor think of Absence.
Absence to some gives Relish to their Joy,
A breathing to their Pleasures; but to me
'Twas Death, when to the Monast'ry you fled,
And to be safe lay hid.







Madam! Fye, leave this dull Formality.
Does it suit Love of such a Growth as ours?
I shou'd abhor it, came it not from thee.



Oh! stop this Torrent of unbounded Love.
Joy came before but like a quick'ning Shower
On a parch'd Soil, and greedily I drunk it;
But now I'm overwhelm'd, and drown'd in Joy 
Thus now all Lovers lye to one another.




Dear Man, thou'rt doubly pleas'd
Now thou can'st raise me
As I wou'd thee, were but thy Fortune mine;
For thou'rt no needy younger Brother now,
Thy Laura shall no longer have the Pleasure
Of lavishing her Wealth on Love, and thee.
Indeed she cou'd not.







Alas! I fear'd that Lisbon wou'd have seen me
With those two little Orphans, my poor Children,
A forc'd Dependant on the cold loath'd Alms
Of proud upbraiding Friends: For all I've left
Is threaten'd to be seiz'd. The Thought on't damps my Joy; Wealth
But let it dye with all our former Sorrows.
I'm rich enough, since I've thy Love, that can command thy
Soon as the Priest has ratified our Contract,
Which now now your Brother's dead, and my first Year
Of Widowhood expir'd, need be no Secret.
We'll live like Gods. Say, shall we not? Methinks
Thou art not glad enough.



Excess of Joy, like that of Grief, is dumb;
" And, like vast Streams, too deep for Noise, flows silent,
" While shallow Torrents roar, then cease to be.
I fear she'll find me out.




" But tell me, when shall be the happy Day?



" Soon as some short Formalities of Law
" Have giv'n me full Possession of th' Estate,
" The best Artificers shall strain, to hasten
" The wish'd-for Time, and make our Nuptials sumptuous.



" Then, like a Palace, we'll this House adorn.
" The Walls shall scorn with Arras to be cloath'd,
" Unless the Gold shames there the shading Silk.
" Amazing Wonders that dissemble Life
" In each Apartment, shall beguile the Gazers.
" The Spoils of India, and more distant Climes
" Shall croud, and rear their Fronts on rival Rarities,
" In antique Order, various as their Make;
" And ev'n the fragrant Wood, which in Compartments
" Floors the vast Rooms, seem proud to bear the Load.



" Oh! Elegance in Luxury! Oh! Sex resin'd in Fancy 
Aside.]
" To undo the other.



Oh! now methinks we solemnize our Nuptials,
A num'rous Train with all melodious Sounds
Salute us and the Morn. Then we, far brighter,
Ascend our Coach, or Love's Triumphal Chariot.
Garlands and Arches grace and roof our way,
And flow'ry Sweets, profusely strow'd, perfume it.
Joy in each Face, and Blessings in each Mouth.



Oh! Theme for ever charming To a Widow.




Then, my Ricardo, then 



Oh! then my Laura 



The crowded Board shall tempt our num'rous Guests
With all that can indulge Luxuriant Taste.
" Conduits shall lavish Wine, and richer Liquors,
And all the Muses labour to Inchant us.



And then at Night my Goddess 



Ten thousand Tapers shall revive the Day,
While at a solemn Ball, the Pride of Lisbon

Shall shine and revel 



And tir'd at last with all these smaller Joys,
Leave us to perfect Pleasure. Thus, my Goddess,
Thus will Ricardo ravish all thy Senses;
Unpeople th' Elements to Feast thy Taste,
To charm thy Ears, rob ev'n the Spheres of Musick,
Tire Art and Nature to regale thy Sight,
Inform thy Brain with ev'ry grateful Odor,
Thy Touch with Bliss, and ravish ev'ry Pow'r,
Till in one sence we lose the other four.









What mean these Monks?



My Lord, We've weighty Business,
That claims your private Ear with utmost speed.



Some dead Man's Alms 



Hear us this Moment, if you love your self.



Then follow me pray pardon me, dear Madam.
I'll strive to meet you here again this Moment 
Or at your own House rather.



'Twas well dissembl'd: But I'm glad I'm eas'd.
How loath'd a thing must a fond Woman be!
Ev'n Monks are welcome, when from her they free.




Curs'd be the Holy Duns! Those bold Intruders
Into the Privacies of blinded Mortals,
Self-privileg'd to break-in on the Great!
Those craving Idlers, who preach Charity,
Yet never had one Spark for one another!
Presumptuous Beggars, who with Saint-like Mein,
With proud Humility, and sawcy Meekness
Can seem at best but impudently good.
The Doatards know (for well they know our Sex)
That what a Woman never will forgive
Is an Intruder, whose preventing Words
Force from her Arms her Lover to remove,
In the wild Sallies of unfinish'd Love.








WHy do we leave Fabiano with Placentia?

I dare trust all his Vertues, but his Prudence.
He loves he'll stay too long, and be discover'd.



Fear not, my Brother's busie with two Fathers;
And tho' Placentia loves, she shuns her Lover;
Like him she languishes, unhappy Maid;
But her Discretion, and yet more her Vow,
Force that despairing Lord for ever from her 
And see, she comes; he follows; both in Tears!
In pity let's avoid 'em.







Stay, cruel Maid! Oh turn, and cast one look!
One look, tho' 'twere a Frown, and but to see me dye.



Alas, I dare not, must not meet your Eyes:
They must not see how mine partake their Sorrows.
Fly, fly, my Lord, where equal Greatness calls
Leave poor Placentia to her humble Fate.







I dread those Words that make ev'n ruine please,
The tempting Musick of your Syren Love.



Can it bring ruine to be match'd to Greatness?



When by the Match that Greatness is debas'd.



Why will you still urge this, too humble fair?
Oh! wrong not thus your Merit, and my Love.



Witness, ye sacred Pow'rs that read my Soul!
Witness, my Blushes, and these grateful Tears,
How much I prize you, gen'rous, dear Fabiano!

For ev'ry Sigh you breath, I Sigh another.
Oh! had our Births been equal as our Passions,
We might have lov'd on still.
I see the Heav'n of Joy, your Love, wou'd give me;
But, like a Wretch condemn'd to endless Torments,


The vast abyss between, adds to my Pain:
I wish, I sigh, I grieve, I rage in vain;
I wou'd ascend, but cannot break my Chain.



Love equals all, and you're most sure of mine.



I still shou'd fear to lose what I deserve not,
Still dread my Equal's Envy, and the Scorn of yours:
And thus shou'd live more wretched yet than now,
This fatal now, that sees me tear my Heart,
While thus I tear my self for ever from you.




You tear my Heart, but shall not tear me from you.

Thus you shall drag me, while I suffer Life;
And when I've eas'd my wretched Soul with this,

'Twill hover o're you still, to wait for yours.
For sure in Death we're equal, and may joyn.



Oh! hold! and rise! fright me not with your Danger,
Nor humble me yet more with your Submissions.



Raise then at once a Wretch to Love and You.
To rise thus, I'll descend, and mix with humble Swains,
In lowly Cottages, and rustick Weeds,
And there forget that fatal thing call'd Greatness.



Oh! rise, degrade it not by kneeling thus.



No, let your Answer make me rise or fall.



Alas! my Lord, I know this wou'd but prove
A Dream, that might a while indulge your Fancy,
While Mem'ry wou'd lye lock'd in the first sleep
That Love might lull it too; but too too soon
You'd wake to hatred of your self and me.





Base Man! I thought t'have found you with Morella!

But hear me swear; By my great Ancestors!
That Hour Fabiano weds below his Rank
Makes him a Stranger to my Blood for ever.



You might have spar'd that just, but rigid Doom,
And left my Love the Glory of our parting.
For, Sir, I love your Son; so well I love him,
That rather than I'll curse his gen'rous Passion,
By suffering him to bless me with himself,
I'll leave my Wealth, Friends, nay, the dear Man for ever.
Bear witness, you whose Breasts confess the Pangs
Of truest, te nd'rest, fondest, fiercest Love!
Bear witness, Heav'n! and all that hear me swear!
I leave ev'n him, ev'n all that's kind and dear,
For endless Grief, a Cloyster and Despair.




My Love! my Father! both conspire my Ruine!
Some Angel stop her, and recall your Vows!
No pity yes, you're kind, at once you kill me,
And thus will quickly end the worst of Pains.



Unequal Nuptials show not Love, but Madness.
If you're my Son, leave this ignoble Creature.



Leave her! ignoble! give me Patience, Heav'n!
And Duty check my Rage! a Father said it.
Oh! that you knew her, Sir! you'd see in her,
That Worth, whence true Nobility began:
She claims a Birth immediately from Heav'n.



No more. She never shall be yours.
Haste to Morella, Noble, and more Charming.



Ah Sir! I can love nothing but Placentia.

Rather take back the wretched Life you gave me!

Draw, draw your Sword, rip up my panting Bosom;
You'll find a Heart where that sad Truth is written.
Pity my Youth! pity your Son! 



'Tis vain Reason and Time will bring you to your self.








Away comply, or never see me more.





Yes, cruel Father; yes, unkind Placentia,

I'll never see you more 
You shall not see how wretched you have made me.
I've one Friend yet, I hope; his Ship shall cast me
On some abandon'd Shore: There I will dye;
Pitied, perhaps, by Beasts more kind than Man.
More wise, more happy Brutes, I envy you!
With you 'tis Will and Beauty make the choice,
Ne're crost by the lov'd Female, nor your Syres.
No dream of Greatness bars your am'rous Joys.
Curst be the first who made the vain distinction,
Taught to boast borrow'd Fame from ancient Dust,
That fancied Distance between equal Emmets!
Curst be the poys'nous Notion, and may he
That slights true Merit for a vain Degree,
Love humble Worth, be scorn'd, or curs'd like me.
And that the Vice an ampler Curse may find,
Curst be th' Ambitious, which is all Mankind.





His busie Grief usurp'd his very Sight.
He's gone, and cou'd not see me; wou'd he had!
Alas! I shou'd, I wou'd have call'd, but cou'd not.


Who will protect me now? Oh! noble Moor,
Assist me to preserve my threaten'd Honour.





Can worth, like yours, want a Protector, Madam?
My best Friend us'd me so to eccho back his Sighs,
When he repeated dying Tales of you,
That he has fill'd my Breast with the like Zeal
Of serving you: That Zeal may look like Love;
But, fear not, Madam, rarely Love gets in
But at some Chink where Hope had crept in first,
And I who know how you us'd Don Vincentio

Can never hope this Figure cou'd prevail.
Then give me leave to serve you, and my Actions
Shall ne're oppose the Dictates of your Will.



It were a Sin to doubt your Honour, Sir.
Let your Man wait and I will tell you Things
That are yet Secrets to all Souls but mine.




Zemet observe who comes, and give us notice.





Let guilty Persons blush: I have no Cause:
The Passion I must own admits no Shame;
Tho' I confess, I Love: Oh Noble Moor!
You will have Cause to pity me as much
As e're you did Vincentio.




Do I live? 

Or have I chang'd my Being with my Form?



What shou'd surprize the Moor? Sir, tho' I want
Your help, or such a Friend's, yet let not that
Divert your Thoughts from your own great Concerns.



No, Madam, these are Fits that sometimes shake me:
My Soul and Body are by turns at odds,
And fain wou'd part;
Yet, like false Friends, each strives not to be thought
To give most Cause for such a Separation:
But now I'm well again you say you Love, Madam,
And that I shall have Cause to pity you.
Sure, he that is the Cause, is Deaf and Blind;
Else either Sence, and You, might teach him Love.



Nay, I'm so miserable, worthy Moor,
That 'twas his Passion that gave birth to mine:
But, as Fate orders it, all I've to beg,
Is that you wou'd convey me to some Cloyster,
Where I may ever weep and pray for him.




Sure 'tis for me, 'tis for the poor Vincentio



She thus wou'd weep and pray. Oh wou'd it were!


Madam, I'm bound to wait on your Commands;
But can there be a Cause for such Despair?



Too many, Sir, for had not Fate contriv'd
To snatch him, and all Hopes, for ever from me,
Yet I too well regard his future Glory,
E're to have fullied it with my mean Blood.




'Tis my self 
It can be no Man else she thus despairs for.
First she shall name me, then I'll own my self.


Madam, you may well trust me with his Name,
That can be happy thus in spight of Fate.



I will not hide his Name, from one that knows
So much of his Concerns: 'Tis 










Heav'n guard me from his sight! 



I'll strive to meet you here again with speed.
Curse on his coming! But why am I troubl'd?


By what she said, 'tis plain 'tis me she means.
Revive, Vincentio! Doubts and Fears remove!
She must be mine, since she confesses Love.
The Man that's lov'd, of Conquest never fails:
Love pleads, and bribes, and forces, and prevails.






Ricardo seem'd dejected; I'll observe him.





This Mine brings Instant ruine when 'tis sprung;
It rends the main Foundation of my Greatness.




Ha! thou black Imp, what do'st thou here?
Hence vanish!


They and their Papers will so prove the Thing,
There will be no out-facing it Oh curst Discovery!
This Morning in the Sanctuary I trembl'd.
E're Noon I revel'd as sole Master here:
Yet now, e're Six at Night, these Monks have rung
A fatal Knell to all my new-born Joys.
With this Day's Sun my Fortune rose and falls.
But with the next may it not rise again?
They've giv'n me time to get my Pardon seal'd,
E're they divulge the Truth I'll have them kill'd 
But how? by this they're in their Cells at Prayers.
No, I must think again assist me, Hell, I have it.
At Night for Africa I'll Ship the Sisters,
Where I will marry one, and then return.


But why not get Placentia? There I'll fix:

Placentia shall be mine.











Does your Guilt make you start?



Art thou Immortal, Moor?



Yes, Ravisher, all good Men are Immortal.
Death is entail'd on none but such as you,
Who wear him still about you in your Crimes,
Yet justly fear him as the greatest Evil.




Placentia has inform'd him of my Threats.




Base Man, with Gyant Blood, and Pigmy Honour,
I hear thou talk'st of Ravishing Placentia,

But if thou dar'st but wish it, that bad Soul,
That Soul of thine, hard and impenetrable
To ev'ry thing that's good, shall be let out
To seek its place among relentless Devils.




Sleep my Resentments! now my Fortune's chang'd.
To him.]
I loath the Thought, tho' once I threaten'd it,
To try her Vertue; but, since that, my Doubts
Are chang'd to admiration of her Worth.



Oh that there were but hopes you yet wou'd mend!
I'm bound, and strive to love you, as you're call'd

Vincentio's Brother, and his Father's Son.
In War's brave School, your Father was my Master;
Who bad me dare, and taught me how to Fight.
He rush'd like Light'ning on firm Troops of Foes,
Unnerv'd their Ranks, and shatter'd them to Ruine,
And floor'd the Field with honourable Slaughter:
But after Conquest, mild as tender Virgins,
Protected Vertue in his very Foes 
If you'll be Noble, learn to act like him.



I'll learn of you, brave Moor, if you will teach me,
Your words can shame and charm us into Vertue.
Methinks your Tongue, like glorious Victory,
Instils a Soul of Valour through my Veins,
And all my Nerves seem knit with double force.
I'm now engag'd, but in an Hour,
I shall be proud of being taught by you,
And fixing you my Friend.




Love truly, and I ll give you leave to hope;
For as your Love encreases, Vertue will.
'Twas Love alone first Civiliz'd Mankind,


And dull Instinct to sprightly sense refin'd.
In Savage Nakedness Man liv'd and toyl'd,
Uglier than Brutes, more wretched, and as wild;
Till Emulation to be lik'd and lov'd,
Started Invention, and the Man improv'd:
But 'tis not Love, weak Bodies to controul,
Love only triumphs o're the stronger Soul.





I'll strive to work thee to my purpose, Moor.
Thou'rt brave, but free and credulous to a Fault 
For ruin'd Laura's good, and more for mine,
I wish Placentia may with equal ease
Be wheadled into Marriage! startling change!
She little thinks she's great, and I am nothing;
Oh! I cou'd rave and bellow Execrations.
Hell curse these Monks, emphatically curse 'em 












I sent for you to punish a rude Moor,
But I'll suspend a while my just Revenge:
I've business of more Moment. There's Gold for you.





Thanks, my good Lord, whose Throat must we cut now?



There's milder mischief Brooding.
Hire me a Ship, that by use of Oars
As well as Sails, may put to Sea this Night.
At any rate, by any means I must
Have it to Night, and you shall go with me.
Succeed, and your Reward shall be so great
You shall no longer skulk disguis'd; but live
At large, above the scandal of your Lives.



Conclude this done, my Lord; our Friends will help us.
If by fair means we cannot get a Ship, we'll seize on one.



Success wait on my Friends!









My Lord, 'tis for Placentia.





Go, I'll deliver it ha! from Fabiano! 
How? leaving Portugal for ever! Embark this Moment!
By my hopes 'tis well!





Hah! my Soul's Joy, I did not expect you here.



I read that in your Eyes, my Lord, but I
Expected you, tho' 'twas in vain, I fear.
What Letter were you reading?







I desire to see it.



Wou'd you be made uneasie with my Cares?



Unless I see't, I shall be more uneasie.



Trust me, my Love, you need not, nay you shall not,
Tho' ev'n from you I must a while conceal it.



From me! Can you conceal it then from me?



Suppose it were a Challenge from a Foe,
Or a more dang'rous Secret from a Friend?



Say rather from a Mistress: false Ricardo.




Will you still chide, and without Reason still?



False and Ingrate, I have but too much reason;
Yet if I chide, I chide but like a Dove,
In gentle Murmurs. But urge me no longer.
Give me the Letter, for I rave to see it.



What, will you still controul me like a Slave?
Will you still claim so insolent a Right?



Traytor to Gratitude, to Love, and me,
What is't I claim, but leave to be assur'd
Of thy Heart's Truth, or of its Falshood rather?
For now I've too much Cause to think thee false.



Your Jealousie, that Jaundice of your Mind,
Perverts all Objects to it's sickly Colour.



What, are my Charms then vanish'd with my Fortune? 
'Twas otherwise when this base Rebel languish'd at my Feet,
Trembling as Guilt, humble as begging Want;
Charm'd with a Look, transported with a smile,
And extasied with a reviving Word.
Love gently rack'd all Secrets from his Breast,
Made him live more in me than in himself,
Prevent my very Wish, and open all his Soul.
Did it not Traytor?



It did, it shall, my Life, then pray be calmer.



And have I made thee Lord of all my Wishes,
Given thee my Wealth, and my more valued Love,
To be deny'd a Triste?
Base Man, dare but be false, dare but deny me,
I'll Sacrifice thee to my injur'd Charms,
Tho' thou wert kneeling at the very Altar 
Give me the Letter.



Since nothing else will satisfie you, take it.
'Tis only from Fabiano to Placentia;

For whom he's leaving Portugal by stealth.
You see, he begs this may not yet be known 

Puzzled.] Then I'ad a mind to try your Jealous Temper 
And fear'd it might incline you to misconstrue
My Caution in thus op'ning a Love-Letter
To one that's a Dependant on my House.



Hah! sure you love her, or your guilty Mind,
Which so long labour'd for a faint Excuse,
Had ne're suggested such prepost'rous Doubts.
You seem'd surpriz'd too at my sight; your Face
Had scarce the Pow'r to shape a gay Disguise.



To clear at once my Innocence, permit me
To send for her Who waits?








Acquaint Placentia, that I'm here, and have a Letter for her.

My Life, from yonder Closet if you please,
You may behold unseen
Our mutual hatred in her looks and mine.







She's here! This news will strangely grieve her 
To Pla.]
You're well attended.



So we shou'd be to come to you, my Lord.
Your Pleasure?



Here's a Letter from Fabiano, who's fled by Sea.








Poor parted Lovers! how I pity them!



Is he then fled? fled without seeing me?
Fled my Fabiano? Oh! 'twas too too cruel.
Thy last farewel wou'd pain me worse than Death;
Yet I wou'd suffer more for one dear parting look 
But sure I wrong thee; we cou'd ne're have born it.
How my Soul mourns, Some Dream or Angel tell thee!
My Soul! oh no! 'tis fled with thee, and Grief
Alone informs this Widdow'd falling Body.




Rise, rise, my Dear.



Sink not beneath your Sorrows.



Let me dye here; for I've out-liv'd my self.
Break, throbbing Heart! break now! break! what, not yet!
Well, stubborn Life, I'll punish thee for lasting,
Melt thee away in Tears, and breathe thee out in Sighs;
'Till I'm grown of one Substance with my Grave.
She's rais'd]
I'll drag thee where thou shalt converse with nothing
But Walls, and Heav'n, and Sorrow, and his Image.
Off then, gay Dress! vain Pageantry, away!
Thou once lov'd House, where my Years rowl'd so smoothly,
Adieu for ever! adieu, my dear, my only Friends!
Adieu to all but Grief, and the dear thoughts of him.
He's lost, he's lost, and Pleasure is no more.



Let's follow her, and strive to calm her Mind.





Prevent her going out.




I will, my Lord.




to Laura, who comes forward.]
You see the Love between us.



Did I not dread her, I cou'd pity her,



Grieve not for her, my Love.
A Widow'd Nymph of Course a while Despairs,
But nothing dries so soon as Woman's Tears.
Clouds dull the Sun, then fall apace in Rain,
And sprightlier Smiles adorn his Face again.
Such, now your doubts are clear'd, you shou'd appear,
And with kind Looks your Injur'd Lover chear.



Were those Doubts clear'd 



Unkind! now I must chide. What, Jealous still?



Still Jealous, since still Loving.



But I've a sure way left to ease your Mind.







Let to Morrow be our Nuptial Day.







Yes, we'll wave tedious State. Hymen shall bless us.
Oh! let me seal that Promise on your Lips;
Thus, thus your Doubts shall all be lost in Joys,
And kiss'd away as oft as they return.



Shall I still doubt no, tho' I still had Cause,
I must believe thy dear bewitching Tongue.
Conduct me home, and oh! forgive me, my Ricardo.

I cannot bear a Rival in your Heart.
While Woman must to one confine her Love,
Why shou'd Man claim the Privilege to rove?
We cou'd dispense with Change as well as you:


Women lose more than Men by being true.
Yet tho' you blame our Sex, yours most deceives;
Man leaves us oft, but Woman seldom leaves.
Be just then, urge us not to change of Mind!
Or give us leave to rove, or be your selves confin'd.









WHy am I thus detain'd? Now in this Dress
I'm fitted for a Cloyster: Oh! Fabiano!

Thou leav'st the Land, I'll leave the World for thee.



Oh! grieve us not, by grieving thus your self.
Society in Woes will make them lighter,
But ours grow heavier while we share your Load.



I'd silence my rude Grief, wou'd it be silenc'd;
But tender Love, Love newly wean'd, and hopeless
Will, like all other Infants, pine and rage,
Tho' check'd by Reason that denies the Food.





Where, where's the Chaste Placentia? Sisters, tell her
I'll crown at last the Vertue which I try'd.
What, all in Tears? She too in this mean Dress?
You feed her Grief. Away! I say, be gone.


Leave Tears and Cloysters, Madam, to those Wretches
Whom the World leaves, and who must leave the World;
Who surfeit first, then practice Abstinence,
Turn Nuns, and then repent their rash Repentance.
'Tis true, my Brother's dead, Fabiano's gone;
But I am left more charm'd with your Perfections.



I pray you, leave me.



Look not on me as being still the same;
Behold your Convert, Madam, 'twas impossible
To love you, and love Vice, which you detest.
You, and my change of Fortune, have at last,
Made me reflect, and rous'd me into Vertue.
My Threats were but to try you.



I shall rejoyce, my Lord, to find the Change,
Tho' tis ill jesting in the shape of Vice;
" For 'twill be long before I shall shake off,
" The horror that surprise stamp'd on my Soul.
In the mean time, I beg you'll give me leave
In some Retirement to compose my Mind.



Oh! leave me not, blest Maid, " You're my good Angel,
" That bear me upwards, govern my best Thoughts,
" And bid me think of Heav'n, and view it in you.
" But, if you leave me, e're my Callow Vertue
" Grows fledg'd, and strong to soar with outstretch'd Wings,
" Too soon my dead habitual weight of Vice
" Will make me flag, and fall to worse Perdition.
" Take me now, save a Soul, confirm me yours.
" O save me, lest you answer it to Heav'n.
A Priest, a known Priest, waits to joyn our Hands.
Oh come! I will not leave you till you've blest me.



What means my Lord! Oh Heav'ns! what shall I say!
Yes, I will bless you if you'll let me go.
But as for marrying you, forbid it Love!
Forbid it Honour! and forbid it Heav'n!
" This wou'd be cursing you, and then my self.
" Change, rather change this dreadful Love to Hatred!



I've play'd the Tyrant, but I know you're mild
As a forgiving Saint. Here on my Knees,
(But that's too proud a Posture) thus then falling
With prostrate Body, and more humbled Mind,
Repentant, chang'd Ricardo, begs your Pardon.



Oh rise, my Lord! 'twas granted e're you ask'd it.



Oh! add your Love, or let me sink for ever.



My Lord▪ I must not, cannot hear you thus.



Thus have I sworn to kiss your Steps, and dye,
Unless this Day, this very Day you're kind,
Stoop to be mine, and condescend to rise.



Alas! I too have sworn, this ne're shall be.



I'll beg so earnestly, so humbly, 



My Lord, I thought you knew Placentia better.
Spare this affected Cringing! 'twou'd be vain,


Tho' 'twere not feign'd; for such a whirl of Humour,
So quick a fall from one extream to t'other,
Betrays less Love than a Distemper'd Mind.




'Tis true, I'm craz'd, I'm mad, mad as wild Frenzy,
To starve my noble Pride, to glut a Slave's.
Why, cruel Stars, why do I court this Creature,
This Infect, born to crawl and lick the Dust,
Till foster'd here, ungratefully to sting me?
Oh! I cou'd burst, and tear my Flesh with Rage.
But why do I not rather crush it dead?



Murther! Oh save me! 




None but your self can save, or you or me.
You shall be wretched, if you'll make me so:
" For, good or bad, you now must share my Fate.
This Steel, or else this Juice, shall end us both.

'Tis like the poys'nous Love I suck'd from thee;
No Antidote can stop the Bane's Progression;
It creeps thro' ev'ry Vein, preys on the Blood,
And ling'ring gives a sure, tho' lazy Death.
Relent, or now I drink, and thou shalt pledge me.



Oh Horror! hold! let's parley o're our Fate.
Give me some time, my Lord, I beg it on my Knees,
A Month, a Week, a Day; Oh Mercy! Mercy! 



No, it must be this Instant now.



What shall I say? I dye with Terror.
O hold! oh think of Hell, my Lord 



Hell's mild to what I feel.



I can but dye




I've drank the Liquid Death. Now chuse thy Fate.







Chuse quickly, or 



Oh! give me time to pray.



The Poyson will do that.



I thought 'twas but to try me.
But give it me. 'Tis th' only welcome present
You cou'd have made me, and I thank you for't.
I only wish my dear, my lost Fabiano,

Thou coud'st have seen these Tears, the best return,
My niggard Fate wou'd suffer me to make thee.
Oh! if a helpless, friendless, dying Maid
May form a wish! oh hear me, hear me Heaven!


Let all the dear Man's Sorrows dye with me.
And, if another e're can love so well,
Let some chaste noble Beauty love him thus,
And make him happier than I've made him wretched.






Hence! Slaves! she's here.











Yes, here to dye. Look up, my Life, my Soul,


Placentia, see 'tis I, 'tis thy Fabiano,




'Tis he; some Angel brings him my lov'd Lord 









Oh! I forget my Fears, my Grief, my very self,
At this dear sight.



Senses awake! and thou my wand'ring Soul,
Unwind thy self out of this maze of Joy.
Art thou at large, or in Placentia's Arms?



Must I bear this? my Lord, what do you mean?



To kill you, if you dare once more disturb me.



You're in my House, but 







I'll say no more I fear his Greatness now, tho' not
His Sword




Tho' Love had not betray'd me into Fondness,
Revenge it self had don't, to plague this Monster;
To make his Eyes drink Jealousies worst Poyson,
More gnawing than the Draught he swallow'd now,
Or that which he design'd me.







No Poyson, Madam, nothing but a Philtre,
A Lover's harmless Trick to fright and win you.
To ease your Mind, I'll send for her that made it. 
And for some others too 






I dread his coming back.




I've a Friend waits without with some choice Men.



I thought I never shou'd have seen you more.
Where have you been? Why did you write that Letter?


Was it to break my Heart? 'twas too unkind, yet I pray'd for you.
I wou'd have dy'd, but pitying Heav'n reserv'd me
For this blest Moment, e're we part for ever,
For we must part.



Part! no, first let the Monarch part with Crowns,
The Brave with Honour, and the Saint with Heav'n.



Oh Reason, Honour, Duty! 



Oh Love! Love! Love! great Love against them all.



I've sworn to leave you; nor must I examine
Whether I shall outlive the killing loss.



No, you will not leave me: I will ne're believe it:

Placentia loves me Placentia will not let me dye.



Sure Heav'n will forgive this Sally of a Heart,
Startled and wild with Joy, this Riot of starv'd Love,
Tho' rigid Honour dares not warrant it.
Oh! lead me quickly to the Convent, that 





She whom I sent for, Madam, will soon tell you 



Nothing that can deserve our stay farewel 





Stay, do not lead my beauteous Charge to Ruine.



She's led from Ruine, when she's led from you.



Hold! hear me! for I'll here dispute my Right.



Then somewhere else, and not with Words dispute it.



Tho' now with Words, some fitter time with this.

I claim her as my due. I best deserve her.



Who e're pretends Desert, deserves her least.



She's oblig'd to my Family.



But I'm oblig'd to her.



You've nothing; but I've an Estate to give her.



I chuse to lose one for her. But that's little;
I'd give the Globe to bribe her to a Smile.



Oh! cease so needless a Debate, my Lords;
Nor rate so high a worthless Maid's Esteem.
Know both, I'd sworn, before I knew your Love,
Never to wed above my Rank I'm going to a Cloyster.
Then, if you love me, shew it now, my Lords.
Be pleas'd to leave me there.



No, Madam, I'll sooner leave the World.



Let me conduct you, Madam.







Forbear, or in your very House I'll kill you.



Hah! Will you break the Laws of Hospitality?



Talk'st thou of Hospitality, and dar'st
Detain her there? 'tis Sacrilege and Death.
Draw, Fight, and Dye.








Tho' I dare fight, why shou'd I leave to Chance
What Prudence can secure?

The shortness of my Sword makes you insult, but 



Give it me, and take mine.





Take it, and use it if you can. 



Oh! hold, my Lords!



A broken Sword! hah! Villain!




Stir not, be silent, hear me, and you're safe.
Live happy with my Sister, I with her;
But dye, if you persist t'obstruct my Bliss.



Oh! wed her, wed her, tho' I dye my Lord.



I'll yet disarm thee, Traytor.






I wou'd not kill thee! Who waits! 










What, hoa! my Friends!



Help, Murther! help! 




Courage, my Lord, we're here! Slaves! Villains! dye.


the Combatants cease Fighting.


Hold! or my Guards shall fire among you.



'Tis well you're come at last, my Lord, your Son
Was forcing his way out with this ungrateful Maid,
To wed her, and leave Portugal by Sea.



I scarce believ'd the Messenger you sent me:
Nay, now I scarce believe my very Eyes.
What, my Reproof, my Counsel, my Commands,
My Pray'rs, my Threats, my Oaths, all unregarded?
It cannot be; Fabiano is my Son:
My Son wou'd not at once lose Wealth, lose Honour,
Lose my Love, lose my Blessing,
A Father's Love, and Blessing, for a Trifle;
For all this he must lose, or leave this Maid,
To wed my nobler choice, the fair Morella.




Thus, as to Heav'n, to you, Sir, kneels your Son;
And that Heav'n knows, I scarce can reverence it,
More than I do my Father. Oh! I'd lose
The Life you gave me, rather than your Blessing.
But Love, like mine, is deaf Necessity;
'Tis Fate it self, and who can alter Fate?
If Love's a Crime in me, 'tis its own Punishment:
For hope, that soften'd all its Pains, is lost.
Then curse me not yet more: alas! your Blessing
Is all your wretched Son has left to lose.
For soon he'll take his everlasting leave
Of Friends, of you, of her, and Life, I hope.



Rise, hear Age speak! Fabiana! Wisdom's old.



My Lord, my Father,
Oh! let me kneeling thus attend your Will.



Rise, rise, my Son, nor let thy poor old Father
Lose the sole Comfort of his widow'd Years.
Thou art my only Child. Alas! I liv'd
But by the hopes of seeing thee renew
The •••ries of our Race, by equal Marriage.
Have I for this declin'd a second Choice,
And liv'd in solitary Widowhood?
Oh! do not hurry thus thy self and me
To the dark Grave, and worse Oblivion's Death.
I beg it, 'tis thy Father begs it. See these Tears,
They're the last drops, the dying hand of Age
Has left to dew this drooping with'ring Plant Oh speak!



Can Nature plead against it self?
I cannot speak: my throbbing Heart's too full.



Then kill me, cruel Son; that Parricide
Will be less barb'rous than the other speak!



Then with obedient boldness I must own, I cannot
wed Morella.




Just Heav'n! what have I done? what are my Crimes?
That I must thus be punish'd with this Son? 
But sure he's not my Son: Such Disobedience,
Such Meanness, must and shall be Strangers to my Blood.
Now, as I hate base Thoughts, he's rous'd my Rage.
Degenerate Boy, thou scandal to my Race,
Retract thy words, consent, lest, in my Fury,
I wrong the dead, and ev'n suspect thy Mother.



Oh! use me as you please; but spare my Mother!
For your own sake, for hers, tread gently on her Grave.



No, she was Vertue's self, but sure some Peasant
Impos'd thee on me, and displac'd the Heir.
Be banish'd then my House, my Heart, my Thoughts!
Be stript of all 



But my Placentia's Love:
You cannot take that from me.



Tortures and Daggers! Wretch, lose all but that.




My Lord, let him rave on.
He's lost all use of Reason in this Fit
Of Love's high Fever; but it cannot last.
Leave him with me, I'll watch its Crisis and Declension.
First, I'll remove the Cause, this fatal Charmer,
Then soon my Sister shall restore his Reason.



'Tis well advis'd Guards stay obey my Lord.
Curst be this Frantick Love, that rashly hurries
Unequal Pairs into the Nuptial Noose!
How bitter proves the fair forbidden Fruit!
How lost, how naked Man then finds himself!
How short, how false the Bliss, how long the Woe;
A few good Nights, a thousand dismal Days.
Then the fierce Lover grows a tame dull Husband,
And the kind Mistress a vexatious Wife.
How like an Ass, how like himself he looks,
Wishing to part, more than he did to joyn;
While Wife and Husband curse th' unequal state,
Wedded for Love, then Cuckolded for Hate.





Retire you tempting Mischief to your Chamber.



Oh! rather to a Cell.



Leave that to me.



Oh! once more let me see him.



You shall not see him more.



to prevent her going out.


See me no more? then I'm poor indeed;
Yes, I will see her, tho' her sight were Death.







Forbear! Despair is frantick; play not with it;
I've lost all hopes but of one parting look;
Rob me not of that last, that cruel pleasure.



Oh rigid Fate, why must I thus undo him▪
" But I my self shall soon be more than punish'd,
" Lonesome, self-banish'd, buried to the World,
" My Life shall be a kind of ling'ring Death.
" Course Weeds my Cloathing, a poor Cell my Lodging,
" Bare Walls my only prospect, the cold Ground,
" Or harder Floor, my Bed; and Grief my End.



" Oh! why did I come back! why wou'd I see her!



" Then, if at dead at Night you chance to wake,
" Oh! think of me, and say, now poor Placentia

" Is risen in the Dark, and in the Cold,
" To pray for me, to pray for her Fabiano:

" For then will I be praying on my Knees,
" That Heav'n may bless you and your future Bride.



Too gen'rous Fair, Oh! spare your Grief's Profusion;
Show me less Love, be cruel out of Pity;
Tell me you hate me, I shall be less wretched.



I cannot; Oh! then leave me, quickly leave me;
Fly my Contagious Grief. Oh! 'twill infect you.
I merit not your Care, much less your Love.
And yet forgive, and let me Love you still.
As for your Grief, impose it on me, Heav'n!
For I am grown familiar with Affliction.
But live, and think your Death my greatest dread.



Then I must strive to live: But oh! Placentia,

'Twill cost my Love much dearer than to dye.
If one Hour's Absence made me wild with Sorrow,
How shall I live, for ever parted from you,
By Hills and Seas, and the more fatal Cloyster?
How bear the Sun shou'd rise, the Sun shou'd set,
And I ne're blest with my Placentia's sight?
Yet fear not, my Complaints shou'd reach your Cell.
No, not so much as the Tidings of my Death
Shall give you cause to think there liv'd on Earth
So lost a Wretch as I.



Take her away, she heightens his Distraction.



Oh! stay one moment more, then tear me from my self,
Here let me seal my everlasting Leave.

Farewel, thou Innocent, thou blest Destruction!
Kind Cruelty, sweet Torment of my Soul;
All that's Delight and Pain transcending Thought;
My Soul, my Blessing, and my earthly Heav'n.











Oh! let me take another parting Look.









I cannot bear 



Hold, stir not, on your Lives.




Hold, impious, sacrilegious Villains, hold!
Pull, hale, drag, cut, part, tear me Limb from Limb,
Yet still I'll hold she's gone.




Farewel, thou dear unhappy Man, farewel.





Wolves, Tigers, Fiends, you shall not 'scape unpunish'd.




He'll but obstruct me, if he stays I'll free him.


My Lord, 'twas needful Cruelty to force you from her.
But I'll yet prove your Friend, and free you instantly.
Go travel when you please; I'll not impose
My Sister on you, tho' your Father wou'd.
This private way you may get out unseen.





Tho' I can't thank you, I accept the offer.
To the Captain aside.]
Captain, once more I'll try to see Placentia;

Then I'll aboard your Brigantine again.



My Lord, part of my Men ashore keep close together,
The rest aboard wait for us: All the Slaves
Sit ready at their Oars.




Tho' they're not half so wretched as my self.



Guards I dismiss you.

the Guards another way.
He's gone, and she's secur'd so far 'tis well 
Page, tell Placentia, that Fabiano's here,
And has prevail'd with me to let him see her.

This may decoy her hither my Time's short,
Yet I will fetch thee back, and tug with thee,


Thou shifting Fortune E're thou part'st from me,
Resolve to leave some of the spoyls I hold;
I will not be left naked 








Nay, start not back, he's gone for ever now.



And do you think to keep me here by force?



Yes, force must act, when kinder usage fails:
I'll give you still an hour: But then resolve
To wed me, or appease my am'rous Rage.



Wer't thou as great, as Lawless Pow'r cou'd make thee,
And I as poor as Nature first design'd me,
Know, rather than I'd serve thy horrid pleasures,
I'd Fly to Desarts, to the Land of Sorrow,
Bear with the want of freedom, light and food.
Nay, I wou'd plunge in Seas, and ev'n in Hell,
But that, I know, thou wou'dst torment me there.
Such is my hate, I'll desperately dare,
And, to shun Thee, all other Curses bear.



Then hear thy Doom. Out of meer Spight I love thee,
Love thee with most inveterate bent of mind.
And thus will hate thee worse; yes worse I'll hate thee,
When force has gain'd what thou deny'st my Love.
That which will quench my Flame, shall kindle thine;
Then for the Pleasing Cure to me thou'lt run,
Still close thou'lt follow, but as fast I'll shun:
From wealth, from me, I'll calmly see thee torn,
And leave thee nothing but thy naked scorn.



Hear thou, the surer fate attends thy Crimes;
In sudden wealth, as sudden a decay:
Then universal hate, in pressing want;
And, in that want, sickness without Relief.
Thus lingring, thou shalt envy starving beggars;
Shame and Reproach clogging thy heavy hours.
Then, guilty conscience hurrying on despair,
Hang between Heav'n and Earth, as fit for neither;
And none Endeav'ring thy curst life to save,
Dye without Tears or Pray'rs, and want a Grave.




'Tis well thou'rt gone, proud Thing. I'm urg'd so far,
I scarce cou'd hold from making good my Threats.
'Tis yet too soon, but if my plot succeeds
Thou shalt be mine, or bear thy share of Ruin.
If I'm left hopeless, hope not to be spar'd.
No, when I fall unpittied, perish Nature;
Dye all that's humane in me but Revenge;


Like a fall'n spright to desperation driv'n,
I'd be more damn'd to keep my Foes from heav'n;
With pow'rful spight I'll all their hopes destroy,
And drag 'em downwards with a dismal Joy.






THe Day's grown old, and almost lost in night:
Work in each Street gives way to soft amusements:
All Nature's business seems now to be Love.
The wind with stronger sighs salutes the Flowers,
Descending Clouds embrace and kiss the Earth.
And, while the Sun on the Sea's bosome Rests,
Th' officious Moon, who winks, with half a face,
Lends a securer light to meeting Lovers.
For now they meet; Th' impatient happy youth
Sees his kind Nymph come tripping or'e the Plain:
They fly, they rush into each others arms,
The Lover's Bless'd and rifles all her Charms.
Thus eager, but less certain, here I come
To seek my better Fate, my lov'd Placentia.

Make haste, O night, extend thy sable Wings!
Let Nature wear a blacker Face than mine,
When the Fair owns her Love, and I my self,
When with kind Rudeness, I force willing Kisses,
Hide, hide Placentia's blushes from my Eyes,
Or with Excess of joy, the bless'd Vincentio dyes.




But are you sure the Ship's at your disposal.



The Brigantine is ours, my Lord; we could not
Get one sor any hire; but seiz'd on this with ease.
Most of the men were gone ashore. Besides
The Captain is a new revolted Pyrate,
Who was as glad of us as we of him.
Enter Servants with
Lights, which they set upon the Table.
Hush! here's the Moor! In half an hour attend me.




Whisp'ring and Bravoes! sure there's mischief hatching.
For once I'll force my self to seem a Villain,
To sift out, and prevent it 



You're punctual, worthy Moor, but why so thoughtful?



I was but thinking
Why men, who know each other to be Cheats,
Shou'd to their prejudice strive to seem honest.



What, do you think I now dissemble with you?



Why not, my Lord? since I my self dissembled.



How! you? plain-dealing blunt Morat dissemble?



We all for Love, Revenge, or Int'rest feign,
And all, for diff'rent ends, seem diff'rent men,
Then shift like Play'rs, and are ourselves again.
Ev'n the most wise, with studied labour, hide,
When flatter'd, Joy; and when exalted, Pride.
Old Maids, if such there be, dissemble youth;
Young Widows, sorrow; Wives and Husbands, truth.
The heir feigns Joy, if his sick friends revive,
Yet almost dyes for grief that they're alive;
The Trader rails at Thieves who Forests range,
Cants, prays, yet cheats, and shakes a whole Exchange.
The Common Jilt, with face and passion feign'd,
Hugs some rich fool, nor leaves him, till he's drain'd.
Dissembling's all Mankind's Prerogative
We know 'tis us'd by all, yet still believe,
And thus are all deceiv'd, and all alike deceive.



I've been deceiv'd indeed. What, wou'd you tempt
Your Convert to relapse?



Come, come, unmask my Lord, I'm bare-fac'd now,
And know you; know me too; I'm left Executor,
And the Will gives your Sisters and Placentia

Most of th' Estate. I've nothing but my Sword;
Command it, and my Pow'r, so I may share
Some of the gain you by my means may reap.



Shall I believe thee true?



Like all mankind, true to my Interest.



Then thou'lt be true to me 
Come to my arms, thou surest, best of friends.
With feeble Oaths we'll not each other bind;
No Tye but Int'rest strongly links mankind.








I love no Woman, but I lust for all;
And her above the rest; tho hopeless yet:
But now I've a design, you soon shall know 
A flourish for a
Serenade.
Hark, Music! sure this Serenade's for her;


'Tis giv'n so near her Window; let's put out
The lights; perhaps we may know more. 

They put out the Lights.



Placentia! hah! I find I am not proof
Against th'intruding Monster Jealousy.
Out of my heart, thou gnawing envious passion!
Tho look'st so like a Vice, I will not lodge Thee.

A Serenading Symphony is heard, as from without.
Enter Placentia while 'tis perform'd.


What wretch has chos'n this night for Serenades?
Alas! my only Charmer's gone for ever,
And with him all the Joys these Notes wou'd summon.
They might as well before Church-windows revel,
And with unheeded Numbers tempt the Dead.
Yet have my hopeless wishes drawn me hither,
Where I unseen may best inform my self,
Whether, as I suspect, these are not this Musicians.
Perhaps he's not gone yet, but stays to free me.
Time was I shou•d have trembl'd thus alone,
But Grief and Fear itself have made me bold.
Enter Fabiano, Captain, a Servant, with a dark Lanthorn.
Ha! who are these?



She's here; fear not, my Soul. 'Tis your adorer.














Take this, thou friendly guide, with my best Thanks,
And watch to let us out.

Gives the Servant Money. Ex. Servant.


Oh! I am all surprize. Why wou'd you venture thus?
Why, with this Musick? Is't to punish me?



Think not those accents meant to move the Soul.
Oh! lovely Maid, more Musick's in your name;
They're but the mournful Prelude to my Dirge;
And serve t'amuse observing Spyes one way,
That we more safely may escape another:
For I am come once more to see and free you,
Then go, where my despair shall neer torment you.



Oh I must share your grief where e're you go;
You never can be absent from my heart.



I hope, I dream.
(aside▪)
Is this the love I blest my self withal!



Sighs stop my words.



And Tears obstruct my sight.



Oh! if you lov'd!



I love you but too well,
For my Soul's quiet, dear unhappy man.



Oh cursed sound! he's lov'd! he's but too happy.




Go prosecute your generous Design,
See foreign Lands, and visit distant Courts!



Since you will have me go, I will Placentia:

But not to Courts. No, I will find some Desart:
There will I linger out a wretched Being,
Till grief that nurse of Sighs, can yield no more,
And with your name upon my Lips, I dye.



Alas, my Wishes contradict themselves;
I wish you'd lov'd me still, I wish you wou'd forget me.
Yet love me, love me still, where e're you go.



Racks, Wheels, and Vultures! 




Stay, but one moment, I will fetch some Jewels;
" To pay my Portion to the Monastry,
" Then I'll fly thither under your conduct,
For there's no safety here, now brave Vincentio's Dead.




Oh! that he were! (aside.) I can forbear no longer.
Who are you there, that with false Lights and Vows
Seek to dishonor noble families,

Zemet comes up to Morat.)
By ravishing young Virgins from their Houses?



Whoe're thou art, I justly fling the lye back in thy face.



Our quarrel's just o' both sides, if 't be so:
Then let not odds on mine e're make it less.
How many are you arm'd?



We're only two, yet dare defie you all;
Tho, if the Moon's faint light deceives me not, you're three.



That shall not be; Ricardo, now stand by. Draw, Zemet▪





No, I'll get lights I hope they'll rid me of a Rival.





Whoe're thou art, tho thy Reproach was base,
Yet this proceeding's noble. Wou'd we had
The Sun to light us to each other's face. I wou'd see thine
Let's to some fitter place to sight this quarrel,
For which I know no motive but thy Rudeness.



Yes, there are many; but my face wou'd show
By light but little otherwise than now.
I am the Moor, deceas'd Vincentio's friend.



I ever lov'd him;
And, for his sake, I wou'd not kill thee, Moor.



But he wou'd thee, if he were in my place,
For stealing thus from him Placentia's love.
But I'll revenge at once his wrongs and mine.



Were he alive. I'd not invade his right;
And as for thee, how canst thou say I wrong'd thee?



Oh! ye immortal Pow'rs! What, have I got
A talking syllogistick Enemy?
And for a prize great as Placentia's heart?
Know, whosoe're thou art, I love Placentia.

Will that yet rouse thy Courage?



Hah! Thou love her!
Vile Black! I'll free her from that shame, or dye.


Morat fights Fabiano, the Capt. fights Zemet, and disarms
him out of sight, then (to joyn with Fabiano,) he Re-enters,
supporting hims•elf on his Sword.



Disarm'd! Curst Chance! Help! Help!



Unlucky Wound! he has hurt me in the Thigh,
And now I'm useless.





Oh! hold! or know you kill a harmless Maid.








Leave us a while, dear Madam.



No, here I'll take my death, or hinder yours.



Oh! fly! while this Moor lives, I cannot free you.



Ah! why so cruel, Moor!



I love and will not lose you.



The name of love is posion'd on thy Tongue.
Oh! sully not my Virtue with thy passion.
Can you now think me worth your care, my Lord?



Heav'n can receive no spots from Blasphemy;
But, spight of that, the pious pay their duty,
And mine's to dye or free you.

(offers to fight again.)


Oh! stay! hold! if you love your selves or me,
Who first desists, I'll think the truest lover.



Must I not punish him?

She suddenly interposes and
holds Fabiano.



Yes in my arms Thus punish him more safely.
Now, Moor, if thou woud'st kill him, kill me too.








How does my worthy friend?







Where are you wounded, Sir?



Oh! at the heart by killing jealousy.



Madam, till morning I must leave you here,
And then I'll wait on you.



Oh that's too long, where honour is unsafe.



Let him protect you there, if I am grown
So fear'd a Ravisher.



Madam, we will: my wounded friend wants help,
The Moor is brave, and thus we must be safe.




Zemet, While I retire, stay and observe 'em.





O do not fear me, Madam: what I threatn'd
Is far from my intent, 'twas but to fright you
Into complying. I adore your virtue.

Oh pardon me, be blest, and make me so.












They start and look amazedly at each other.






Both, if you stay.
(Aside to Laura.)
You found me begging here a reconcilement
Of this fair Enemy, who's wedded to a Cloyster;
But I'll withdraw with you, to know what fit
Usurps your patience, Madam.



No, learn that here.



Oh hold! retire, or we're undone.





No, perjur'd man. All here shall known my wrongs.
Despair disclaims Reserves: 'tis as I fear'd;
Impatient Creditors drive me from home,
Just now my goods were seiz'd, and here thy heart.
All, all, I find, is lost▪ of what the fondness
Of my late Husband left me when he dy'd,
I've nothing now, but these his helpless Infants;
These Innocents, depriv'd like their poor Mother,
Ev'n of a place to lay their little heads.



Oh sad! have we then ne'r another home?
I'm hungry, cold, and tir'd, indeed I am.



Oh wretched Children, but more wretched Mother!



This Scene adds grief to grief, yet tempts to stay:



I share your sorrows, Madam: Let's withdraw,
You may expect to find a friend in me.



A friend! how cold, how unlike one he talks!
And looks, as if I were his Wife already.
I'm lost, he's false! I saw it. This confirms it.
I can no longer doubt the dreadful truth.
But if Revenge 





I dare no longer stay.



Stay, thou invader of my right.








Stay, I'm all patience yet!
Let me peruse you, Madam 
Thou vulgar thing, thou Face mean as thy Birth,


How durst thou tempt the Creature of my Love?
I'm now convinc'd that nothing but a Philtre
Cou'd thus divert his choice from me to thee.
But wer't thou Beauty's Queen, thy charms are vain,
I'd blast them all, my conquest to maintain.
Dare but to hope my slave to disengage,
Not heav'n it self shall shield thee from my Rage.



If Don Ricardo's yours, pray keep him, Madam.
I cou'd ev'n hate my self for pleasing him;
Then think not I'll e're court his odious Love,
Sooner shall freedom doat on Tyranny,
Sooner will I be perjur'd, or he true.





By her Disdain, it shou'd be so. Just Powers!
Shou'd he shun me, to doat on one who shuns him,
'Twou'd be Revenge, yet heighten my Disgrace.
Am I then fallen so low to seek him whom she scorns?



I still am true But hear me.





No, thou can'st only be thy self, and false.
I've heard too much, I'm cur'd at once and loath thee.
I thought not, I so tamely cou'd have born
Thy change; but 'tis so poor, I scorn thee now.
Raise my fortunes
High as they stood, our contract shall be void.



Can you mean this?



Witness it, all that hear me!



Then be it so.











First perish she, thou, I and all the World.
Persidious Fool! cou'd'st thou presume to think
I'd give thee leave to live and be another's?



I was a fool, for I believ'd a Woman!



And I a greater, I believ'd a Man 



What shall I do? out of meer pity I must use her ill.
(aside
Curst be your Love, and your assuming Pride,
Still thus Vexatious, but most curst your Cunning!
Thus do too many of your Sex deceive us;
For they can feign and lye and weep at will. 
Reserv'dness is a Bawd to their stol'n pleasures.
For, as some wear fine Cloaths with empty purses,
They 've but the dress of virtue, not the substance.
Their modesty's as thin, as are their Veils,
Worn alike ev'ry where, but in their Chambers.
Their Reason is a Slave to their wild Passions,


Their honesty to the Desires of Men,
And their best vertue's damn'd Hypocrisy▪



And what's your Sexe's who thus rail at ours,
To hide your worse dissembling, which all ours
Is but to Counterplot; while all the faults,
For which you blame us, are still caus'd by you?
You, who all promise, and who all betray;
Who use your stronger sense to ruin our weakness:
And take a greater freedom to be bad,
Nay, boast ev'n of more vice than you can act;
Force us to feign, and live recluse like Slaves,
Yet damn us for a slip, of which you glory.
You, proud, deluding, treach'rous Tyrant Men:
Your very Heroes are but bold Destroyers,
Your good Companions are but Libertines,
(Walks about
discontentedly.
And your fond Lovers but designing Traytors.




I find 'tis vain to think t'outrail a Woman.
I must try softer means.
Trust me, were both undone, if you rave on;
To Laura fol∣lowing
her.
But if you're calm, I'll double your Estate.



Cruel, how durst thou thus affront my Love?
What did I ever wish for, but thy heart?
Did I desire thy wealth? Did I not give thee
All I possest and beggar these young wretches,
Whose sight now fills my drooping Soul with Grief,
(weeps)
And sinks my spirits to the lowest ebb;
For, with our Wealth, our Spirits sink, I find.



Oh check that Love You know not what you ask.
Whate're I seem, I scorn t' undo you more.
I am Oh! I shall say too much! I swear,
(aside
The dismal truth was on my lips Farewel 




Stay! Oh! I dye with shame, but cannot leave him.
Heav'ns, is this he who swore eternal truth!




Do, rail on, curse me, hate me, scorn me, spurn me,
That I may dare to wrong you, or we're ruin'd!
Heav'n knows 'tis fate, more than my falsehood, parts us 



Oh racks! oh pangs! oh that we could but deal
With love, when slighted, as we can with friendship,
Part company, and love and friendship too.
But 'twill not be I burst with grief and rage.
Must I bear this? Is there no way to ease?
My Rival I'll find her out, and give her instant death.

















Prevented! and by thee? Oh my heart breaks!
My Rage works inwards help; I faint I dye!

Swoons in her Womens arms, and is laid in an Arm-Chair.


Oh help my Lady!



Run to my Closet! I've rich Cordials there 
By heavens I pity her!
Exit Ricardo's Servant.
Yes, from my Soul I do. Her Charms, her Love
Deserve a better fate! Oh! I cou'd kill my self,
My most unhappy fickle self! but hold!
Wou'd that relieve her? No: Then live, Ricardo,

Live to supply her wants out of Placentia's fortune▪
But how? while Laura lives, she'll still obstruct thee.
" Oh! whither am I driv'n? Thoughts not so far!
" But if she lives we're ruin'd both! a dreadful truth!
" I feel a strange Remorse.
Stay, Life's to her a greater pain than Death.
Then let her dye 
" Down checking scruples. Let me tell my Soul
" 'Tis a kind act, and necessary mischief.
Re-enter Servant with a Case of Bottles, Ri. opens it, takes out
one, and causes some drops to be pour'd into Laura's mouth.
Few drops of this will soon restore her sences 
And in few hours give her eternal rest.




How your hand shakes, my Lord.



Alas! I'm much concern'd for her, poor Lady 
See, she revives.



More cruelly to dye.
For, to the wretched, Life's a punishment,
And most to me, lost, hopeless, yet still loving.
Oh women, women, boast your pow'r no more.
How soon our pride is humbled! first we triumph,
But oh 'tis only with more weight to feel
Th' insulting scorn of our Rebellious Slaves.
Weep, Laura weep! Think how with this false Charmer
(Checking thy native haughtiness of Soul)
Thou cou'dst have liv'd an humble Cottage mate,
A pattern to all Wives. Yet now he slights thee;
Tho ruin'd for his sake, and unpossest.
Oh let me rave, be mad, tear, tear my hair,
My face, my eyes, curse their weak Charms,
Groan on the ground, and grovel till at last
It hides me in a Grave.

Throws-herself on the ground▪





There's an apartment ready to receive you.



Away! Think not I'll stay in this ungrateful House▪
No, let me lye expos'd to the bleak Air,
On the cold pavement, in some lonesome street;
A Lodging fit for my forlorn condition;
While my poor Children, freezing, tir'd, half famisht,
With tears and moans pierce the most cruel hearts,
And with cold scraps feed miserable life.
Oh dismal, dismal thought! But 'twill not long torment me:
I shall run mad, I hope. Yet then, I fear,
As on my Straw I rave, a doleful spectacle,
Still with a sigh to all my Sex I'll cry,
Thus, thus, poor Laura fares for being true.



Oh! how this shakes my Soul! she shall not dye.
(aside.
Run, fetch Physicians But hold, I'm mad too.
How will that help her? Gently raise her up,
Then lead her hence to rest.

They raise her up▪


It must be to the Grave then. Wou'd it were,
So my curst Rival were but there with me!
Oh how the thoughts of her inflame my Soul!
May a wrong'd woman's Curses soon o'retake her,
Wrinkles, Deformity, Desires, and Scorn,
Detracting blast her fame, worst plagues her Charms,
Eternal Disappointments, Grief, Disquiet,
Confusion Shame, and Misery like mine
Pursue her, and the cause of my Despair.

(Ex. Lau. cum suis.



How my Soul's rackt; shame combating with pity!
Methinks I see her still, and the Bane's working 
I feel her Pangs, I hear her Groans Oh horror!









It shall not be; I'll save her, tho I perish 



My Lord! He's lost in thought.




But will that ease her?












I've brought the Captain of the Ship: our friends
Wait with his men without.



I thank thee, Hell! thou hast determin'd me.
aside
Plate, Money, Jewels, and the chief, the Women,
This very night shall all be shipt for Afric.


Come, let's make all things ready for our flight;
Then in Placentia's Lodgings seize Fabiano;

He'll be an Hostage for our future Pardon,


Oh Laura! But I cannot help thy Fall.
Necessity makes. Villains of us all.







OH haste, let's fly, my Lord! Ricardo's Threats,
His busie gloomy Looks, his odd Expressions,
That Lady's wrongs, her Rage, and all things here,
Must have convinc'd you, 'tis unsafe to stay.



But oh my Captain?



The danger cannot reach him.


throw it by, and bind him.


Ha! Villains! by whose orders am I seiz'd?



By Don Ricardo's hedesigns no hurt:
As for you, Madam, you must now deliver
Your Money, Plate, and Jewels; else we've orders
To take 'em all by force.



Assist me then, Despair!
(aside.)
If there's no Remedy, go with me yonder;
To them
You'll find much more than e're your hearts cou'd wish:



Search ev'ry where, while I attend Ricardo.



Two of the Bravoes run to the place pointed to 'em by Placentia,
she steps out after 'em, locks a door, and re-enters immediately.


By happy Chance I've lockt the Villains in,
While eagerly they rush'd to seize their Prey 
I must unbind you, but I tremble so,
I scarce have pow'r to do it.

She begins to unbind him.
Enter Ricardo hastily, with a Dagger in his hand.










Attempt to free him, and he dyes.



Thus Robbers steal our wealth, then leave us bound.



You're robb'd of nothing since she'd be a Nun;
Neither shall you be left, but go with us.



She shall not go.



Villain, I will not go;
And rather wou'd be wedded to the Plague.



Oh! how that blush of Rage, that sullen Grace,


That scornful smile, now blended with a frown,
That soft Emotion, and that wild of Beauty
Fire my hot blood! It mantles, bubbles, boyls!
My full Veins swell, and the revulsive Red
Whirls flushing o're my face. Oh I'm all transport!
I must, I will be blest, The coy Placentia,

Since she'll not be my Wife, shall be my Mistress.
Come, quickly yield! for I'll this very moment.
Secure my bliss, lest my design shou'd fail.



If thou'rt a man, unbind and kill me first.



Rave on, and like the damn'd now feel a hell,
To see me seize the Heav'n of love by force.



Oh save me, heav'n! Ricardo, think of heav'n.



Hold! Is the man lost in the lustful Brute?
Thou lookst a man, then bear thee now like one,



So I intend Come, with me, or I'll force you.

Pulls Pla. while Fabiano is striving privately to unbind himself.


Can fruit while immature indulge the Taste?
Oh! stay! do not prophane th' unyielding Tree;
Kind usage and necessity at last
May ripen crabbed hate to gen'rous Love.



I scorn the fruit which of itself do's fall,
I love a pleasure I must struggle for.



Your appetite's deprav'd, your Love distemper'd.



If 'tis deprav'd, and t'other a disease,
Then, sweet or sowr, the Physick must be taken;
Besides, Resistance will enhaunce the blessing;
Insatiate in the Riot of my Joys,
I'll bribe, or teach, or force you to be pleas'd.
I'll grasp the trembling, panting, struggling Maid,
Grac'd with variety of new disorder;
Her dress, her tresses loose, and in her face
Roses, and Lillies in alternate chase.
I'll see her beg, and beg, to be deny'd,
With heaving breasts, soft looks, short balmy Sighs,
Kind broken words, and trickling pearly Tears,
While my proud Rival by, sees, rages, and despairs.



Racks, Wheels, and Fires, must I be still restrain'd!




















I hate long Sieges 'Tis Soldier-like to Storm.



But not to storm weak woman! Oh! forbear!




I'll stab thee then.









When 'tis done thou charming stubborn Folly.
Thou Foe to thy own Pleasure what still foolish? 
Sure I can grapple with you.



Oh Heav'n! Crush, crush us both with Thunder! oh! my Lord!



Curst Sight! Death to my Eyes! Hell to my Soul!
I cannot bear it
Blast, Thunder, striek, burn, tear me or my bands! 
Ha! Now, Fate, I half forgive thee 
Rises, having freed
his Legs, comes up to Ricardo.





Away! fly instant Fate! 'tis in my hand.
" Thou mayst more safely tempt the greedy Lyon,
" When with contracted Paws he grumbles o're his prey.
Be gone! I never threaten twice.
Villain, stab, or desist.


Offers to stab him. Pla.
steps between.


Fond, rash fool, take thy wish!



Hah! What means Placentia?




To rob you of that blow; I want it most.



Restraint, your danger, check, distract, unman me 
Oh! my Placentia! Oh Ricardo spare her!



Oh! my Fabiano! Oh Ricardo, spare him!



Too long I've trifl'd stand out of Death's way.



No, strike, strike thro my Heart! still thus I'll stand,
Between the dear unhappy Man and Fate.



The dearer he's, the sooner he shall dye.



Oh! take the wealth I now was leaving! kill me!
" Alas my Death will mend my wretched state,
" And I, instead of burying my self living
" Within the lonesom Walls of some poor Cloyster,
" Will lye more quiet in the silent Grave,
" Forgot among the solitary Tombs.
But on my knees, which fear has scarce left able
To bear my Trembling body, by your Love,
By the remaining Tears of this sad day,
By your best hopes, and by your future safety,
Let me adjure you, spare him, spare my honour,
Nor act a Crime you'd wish undone too late.



Down Stubborn Heart! bend knees!
Placentia kneels.
A Goddess kneels; but see a greater wonder,

Ricardo! see thy Rival at thy Feet!
Not to beg life! ah no! I wish to dye:
Spare her! oh spare her! Let my blood attone.



Something I feel like Pity; but I'll hide it 

Or yield, or wed me now, or both shall dye.
To Pla. who holds him by the arm.
Let go your hold 



Oh do no drag me thus!



Bound as I am, I'll strive to snatch thy Dagger.


Fa. with both his hands seizes Ricardo's Dagger. They struggle.
Ri. falls. She gets his Sword, and points it to his breast.






" Now, Villain, tremble! Stir, and thou dy'st.



" Oh do not kill me I'm not fit to dye 



" Nor ever wilt; therefore unfit to live:
" What shou'dst thou fear, thou'rt all a Devil already.
" Thy lowest fall can be but into Hell.



" Oh, that's uncharitable!



" Then that's like thee:
" Infection's busie where you breathe! Dye 


Pla. offers to kill Ri. Fa. hinders her.


" Hold, dear Placentia, let me interpose:
" I'll shield him, but to punish him my self.



" No, his Sword must let out his tainted blood.



" Let not blood stain your Innocence.



" A Monster's blood ne'r stains the hand that sheds it.



" Can a Virgin do this?



" A Virgin wrong'd can more.



" 'Tis not her office to be cruel.



" But 'tis ev'ry one's office to do justice.



" Oh! you are pious, and you must forgive.



" Now you can preach that pity you deny'd.



" Oh! 'twas excess of Love that urg'd my Crime.



" Thou never hadst that goodness as to love.
Dye, Virtue strikes, not I.



Hold, Madam, free my hands; I'll kill him then.



Why venture twice your life against a Villain?



What can I have to lose, when you are lost?




aside. I hate this lingring Thus I'll scape or dye.

Starts up suddenly, and runs out.


Ha! now he's scap'd, and 'tis our turn to fear.



I'll fly for help, unbind me.




We've heard a dismal noise Fabiano bound!



'Tis now no time to talk; secure that door.
They bar the doors on the side where Ri. came out.
Theft, Rape and Murder are at hand 
Some of you, ring the Bell, it may bring help.

  48They unbind Fabiano, who takes up the Sword.


Quick, call the Captain: now his wound is bound,
Tho lame, he may assist.





without. Open the door.



No, not to Thieves and Ravishers.




without. We'll break 'em open then.





Heaven send us succour first.



I fear it much.

The Bell is rung.
Enter Captain, supporting himself on a stick.


Why, then I can but dye for you, Placentia.




Talk not of dying, Sir, but of defence.
Let's keep close by the passage,
There we shall better make our party good.

The door is burst open, the Women shriek.
Enter Ricardo, Bravoes, Sailers and Lieutenant.





Ri. and the Bravoes fight, Fa.
and the Capt. who give way by degrees, till the Lieutenant
finding his Capt. there, falls on the Bravoes, and with the help
of the Sailors disarms them and Ricardo.



Our Captain's here! fall on the Rogues.



My men are here, beyond my expectation.



Betray'd by cursed Pyrates!



Lieutenant, what's the matter?



Our Brigantine, Sir, was o're-pow'r'd by Villains;
So many of our men being on shore.
They came upon us so at unawares,
There was no other help but joyning with them.
I told them I was a revolted Pyrate,
Who would be glad of such good company;
And thus, since that, I've trac'd them in their mischiefs,
Being resolv'd to seize 'em, when my men
Were got together, as they are now.



Where is the Moor?



We cannot find him yet.



Bind all the Villains, and confine Ricardo.









How! Don Vincentio living!



Hah! 'tis my Brother's Ghost!



Risen from the Grave;



Why d' you all shun me? But perhaps you ought.
Yet, tho much chang'd, I am Vincentio still.



Alive! oh grant it heav'n.



You've been impos'd upon, I find.



Oh my dear Brother, how I mourn'd for you!





" Come I'll believe he lives, tho 'twere a Dream,
" That I may know one joyful Moment more.


Ri. run to embrace him, he makes 'em sign to forbear.


Spare Compliments! It is your love I'd have;
When I am sure of that, the rest is needless.



My Lord, your Ear a moment.




I find, there have been strange disorders here.

Placentia, as for you, I hear you're grown
An absolute disposer of your self.



Ah can your Soul more than your face be chang'd!
You did not use to meet our joys this way.
Oh! my best Lord! upon my knees I beg
That Calumny may not possess your Soul!




How am I chang'd indeed; I can stand by,
And see Placentia kneel. Oh! jealousy,
Thou hast perverted all my noble nature:
Thou drov'st out flatt'ring hope when most secure,
And all my Gen'rous passions follow'd it.



Do's it become Placentia thus to kneel, my Lord?



If you dislike her low Condition, raise her!



So, I can, Sir, and to as high a pitch
As yours, tho mounted thus in all its pride.



My Lord, you've in my absence stoln a Jewel
(To F. aside.
I priz'd above my life, my very being.
Restore it me again on your Sword's point;
And by the Grove where I kill'd rash Don John.





to him.] I'll meet you; say no more Rise, noble Maid.



No, I will grow to Earth, except my Lord
Turns merciful again, and hears me speak!




aside. Hopes of Revenge have beat out jealousy,
And I'm my self again Ah lovely Maid,
To what but Heav'n shou'd so much Beauty kneel?
Oh! I was mad, Placentia! quickly rise,
Or I shall sink into the Earth for shame:
His words made no impression on my Mind.



My Lord, pray keep your Temper, nor suspect me;
For I have proofs, I wish the Moor were here!
He first betray'd their ill designs to me.



Why then, ye equal judges, hear him speak!
I am the Moor do you start, base Traducer?
But thou'rt below my Thoughts? 'Tis you, Placentia,

I now must chide.


" Why, Cruel fair,
" Why will you thus shut out your lovely self
" From all the World? I prize no other Wealth,
" And wou'd you, wou'd you steal your self from him
" Who without you must dye? for oh Placentia,

" None can divide the Body from the Soul.
" Yet make that Body live.



" Alas! Vows firm as fate for ever part us.



" Yet stay, That I may see you shine at Court.



" Ah no! my Lord, vertue shines best in Cloysters.



" But oh! if you're resolv'd to live recluse,
" And make your fond Vincentio miserable,
" Why must another offer you to Heav'n?



" You shall dispose of me,
My Lord, my heart
Is by a secret charm bound to Fabiano,

But yet, its Duty must be wholly yours.



Oh! break that cursed charm, or else deny
All thoughts that prompt a friendship or respect.
Respect was welcome from you, when I thought
None had a stronger Tye upon your Soul.
But that respect▪ is now below contempt.



Oh! tho I love him 



Oh unspeak those words.
Ten thousand Vipers stung me at the sound;
Ten thousand thoughts, all wild, all black, all dismal,
Work my mad Brain. Oh, say you love him not.
You weep you are dumb you will not? Cruel Maid!
Teach me, yet Pow'rs to move her Oh I wou'd invoke
Men, Angels, Friends, to wrest him from her heart:
But 'twill be vain: how long have I not su'd?
Hours, Days, Months, Years, are past; yet still she's Marble.
I'll dye then yes; but first my Rival shall.
I'm ripe for ruin, like some batter'd wall,
But haughty Foe, I'll crush thee with my fall.



Kill me, I'll thank you; for I'm hopeless too.
But live, my Lord, and think me not your foe.
Nothing but barbarous wrong done to Placentia

Cou'd make me draw my Sword against my friend.



Must I be wicked e're I can be eas'd?
Take, take your friendship back. Oh why am I thus curst.
My Brother a base wretch, my Friend my Rival,
And what's yet worse, a Rival lov'd! Oh Tortures!
But what most racks my Soul, this very evening


I thought my self the happy'st man on earth.
From such a hope, in full career to bliss,
Thus to be hurried down a precipice
To dash on deep despair! It kills my reason,
Confounds my Brains, my Heart, and tears my very Soul.

Flings himself on the ground.


Compose his mind, good Heav'n!



Rise, my dear Brother.



Oh why will you lye thus?



Oh why indeed indeed! my sword, my sword shou'd
end me and my pain.




Hold! are you mad?


Let Reason end 'em, and preserve your Life.



Away; Life's my worst foe, and you the next;
Think not t'impose it on me. Reason's self,
Nay Patience, says my ills are past her cure.
Oh harship! I'm ev'n deny'd the priviledge of dying.
Then hear, thou heav'n! why sleeps thy thunder? end me!
Delay not thus my wisht for Dissolution.
Oh rid me of Intolerable Life.



Forgive your Friends, and live my Lord.



My Friends! wou'd you be thought my Friend?



Yes, from my Soul.



Then dare be such, and rid me now of Life.



Wou'd that be like a Friend? Reflect, my Lord:
Exert your Soul, and bear like your great self.



Will you not kill me then?



Were ev'ry door to ease shut up but Death,
Unwillingly I wou'd.







Then I must be cruelly kind.








Madam forbear? Let one friend ease another.




Come, take your Sword my Friend, and lay its point close to
my Breast?
(Fa. gives him back his Sword.
That when I do you the same hated Office,
We both may fall at once.



What, both! forbid it friendship!
I dare not buy my ease at your Life's Cost.



See, whither passion hurried you, my Lord!
Were wilful Death an ease, shou'd you deny it him
That gives it you? for I too am most wretched.
But Life's the Gift of Heav'n, and we must wait


Till heav'n commands it back, to gain a better.



Oh! you have touch'd my Soul! Come to my Arms!
I'm reconcil'd to wretchedness, to Life,
Nay, ev'n to you: Tho Rivals we'll agree:
Let's all three joyn as partners in affliction.
Till heav'n be mov'd, while nature mourns to find
Three hearts so wretched, yet so truly kind.





My Ld, Don Ferdinand, with guards was forcing Entrance,
But, hearing you're return'd, wou'd only kiss your hand.



My Lord conceal me, lest I be detain'd.




to Fab. Retire into that Room▪ Go bring him in.






Welcome, my Lord, to Portugal, that mourn'd
The brave Vincentio's loss! The King himself
Has worn a noble sorrow for your Death;
And doubtless will rejoyce, to see you contradict
That most unwelcome news.



I must employ my Friends, my Lord, for a new pardon,
'Twas I that caus'd the Rumour to be spread;
But 'twas to save a Brother.







My Lord, he's but an ill one, I confess:
Yet, nature still will work.



I'll say no more, till I have got your promise, of one thing.



Name it, my Lord; a gift that you can ask
Must needs be too well plac'd to be deny'd.



I had a Son, and hope once more to have him,
If this fair Lady will restore him to me,
Once I despis'd her, but admire her now.
I ask her for his Wife, my Lord, that's all.



All! ask me my Lord, to rip my breast my self,
And give you thence my heart. Ask any thing,
Rather than ask Placentia for your Son.
She must be mine, or no man's in the World.



My Lord, she is your Sister.








Nay then 'tis time to fly: These perjur'd Monks,
Tho he's not dead have made the secret known.



Lay hold on him! 
(going is stopt by the Lieutenant.)
Enter the 2 Monks.
This Villain, shall no longer be your plague.



No, he's a peasants Son, and she your Sister.



Can Heav'n and Earth conspire to make me wretched?


Sister, that word ne're sounded ill till now.
Sister brings in't eternal separation.
Fathers, you shou'd be Messengers of joy.



I hope, My Lord, we shall, if you'll but hear.



Let me hear any thing but Sister from you.
That fatal sound will murther me at once;
I dare not understand you.
But since I'm doom'd to hear some dreadful story;
'Tis fit I shou'd possess my Soul with Thoughts
Of the most dismal kind! I need not study.

Placentia Loves another That's enough.
Alas! what Racks, what tortures can be worse!
Now tell the rest yet on the Ground I'll lye
Lest I drop down, when she is prov'd my Sister.'
There, wretched Lover, measure out thy Grave.


Now strike the blow that must cut off all hopes.



Read that, my Lord! It is a declaration
Under his Parents hands.

Gives Vinc. a paper.


This is enough Placentia is my Sister. Oh! my heart!
Turn, turn thy self about, that I may ask
Why this was done?



My Lord, you've heard your sickly Infancy
Gave but a doubtful promise of your Life.
This made your Father wish another Son.
But Daughters still deceiv'd him. Now your Mother
Then big with Child, had heard him rashly say,
If that too prov'd a Daughter, he should wish
She never had been his.
This made such an impression on her mind,
That to preserve his Love, he being absent,
Seeing it prov'd a Girl, she chang'd the Child.
This fault her youth committed, and her age repented.
So she with us deposited this Trust,
To be reveal'd, if you dy'd without Issue.
If not, to be kept secret. But just heav'n
Has brought the secret out before its time.
Yet with no breach of trust on our-side neither,
Since we believ'd you dead, when we reveal'd it.



Have I not patience, fathers, thus to hear
Such killing news, yet lye here without raving?
But I'll do something too.





Look to my Lord!



Alas! he's much disturb'd As for these Villains,
To dungeons with them. But for this mock-Lord 


Degrade him first. Strip of this rich garb,
Then Cloath him as befits his state and Birth.


That thus my Lord may see him dragg'd to prison.



Oh Sister; 'tis more joy to find you thus,
Than 'tis to lose that wretch.



This doubles the delight I took in Friendship,
But my Love for you was so great before, it cannot now encrease.

Re-enter Ricardo, in an old Gown with Attendants.



I owe you nothing but a wretched Being.
Take back the thankless gift, and then we're even,
" Nor rack my Soul with dread of endless Flames.
There's Hell enough on Earth in guilty minds.
" To lose at once the heav'n of Love and Greatness,
" Then be condemn'd to Life, or dye a branded Villain!
" Curst Thought! a branded Villain. Ha! I feel
" A warmth new to my heart, thaw the hard lump,
" And shake my shudd'ring frame.
Oh my past Life, thou mak'st me doubt the future.
Alas, I dare not hope I may repent▪



Oh run, for pities sake! she is poyson'd.
Get Antidotes! But tell her not, I did it.



Run, help the Lady.




Oh! lead me from her Sight, to Chains and Galleys,
To toyl, to shame, to want, to pinching cold,
To scorching heat, to stripes, to worse Remorse,
And ever-new variety of Woes.
All, all these pains are slight, to those I bear,
Struggling for hope with horror and despair.

Laura in the passage.]
Stay! Poys'ner Fiend,! take this and this.









More horrors yet! oh let's avoid that Sight.



with Fer. Morel. and Mel.
Enter Laura and Richardo. She holds a Dagger in her hand,
and drops it as she struggles with the Servants.


Why do you hold me? let me end that Monster!



Strike, injur'd Goodness; strike again; I'll thank you.
" Compleat the work of Death, that moves too slow.
" But oh! first hear me, take some Antidote.



Must I be held, and punisht with his sight?
" Free me, or take him hence, for horror shakes me
Ev'n at the thoughts that he's of humane form.




Oh stay; look on the most undone of Creatures,
A Devil in guilt, but a repenting Devil.
Oh! cou'd but heav'n and you forgive.



Avant Devils can't repent, nor be forgiven.



But ev'n the worst of Men, thus prostrate trembling,
Not daring to look up, near death, will sigh to heav'n.
" Oh! you're so much its likeness,
" Sure its best attribute, Divine forgiveness
" May yet be show'r'd ev'n on a wretch like me.
" A Wretch, more, more than a wretch, there's not a name
" That can express my miserable state.



Let go my Robes.




The drowning wretch cannot forego his hold;
That lost, I sink for ever.



" I'd sink with thee, that thou might'st sink yet lower.
" Think on my wrongs, thou Fiend, thy breach of Vows,
" Ingratitude, that ev'n thy Sex must startle,
" Poyson thy kind return for all my wealth,
" For all my Love, and what cries most for Vengeance,
" Those poor young Orphans! Oh my ruin'd Children.



Oh! take some Antidote!



No, I wou'd dye: what shou'd I live for now?
see behind me nothing left in Life

•ut misery, terrible misery.







Wil't thou still plague me? Dye, and let me dye.



" Oh! had you heard me, but an hour ago,
" We might have liv'd. Alas you little know
" What's now divulg'd; I'm not Vincentio's Brother.
Death to a wretch like me has lost its horror;
Death shou'd have snatch'd me in my fancy'd greatness;
But now my base original, my Crimes,
My shame call for severer punishments.
The Rack shou'd stretch my Limbs, and show me death in view,
Then pull the blessing back, that I might long be tortur'd.
Then let me starve with those poor helpless Orphans,
Whom I have robb'd of the support their dying Father left.



" Oh now thou'st touch'd my Soul,
" And laid my Crimes as well as thine in view.
" I, I, was left entrusted with the Care.
" How shall I meet my Husbands shade? methinks
" I see his angry Ghost! he frowns oh hide me.


" Forgive, blest soul; forgive a poor deluded Woman! 
" But oh! my Children, how can you forgive me? 
" Yet once more let me see 'em stay; I dare not, 
" Oh dismal f••e; a dying mother dreads to see her Children.



" Oh not to you, to me they owe their Ruin;
" Oh me, on me alone shou'd Vengeance fall.
" Add to my torments, heav'n, so they have ease.
" Oh! tho' she curst me still, tho' she ne're knew
" 'Twas for their good I strove to wed Placentia,

I'd bear an age of Hell to mend your fates.



Amazement! his guilt lessens. Can it be?
He pities me, pities my Children too.
Take back thy pity, take it back, Ricardo.

It gains so much upon my easy heart
That I shall wrong my self, and give thee mine.



Pity'd! am I then pityd? oh! thou goodness,
If thou can'st pity, sure thou can'st forgive, 
But oh the poyson! That must wake Heav'ns Vengeance,
And seal the ears of mercy;



Twas Charity to kill me: but thy falshood
Was a worse poyson to my doating heart 
Yet we've all faults. Alas, we all want mercy 
We must forgive, heav'n pardon thee, and me!



What do I hear?



But fly! my Children's sight may force forgiveness back.



Is that forgiveness? see, I bleed apace.
Oh pardon, e're I dye.



Oh! I've a vice of mercy in me.



Let me Embrace your Knees, breath out my Soul.






My Children! off, away.




I dare not see 'em, and I cannot leave her!

throws himself on his Face.


" Away, you dearfond wretches. Why d' you cling?
" I've ruin'd you; but oh! I'm ruin'd worse.
" Poor Innocents, they little know their misery,
" I feel it double for them, wretched Mother.
Oh had my Woes fall'n only on my self,
I'd think 'em gentle, but this worse affliction
Intail'd on you, poor helpless guiltless Orphans,
It turns my Brains, distracts me 'Tis too much.
Oh dreadful change! oh vanity of life!


Death is the only blessing a fond Mother

she sees the Dagger by her and takes it up privately.
Can wish her dearest Children ha! the Dagger.
Do's not Fate hint by this, I ought to ease 'em?
Must they be left, to want? to beg? to starve?
I'll do't; but oh what Arm can hurt such sweetness?
I cannot strike I cannot bear their Looks 
But must they live to curse me, shame their name,
And dye perhaps an ignominious Death?
No, I must strike 



Pray, mother, don't look so, indeed it frights me
Oh pray ben't angry! oh I'll hug and kiss you.



Away, we're ruin'd, and we ought to dye.



Oh my dear Mother, live; We'll beg for you.



Beg! cou'd you Beg?



Yes, for our dearest mother.



Oh this disarms me. Live, my dearest Children 
Live and be happier, you instruct your Mother,
(She throws
away the Dagger and embraces her Children.
And I too ought to Live If there be means but oh the poyson
It works, hah! it shoots Hell into my Blood!
I am all wound. My head; my breast! I burn!
Heart, I cleave my sides! Brains, burst my skull! help! help!
Oh gently, gently! 

(They offer to help her.


" Oh horror! Curse thy sufferings off on me,
" Thou martyr'd Goodness hurl your Bolts, you Powers!
" Grind, grind me into dust,
" And on each atom double all her pains.
" So Laura's eas'd, Ricardo will not murmur!



Oh! give me ease! where's Death?
The Coward dares not come, affrighted at my torments.
My Br••th's a fire. Help! Water, Ice! Heav'n, pity me.
Give 〈◊〉 some of the cold my Children are to suffer.



Take hence these innocents, too much they move.



Oh pity them I call'd on Death, and lo, he's come
at last.
But oh the thoughts of them, makes me now welcome him
With that sad heaviness that sinks despairing Sinners.
Oh Heav'n! Oh my Children! 




She's dead, she's dead.



" Hah! and do I still live?
" Be dry my Eyes, and you, my Wounds, weep faster.
" Oh let me look, and sigh my last at once.
Oh killing sight when shall I overtake thee,


Thou only fair? Oh! never, never, never.
'Tis not for guilt like mine to mount with thee:
I feel my self in Hell, and mercy's self
Can never stoop so low.
" Fain wou'd I pray ha! a Grim Vision frights me.
" Oh heav'n! oh save me! hah! a hand is stretcht
" To raise me up to heav'n, let me get hold 
" But oh! dark vapours rise between I cannot see it
Re-enter Ferdinand, and a Servant.
No News yet of Vincentio? Oh most dismal sight!



Remove that Scene of Grief force off that wretch.



Oh you shall never part us No, I will, I will
Be joyn'd with her at least in Death! Oh Laura! Laura,


(Laura is carried off, Ricardo follows, bolding by the garments,
but is forced off, faints, falls and is carried off.


A doleful Scene! but where's my Lord Vincentio.

I dread some greater mischief from his Stay.





Run, find Placentia? Don Vincentio's coming,
A Conqu'ror o're his noble self at last.
(Exit Servant
He brings my Lord Fabiano to be blest.







Placentia, Morella, and Melinda at the other.


Love's sacrific'd at last to Reason, Take her,
She's yours, my Lord.



Oh 'tis too much at once oh rapture oh Placentia.




Oh my lov'd Lord! 




My Life! my Soul! oh I am lost in Bliss, and suffer with delight.
Thou kind omnipotence, forgive my doubts,
I thought thou cou'dst not thus have blest a mortal 
My Lord, my Father!




Oh my dear Son, be blest, and let my tears
Now speak my Joy as once they did my Grief.



Thus Providence has wrought my desperate cure.
Oh! you, no more my Mistress nor my Rival,
Live happy. Long be crown'd
With blessings which no single state can give.
My heart has fed so long on hopeless Love
That it wou'd surfeit, shou'd it feed on other.
Glory shall be my Darling Mistress now.
Off then, soft frenzy! let me rouze my Soul.
In martial Fields let Fame possess it whole:
While all who know, whence sprung these dangers here,
Learn from small Crimes great mischiefs to beware.


