Set to Musick by Mr. Iohn Eccles.


Overture. Violins and Hautbois.
Enter Aglaia and Euphrosyne.


TO meet her Mars, the Queen of Love
Comes here adorn'd with all her Charms
The Warrior best the Fair can move;
And crowns his Toyls in Beauty's Arms. 
Symphony of Flutes. Enter Venus improving her Dress; attended by Hora, the Graces, and others.
Say, ye Graces, am I now
Fit to make Immortals bow?
Are my Dress, my Face, and Air
Fit to charm the God of War?
Say, ye Graces, am I now
Fit to make Immortals bow?



You've been scarce five hours a dressing;
Yet you're charming past expressing.



Let me see once more the Glass!
So! I fancy it may pass.

She looks a while in the Glass while a Ritornel is plaid.


  6Euphrosine and Aglaia.

'Women seldom like their Faces,
'Tho they long consult the Glass;
'But, if you dare trust the Graces,
'You now ev'n your self surpass.
'And when Beauty's self engages,
'Arm'd with such a Dress and Air,
'She may conquer rigid Sages,
'And ev'n the rough God of War.




How slow the Warlike God I find!
On Love's expanded Wings expecting Lovers move
But slow as palsied age expected Lovers prove;
Love flags, and leaves the heavy mass behind.


Fly, ye hours; haste, bring him here
Swift as my fond Wishes are!
When we love, and love to rage,
Ev'ry Moment is an Age. Enter Cupid, to the same Tune, and smiling.

But when blest with what we love,
Ages but a Moment prove.


Beauty's Goddess, cease to mourn:
Soon to your Arms,
From War's Alarms,
Your Lover will return:
Your Grief will then be lost in Kisses,
Melting Blisses,
You will gaze and laugh and toy:
As gloomy night
Adds Charms to Light,
So Absence to our Joy.






Will my Soldier then be here?
Where was he? come, tell, my Dear?

Chucks Cupid under the Chin.


The rough Warrior rov'd a while
In the lovely British Isle.
Had not I his Flame renew'd,
He cou'd scarce have now been here;
For such Beauties there I view'd,
As might ev'n with You compare.



Tell me, gentle Cupid, how
In that Isle I'm worshipp'd now?



There the kindest Husbands are,
And the kindest-hearted Fair.
Each in Hymen's Bonds is free;
And, when Wives with Lovers go,
Cuckolds, not to disagree,
Thank the Men who make 'em so. 
Ritornel.
Others, fond of roving Lives,
Love all Women but their Wives.
Painted Beauties there abound;
Nay, some Men are painted too:
Crouds are in all Temples found,
But come most to worship You.



Happp Isle! and happier far,
If thou knew'st no other War! 

Venus's Attendants repeat this Distich
Happy Isle! and happier far
If thou knew'st no other War!


  8A March to a rough wild Tune.
Enter Vulcan with Brontes, Steropes, Arges, Pyrach∣mon, and other Cyclopes.
Vulcan looks about with his Spectacles.



Where's my damn'd Wife? hoh! here she stands!
Methinks she's plaguy fine to day!
And this in spight of my Commands:
There's something in't; she looks too gay. 



the grumbling Husband here?
Love no longer then can stay.




When the jealous Coxcomb's near,
All the Graces must away.




Now an hour will seem a day.





Thou Plague of my Life,
Thou Devil, thou Wife!
Come, tell me, why did you
Dress so like a Crack? you know I forbad you.
Why d' you Patch thus and prink?
What, you're Painted I think!
Why this Head six foot high?
S Blood and Fire, who am I?



My Fool; for what else can that Property b
That's ugly, and old, and ill-natur'd, like Thee?

  9I'll dress when I please, nay I'll Cuckold Thee too:
What else have young Wives with such Husbands to do?



If ever you dare,
I'll make the World know what a Strumpet you are.



Nay, what do I care?
You'll make the World know what a Cuckold you are.

Both at the same time in a scolding manner.


I'll make the World know what a Strum∣pet you are.



You'll make the World know what a Cuckold you are.




Join, and curse the Tye with me,
That confines us to one Bed!



Thus at least we'll once agree;
Curs'd be he that made us wed!


Vulcan repeats that Verse three times with Venus.




Join, and curse the Tye with me
That confines us to one Bed!
Thus alone you can agree,
Curst be he, curst be he, curst be he that made you wed.

Some of the Cyclopes and their Wives dance, while the others are singing; and in the Dance they frown, jolt, and threaten each other, wring their hands, and kick backwards, and the Women make Horns at the Men.
The End of the First Act.
  10The Second Act.
The Music of the Second Act compos'd by Mr. Iohn Eccles.



A March, with Trumpets and Kettledrums, and then with Hautbois, alternate.
Enter Mars, followed by Gallus, Fear, Anger, Noise, and a Body of Souldiers marching.















 None but Gallus further comes. Now face about.
They all face about, except Gallus.



Ye Trumpets, and ye Drums.
March all to Quarters; March, and there remain, Till my Command renews the rough Campaign.

They all march out in Military order, except Mars and Gallus, who stay. The Drums, Trumpets and Hautbois continue the March alternate, till they are all gone.



Thou watchful Sentinel of Love,

Gallus, my trusty Spy,
By whom secure in am'rous Wars I move,
And all surprizing Foes defy,
Procure thy Master new Delight;
Go, bring my Goddess to my sight! 


What if the limping Cuckold's nigh?
I may be bang'd,
And may be hang'd,
And then, god' b' y▪,

Gallus your trusty Spy!



No more: I on thy Vigilance rely.



I shall be kill'd.

Mars, offering to draw his Sword.
 By me.



 Hold, hold, I fly.







Oh! Rival! you must happy be;
You ev'ry day my Goddess see.
Perhaps in vain you sigh and sue;
But you, at least, my Goddess view.


For such a dear bewitching sight,
Who would not gaze away the Light?
Oh! tho I see her ev'ry where,
I too too little see the Fair.

  12n vain to shun her sight I strove:
Here, in my Heart 'tis fixt by Love.
None can the Charming Image blot,
I see her, when I see her not.


And who can from her Chains be free'd?
She looks; and Gods themselves adore.
She smiles; then I'm a God indeed.
She's in my Arms; Oh then I'm more!




Venus running into Mars' Arms.




















 My Soul, my dearest Mars!



 My dearest Venus! oh!
'Now let the World a Truce from Wars & Tumults know
'While Mars is here, 'tis Peace below.
'O Absence, now I see
'Unjustly we complain of Thee;
'Without Thy Pow'r cou'd I have hop'd to find?
'Even Beauty's Queen so charming and so kind.












 My dearest Mars!



 My dearest Venus!







Cupid, while dumb Courtship passes between Mars & Venus.

Come, you Loves, clap ev'ry Wing;

Io Triumph! dance and sing! 


'Come, you Loves, clap ev'ry Wing;
'Io Triumph! dance and sing!



How sweet, how pleasing, when return'd,
The lovely Object whom we mourn'd!
Recruited Fires more fiercely warm,
And Absence heightens ev'ry Charm.
The Blessing that a while was lost,
When 'tis regain'd is valu'd most.
'How sweet, how pleasing, when return'd,
'The lovely Object whom we mourn'd!











 My dearest Mars!



 My dearest Venus!












He offers to knock 'em down with his Hammer, but is hinder'd by Gallus.



Hold; Let the God of Anvils know,
My Master's Arms must be just so.

While he sings the last Verse, he puts his Arms about Vulcan s Neck, and then about his Body and Thighs, making motions to show him how a Coat of Armor should be made to fit Mars.



You sawcy Varlet, I say no.
Come, Bully Mars, let go, let go!
Your Arms must be just so, just so.

While he sings this, he takes Mars by the Arms, and lays 'em along his sides.


Hold, fiery Smith, I mean those Arms
Which you must frame for War's Alarms:
Those Arms must o re his Shoulders close just so,
As he now did to Venus show,
Only that she might let you know.
He's somewhat rough, she somewhat tender,
His leaning on her might offend her;
So she cry'd, Oh! That's all.



   Oh ho! is it so?



Now since you're come, if you're at Leisure,
An't please your Godship, take his Measure






Here Vulcan, Arm me, Cap-a-pié!

And let my Shield impenetrable be.


Let future Heroes there appear;
Place Greece's, Rome's, and brave Britain's there.
Let Alexander, Caesar, Arthur meet,
And all their Lawrels lay at greater William's Feet.


'William, more God like, and as brave,
'Shall only fight th' endanger'd World to save:
'William, my other self shall be;
'Inspir'd by *Themis, and by me.


'Immur'd in Steel now Warriors safely fight;
'But Balls unseen with rapid Flight
'One day shall deal Destruction through the Field:
'William, with Brest unarm'd, shall face those fiery Foes;
'And Mars must kindly interpose,
'His Representative to shield.


Here, Vulcan, Arm me Cap-a-pié!

And let my Shield impenetrable be.




But good your Godship, know,
His Arms must be just so, just so.


Vulcan, hindering Venus from holding Mars; who, while Gallus sings, talks to her, making signs as if he gave her Directions about the Armor.

'Hold, I don't like my Wife should feel
'This ample Back of Brawn like Steel.
Come, Mistress, pray, what Business had you here!




I only-came-to take the Air, my Dear.



You rather came to Arm my Head, I fear.




Go, now I hate you, now go to!
And cou'd you, cou'd you think I'd do
As I in jest did threaten you?
Go, now I hate you, now, go to.


Dull Fool! had I design'd to try,
Wou'd I have told you so before?
Besides, you see my Son was by.




Your Son's a Pimp, and you 



   No more.



'Why, sure some Fiend must have possest you!
''Tis but a Month since I caress'd you.



'Ungrateful Dear! cou'd you believe
'I wou'd my self and you deceive?
'What with that Fore-head can compare?
'Can any one read Cuckold there?
'That Leer! that Hip, that Heel and Toe!
'What tho' you're old? most Beaux are so.



'Nay, when I'm smugg'd up, I'm so comely,
'I know you cannot think me homely.



Come, for her Pardon humbly sue!
Tho' she were not so true,

  17She••〈◊〉 too good for you.
Come; for her Pardon humbly sue!



What shall I do?
I fear this Mars, and love and fear her too,



Come, for her Pardon humbly sue.



It must be so, My Deary, Deary!
My Love! my Soul!



   My hate, my Fool!



Pray, Chuck, don't frown, let me come near you!
Come, 'tis a Folly to repine,
You've had your Jest, pray pardon mine.



First ask his Pardon as you ought.



You hear her, pray good Mars forgive my Fault.



Well, for her sake, no more of this be thought.



'Now, Dear, a Kiss in sign of Grace!



'Not till you've got you a new Face.



'Come, Buss'e; come, it must be so!



Venus after he had kiss'd her.
'Pish, you're so troublesom! Now go.



'Shou'd he not beg my Pardon too?




'Ah! how sweet is Reconciling,
'When a loving Pair is smiling,
'Free from Spleen or jealous doubt!
'O that we cou'd still be smiling,
'still thus kindly reconciling,
'And yet never falling out!



Now all is well, my Cyclops shall advance
With their newest Anvil-Dance.





'Let's a while renew our Blisses
'In a sweet exchange of Kisses:
'Thus the Lover comes in Play,
'When the Husband is away.



'But alas he will not stay!
'Soon be gone; but soon return.
'Soon? no, I a whole tedious hour must mourn!
'I a whole tedious hour must be
'Depriv,d of Heav'n, depriv'd of Thee.




Come, away; strike and sing,
Ting, ting, ting, terry terre, terry ting, &c.

Let us make the Caves ring,

  19Ting, ting, ting, ting, ting, ting,
While we forge Thunder-Bolts for Heav'n's King.
Ting, ting, ting. 



-Steropes holding a red hot Bolt.
This he'll fling,
Ting, ting, ting.
At Cowards at Sieges, and Atheists at Pray'rs.
At a Husband, who by his Wife's Chastity swears.
This he'll fling, ting, ting, ting. 



At promising Courtiers, and Fools that believe 'em;
At poor Rogues that give Bribes, and rich Knaves that receive 'em,
This he'll fling, &c.

'At a Weather-Cock Priest who nere thinks as he teaches.
'At a Cit in his Buff with his Heart in his Breeches.
This he'll fling, &c.

'At Beaux who protest they of Favours nere boast,
'Yet drink the Fair's Health ev'ry Night with a Toast.
This he'll fling, &c.

'At Masks, who at Fifty wou'd follow Love's Trade;
'At a Female of Twenty that swears she's a Maid.
This he'll fling, &c.

At a Couple who swear that they never repented;
At a Briton who says, he can long live contented.
This he'll fling, &c.

At a Ninny who finds a Gallant with his Wife,
Then begs both their Pardons for making a Strife.



'How! then I am fool'd I doubt?



'No, he jests; come, still be smiling,
'Free from Spleen, or jealous Doubt,
'Still be kindly reconciling,
'But be never falling out.


  20The Cyclopes with the rest joyn in a Chorus, and Dance, striking on their Anvil.

'Thus may your Joys for ever last,
'The Charms of Peace best after Wars we taste.



The Musick Compos'd by Mr. Finger.







MY Courage comes, now Mars is gone.
I'll not be Bullied into Patience.
I shou'd be jeer'd, shou'd he go on,
By Gods, and Godlins, and all Nations.
No, I'll be bold, now Mars is gone.


How shall I use this Rampant Creature?

Iealousie imitating Eccho  hate her.
What if I valiantly shou'd beat her?

Iealousie like Eccho,   beat her.
But when she wheadles I believe her.

Iealousie like Eccho,   leave her.

  21Will she still Jilt my kind Endeavour?

Iealousie like Eccho,   ever.
How! Eccho! what am I? speak Eccho?


Iealousie like a Cuckoe, -  Cuckoe.


Symphony. Vulcan, thinking it to be the Cuckoe's Note.

Vile Bird, be curst for thy unwelcome Tongue!
Hence, let the lustful Sparrow hatch thy Young,
And Cuckoe be thy Name, and Cuckoe be thy Song!
Let Married Wretches dread, yet share thy Name,
Their Wives the Guilt, yet theirs the Shame,
Till Cuckoe spreads thro' all the Universal Frame.


Iealousie discovers her self.
Symphony.


See, Vulcan, Iealousie appears!
Tho' not to ease, but raise thy Cares.
Still restless round the World I run,
To rack the wretched Lover's Mind:
I watch and journey with the Sun,
To search for what I dread to find.
Thence sliding on a Beam, my Eye
Saw Mars with Venus loosely toy.




Revenge me Hell, new Pains invent!
To plague 'em, all thy Racks I'll steal.
No, that's too mild a Punishment;
Let'em both share the Hell, the greater Hell I feel.







Yeild, my Dear, let f•ll possessing
Crown my Love, and Charm my Sence.



No, I must oppose your pressing
With as gallant a Defence.



When Love's Harvest shou'd be reaping,
Will you waste the Time in Doubt?



Ev'ry Town that's worth the keeping,
Keeps a while th' Invader out.
Cheap Embraces quickly cloy;
Easy Conquest seems a Toy:
But denying,
Struggling, flying,
Wanton playing,
Wise delaying,
Raise us to a Sence of Joy.



Love's a Hawk, and stoops apace:
We all hurry
For the Quarry,
Tho' the Sport ends with the Chace.




Come Child, let us kiss, hang dull silly wooing,
'Tis time, like our Betters, we two shou'd be doing.
Kind Fate still assigns, as a Custom that's common▪
To the Mistress, the Master, the Man to the Woman.




Be still, I hate your wanton Play,



Yet on a wanton Mistress wait?



What others can be found of late?
If now we cannot still obey,
See all, hear all, and nothing say,
'Twere pity we shou'd serve the Great.



What, wou'd you have me dully wooe?
I cannot flatter, cringe, and sue:
Yet if high Love must pass between us,
Come, I'll be Mars, do you be Venus.


Dear Madam, you're so damn'd inviting,
Rot me, I love you more than Fighting.
There cannot be a better sport,
Than to besiege so fine a Fort:
Your Eyes strange Execution do;
Yet I must dye, or conquer you.



Hold, or my Hands will prove to you
Offensive, and Defensive too.



'Tis vain, make what defence you please,
These two white Rising Tow'rs I'll seize.












  I must storm then.



  Do, do, I defie you.
Be quiet, nay don't you; I'll cry out.



   I'll try you.



Do, do, I defie you; do, no Body's by you,








   I hold you.



  Hold, hold, or I'll fly you.







 I'll fly you.



   Do, do, I defie you.


Gallus carries her off.
Ritornel.
Re-enter Vulcan, having laid a Net by the Couch.


My Wife and her Bully are coming this way;
Tho' kill them I cannot, expose 'em I may.
Since Chains of hot Lust, their dark Union have made,
In Fetters as subtle they'll here be betray'd.
Ritornel.
Well, let ev'y Fumble,
Who like me will stumble,
Be soon made as humble
As I!
And may his Wife fly him,
Or court others by him,
And Fate then deny him
To dye.



Re-enter Mars and Venus.




How my Passion is encreas'd
With imperfect Pleasure toying!
I'll no more starve at a Feast,
Nor enjoy without enjoying.

  25Venus running into his Arms.
Ah! my Dear, my Soul, my all!
Thus for ever let me lye!
In thy Arms I ravish'd fall,
Tranc'd in melting Joys I dye.


Mars and Venus sit upon the Couch.


'O bless me less! th' Almighty Joy
'Will ev'n Divinity destroy▪
'It shakes and labours with the Bliss,
'And wastes, and wastes with ev'ry stronger Kiss.



Mars, rous'd out of his Extasie, and finding himself caught.
'Hah! am I fall'n from Heav'n to Hell?
'No, still 'tis Heav'n bright Goddess where you dwell.
How! trapt in Chains! Iove here! Curst Vulcan too!
Ye Gods, what Being ever fell
So low, from high'r than you? 
To Gallus.

Dull Spye, by whose Neglect I'm caught,
'Turn to a Bird, and by thy early Call,
('Lest secret Lovers like me fall)
'Prevent the prying Sun, and thus attone thy Fault.



'Here for ever thus remain:
'Strong as Fate is Vulcan's Chain.
'Curs'd be the Pair that brand my Front with Shame!
'Most curst my Wife! Damn, all Adult'rers, Damn,

  26'May my worst Fires boyl their Salacious▪Blood,
'Corrode their Flesh, dry up the tainted Flood;
Prey on their Bones, their inmost Marrow fry,
Till they curse Heav'n, like me, and vainly wish to dye! 


Momus laughing to Mars.
Dear Bully, thou'rt fitted; long may you lye thus!
'Tis sweet to make Cuckolds; but why one of us?
What's cheaper than Women? Look, yonder appears
A World of kind Wives, and of She Volunteers!
Not one here but wishes t'have been in your place:
Yet, Vulcan, thou'rt wise thus to spread thy Disgrace:
Thus Jealousy's cur'd, and Men gladly will know,
There are Cuckolds above, as well as below.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, hah! as well as below.

The Chorus, Repeat the last two Lines.
Symphony. Enter Cupid with a Train of Cupids.



Thus all unequal Unions break.
Thus Hymen without Love is weak.
But I'll exert my Pow'r anew,
Make Vulcan kind, and Venus true.
Her Gratitude will soon Improve,
And Friendship shall resemble Love.
Where Hymen wove unequal Tyes,
Love to no higher Pitch can Rise:

Cupid strikes Vulcan with an Arrow.



Compell'd by Love and Fate's resistless Pow'r,
We lov'd, we fail'd, your Pardon I implore.



Well, I'm a Fool! will you do so no more?



Venus, Mars, and Cupid.

No more, no more, no more.


Vulcan goes to set 'em free.

  27A March with Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, &c.
Enter the Followers of Mars. Immediately after the Warlike Musick, Flutes, and other soft Musick, are hear'd.

Rouse, God of War, to Arms, to Arms!



To Love, to Love, to Love's Alarms!



To War, to War, to War's Alarms!



Hark! Flutes are warbling Love!



   Hark! Trumpets answer War.



War, Battles, Conquests, Triumphs, Glory, War,

None but he is worthy Love,
Whom the Charms of Glory move. 




Cupid and Mars hand in hand.
None but he is worthy Love,
Whom the Charms of Glory move


Grand Chorus of all the Voices and Instruments.
Hail! Great Gods of Love and War!
Thus the World's vast▪ Empire share!



 Glory without Love is vain.



 Without Glory Love's a Bane.



None but he is worthy Love,
Whom the Charms of Glory move.
Hail! Great Gods of Love and War!
Thus the World's vast Empire share!




  29An Explanation of the Fable of Mars and Ve∣•••. Out of Mr. Motteux's Gentleman's Journal, Month of Ianuary, Vol: 3.
THE oldest of the Heathen Gods was Coelus, whose Son Saturn is sometimes describ'd like an old man devouring his Children, and at others with Wings and a Scyth; with which having spoilt his Father's propagating Faculty, lest he should produce other Beings, some of the Blood fell into the Sea, and mixing with the foamy Waves give birth to Venus.
By Coelus the Ancients seem to have meant the Heavens, whose motions give birth to Time, which is figured by Saturn, made old because first created; and said to devour his Children, Time devouring its Off-spring. The Wings imply its swiftness, and the Scyth that it mows down all. Saturn castrating Coelus shows, that Time soon takes from things the power of multiplying their Kind, lest they should encrease to too great a Number, and that the Destruction of one is the production of another▪ also, that even after the loss of the Power, Desire fluctuates, and creates Venus.
Fair Venus is the Wife of limping Vulcan, and Cu∣pid is her Son; Mars is the Son of Juno, who by the ad∣vice of Flora, begot him, having toucht a Flower, to be even with Jupiter, who begot Minerva out of his Brain without any other help. Mars is charm'd, courts and enjoys Venus, but Phoebus discovers this to Vulcan, who frames so artificial a Net, that he ••cures Mars and Venus in it, who are expos'd to the laughter of the Gods.
Venus is libidinous Pleasure, which is always wed∣ded to the Fire of Lust, which is the reason that Vul∣can  30
is made ugly, because Lust is so; li•ping like too 〈◊〉 its infected Votaries; and supporting himself with a stick, because Fire cannot subsist witho•• Fuel; made▪ God of Smiths, because Lustful flames 〈◊〉 to forge and sharpen the first points of Love, that is, the Arms of Cupid;〈◊〉 it, made those of the Trojans and Greeks in another sence, the Loves of Paris and Helena having caus'd those two Nations to take up Arms. And as Venus is daughter of the Sea▪ Vulcan's Wife, and Mars's Mistress, she's apt to cause stormy commo∣tions, Fire and Bloodshed.
As for Jupiter's having without any help produc'd out of his Brain Minerva the Goddess of Arts and Sciences, call'd Pallas and Bellona, when she presides to defensive arms, this means the omnipotent Deity, who by his supream wisdom has form'd all states, and given to Man Arts and Sciences, with the means of defending himself against his Enemies. Juno is Riches Iealousie and Envy, that beg at Mars, which is War, in opposition to Minerva, that is the flourishing condition of Governments. Flora by whom Juno is advis'd, means Youth, to whose rash advice War often ows its beginning. By Mars Warriors are to be un∣derstood, who gazing on Venus, or libidinous Pleasure, are entic'd; and abandoning themselves to an ignoble sloth, lose their martial vigor, which is only preserv'd by milita∣ry Discipline. Now this cannot be hid from the piercing eyes of a prying observer, meant by the Sun, whose light discovers all the i•tr•ague to the Enemy: Thus they are surprized in the snare which the Fire of Lust, the Husband of unl•wful pleasure has laid for them, and ex∣pose to the censure of the Gods, that is, thier Superiours and the World.
