




_NO, never; Mirvan, never still this heart
Must throb with ceaseless woe All-gracious heav'n!
Will not this palace drench'd in gore; the crown
Of China's kings fix'd on the Tartar's brow;
Will not a tract of twenty years in bondage!
Ah! will not these suffice, without fresh cause
Of bitter anguish in Mandane's breast? 





Better suppress these unavailing tears,
This fruitless flood of grief. 





It will not be 
Ev'n mid'st the horrors of this dismal hour,
When fate has all transferr'd from lost Cathai
To vile barbarian hands; in such an hour
This heart, revolting from the public cause,
Bleeds from a private source; bleeds for the woes
That hang o'er Zamti's house 






Amidst the gen'ral wreck, who does not feel
The keen domestic pang?






We all Must feel the kindred-touch; daily the cries
Of widows, orphans, father, son, and brother
In vain are sent to heav'n; the wasteful rage
Of these barbarians, these accurs'd invaders, 
Burns with increasing fire; the thunder still
Rolls o'er our heads, threatning with hideous crash
To fall at once, and bury us in ruin.





And quickly fall it must! The hand of heav'n
Weighs this great empire down. 





Nay, tax not heav'n!
Almighty justice never bares it's arm
'Gainst innocence and truth. 'Tis Timurkan,
That fell barbarian that insatiate waster 
May curses blast the Tartar! he 'tis he
Has bore down all, and still his slaught'ring sword
In yonder field of death, where Corea's troops
Made their last stand for liberty and China,
Crimsons the land with blood. This battle lost,
Oh! then farewel to all. But, Mirvan, say,
How came the tidings? 





From yon lofty tow'r,
As my eyes, straining tow'rd the distant plain,
Sent forth an anxious look, thro' clouds of dust
The savage bands appear'd; the western sun
Gleam'd on their burnish'd helms; and soon a shout
From the glad multitude proclaim'd th'approach
Of Timurkan; elated with new conquest,
The tyrant comes, and where his wrath will stop
Heav'n only knows. 





Oh! there there lies the thought
At which imagination starts, appall'd
With horror at the scene▪ her busy workings
Have colour'd to my sight there lies the thought
That wakens all a mother's fears alas!
I tremble for my son 





Your son! kind heav'n!
Have you not check'd his ardour? with your tears,
Your soft authority, restrain'd the hero
From the alarms of war? 






Thou little know'st his danger but that truth
Must never pass these lips. 






Doubts not my honest zeal full well you know
I bear this tyrant deep and mortal hate;
That under him I list, and wear this garb
In hopes that some occasion may arrive,
When I may strike an unexpected blow,
And do my country right.






Thy truth, and honour have been ever spotless.
Besides thy wrongs, thy countless wrongs, the wounds
He gave your injur'd family and name, 





Alas! those wounds must still lie bleeding here,
Untented by the hand of time Not all
His lenient arts, his favours heap'd upon me,
Shall cool the burning anguish of my soul.
What he, that slew my father! dragg'd my sister,
Blooming in years, to his detested bed!
Yes, tyrant, yes; thy unextinguish'd foe
Dwells in this bosom. Surely then to me
Mandane may reveal her griefs her wrongs
Will add new fuel to my hidden fires,
And make them burn more fiercely. 





Urge no more 
My woes must rest conceal'd yet should the tyrant
Learn from the captives of yon vanquish'd host,
That China's Orphan breathes the vital air,
And to himself unknown within his breast
Unconscious bears the gen'rous glowing flame
Of all the virtues of his royal line;
Oh! should they know that the dear youth survives,
That for his righteous cause this war began,
Their fury then would kindle to a blaze,
Might wrap the world in flames, and in the ruin
My blameless son might perish.






To multiply the ills that hover round you;
Nor from the stores of busy fancy add
New shafts to fortune's quiver. Zamti's care
Hath still deceiv'd suspicion's wakeful eye;


And o'er the mandarine his manners pure,
And sacred function have diffus'd an air
Of venerable awe, which e'en can teach
These northern foes to soften into men.





Yes, Mirvan, yes Religion wears a mien
In Zamti's person so severely mild,
That the fierce Scythian rests upon his spear,
And wonders what he feels. Such is the charm
Of heart-felt virtue; such is nature's force
That speaks abroad, and in rude northern hearts
Can stamp the image of an awful God.
From that source springs some hope: Wretch that I am!
Hope idly flutters on my trembling tongue,
While melancholy brooding o'er her wrongs,
Lays waste the mind with horror and despair.
 What noise is that? 





Compose this storm of grief;
In ev'ry sound your fancy hears the Tartar 
Your husband this way bends 






What lab'ring sighs heave in his breast? what terror
Rolls in the patriot's eye? haste, Mirvan, hence;
Again look out; gather the flying news,
And let me know each circumstance of ruin.





















Ah! what hast thou seen?
What hast thou heard? tell me, has fate decreed
The doom of China!





China is no more; 
The eastern world is lost this mighty empire
Falls with the universe beneath the stroke
Of savage force falls from its tow'ring hopes;
For ever, ever fall'n!





Yet why, ye pow'rs!
Why should a tyrant, train'd to lust and murder,
A lawless ravager from savage wilds,
Where chearful day ne'er dawns, but low'ring heav'n
For ever rolls a turbulence of clouds;
Why should a monster thus usurp the world,
And trample fair simplicity from ill
Beneath his ruffian feet? 






Those happy days, alas! are fled, when peace
Here nurs'd her blooming olives, and shed round
Her fost'ring influence. In vain the plan
Of sacred laws, by hoary elders taught,
Laws founded on the base of public weal,
Gave lessons to the world. In vain Confucius
Unlock'd his radiant stores of moral truth;
In vain bright science, and each tender muse,
Beam'd ev'ry elegance on polish'd life 
Barbarian pow'r prevails. Whate'er our sages taught,
Or genius could inspire, must fade away,
And each fair virtue wither at the blast
Of northern domination.






More fatal e'en than that, which first beheld
This race accurs'd within these palace walls,
Since hope, that balm of wretched minds, is now
Irrevocably lost. 





Name not the day
Which saw this city sack'd fresh stream my eyes,
Fresh bleeds my heart, whene'er the sad idea
Comes o'er my tortur'd mind. Why, cruel pow'rs!
Why in that moment could not Zamti fall?





Thy sanctity, the symbol of thy God,
Made ev'n the conqueror suspend his blow,
And murmur soft humanity. High heav'n
Protected thee for its own great designs;
To save the royal child, the new-born babe,
From the dire slaughter of his ancient line.





Yes, my Mandane, in that hour of carnage,
For purposes yet in the womb of time,
I was reserv'd. I was ordain'd to save
The infant boy; the dear, the precious charge,
The last of all my kings; full twenty years
I've hid him from the world and from himself,
And now I swear Kneel we together here,
While in this dreadful pause our souls renew
Their solemn purpose. 




Whose tutelary care hath watch'd the fate
Of China's Orphan, who hast taught his steps
The paths of safety, still envelop him
In sev'n fold night, till your own hour is come;
Till your flow justice see the dread occasion
To rouse his soul, and bid him walk abroad


Vicegerent of your pow'r; and if thy servant,
Or this his soft associate, ere defeat
By any word or deed the great design,
Then strait may all your horrible displeasure
Be launch'd upon us from your red right arm,
And in one ruin dash us both together,
The blasted monuments of wrath: 






Mandane vows ne'er to betray his cause,
Be it enroll'd in the records of heav'n!






And now my heart more lightly beats; methinks
With strength redoubled I can meet the shock
Of adverse fate.





And lo! the trial comes 
For see where Etan mourns See where the youth,
Unknowing of the storm that gathers o'er him,
Brings some new tale of woe. 








And you, my helpless mother, ah! where now,
Illustrious wretched pair, where will ye fly?
Where will your miseries now find a shelter?





In virtue I and this dear faithful woman,
We ask no more. 





Ah! quickly, Etan, say
What means that pallid look? what new event
Brings on the work of fate? 





Say, does the tyrant
Return unglutted yet with blood? 






Ev'n now his triumph moves within the gates
In dread barbaric pomp: the iron swarms
Of Hyperboreans troop along the streets,
Reeking from slaughter; while, from gazing crowds
Of their dire countrymen, an uproar wild
Of joy ferocious thro' th' astonish'd air
Howls like a northern tempest: O'er the rest,
Proud in superior eminence of guilt,
The tyrant rides sublime. Behind his car
The refuse of the sword, a captive train
Display their honest scars, and gnash their teeth
With rage and desperation. 











With these a youth, distinguish'd from the rest,
Proceeds in sullen march. Heroic fire
Glows in his cheek, and from his flashing eye
Beams amiable horror. 





What of this youth? 





Be not alarm'd, Mandane What of him?





On him all eyes were fix'd with eager gaze,
As if their spirits, struggling to come forth,
Would strain each visual nerve, while thro' the crowd
A busy murmur ran If same say right,
"Beneath that habit lurks a prince; the last


"Of China's race. The rumour spreads abroad
From man to man; and all with loud acclaim
Denounce their vengeance on him. 





Ha! what say'st thou, Etan?
Heav'ns how each black'ning hour in deeper horror
Comes charg'd with woe!





It cannot be. Ye vain,
Ye groundless terrors hence. 







Those eyes upturn'd to heav'n, alas! in vain,
Declare your inward conflict. 






I prithee leave me but a moment leave me. 
Heed not the workings of a sickly fancy,
Wrought on by ev'ry popular report.
Thou know'st with Morat I convey'd the infant
Far as the eastern point of Corea's realm;
There where no human trace is seen, no found
Assails the ear, save when the foaming surge
Breaks on the shelving beach, that there the youth
Might mock their busy search. Then check thy fears 
Retire, my love, awhile; I'll come anon, 
And fortify thy soul with firm resolve,
Becoming Zamti's wife. 






Shall never act unworthy of her lord.
Then hence I'll go, and satisfy each doubt
This youthful captive raises in my heart,


Quick panting with its fears. And O ye pow'rs!
Protect my son, my husband, and my king!








Come hither, Etan thou perceiv'st the toils
That now incircle me 






I see th'impending storm. But surely, sir,
Should this young captive prove the royal Orphan,
You'll never own th'important truth. 





Dream not, young man,
To stand secure, yet blooming into life,
While vengeance hovers o'er your father's head.
The stock once fall'n, each scyon must decay.





Then let me perish; witness for me, heav'n,
Could Etan's fall appease the tyrant's wrath,
A willing victim he would yield his life,
And ask no greater boon of heav'n.






So fervid in a stranger's cause 






My king a stranger! Sir, you never meant it 
Perhaps you would explore the fiery seeds
Of Etan's temper, ever prompt to blaze
At honour's sacred name. Perish the man,
Who, when his country calls him to defend
The rights of human kind, or bravely die,


Who then to glory dead can shrink aghast,
And hold a council with his abject fears.





These tow'rings of the soul, alas! are vain.
I know the Tartar well should I attempt
By any virtuous fraud to veil the truth,
His lion-rage again shall stalk abroad,
Again shall quaff the blood of innocence;
And for Zaphimri all the poor remains
Of China's matrons and her hoary fires,
Her blooming virgins, and her lisping babes,
Shall yield their throats to the fell murd'rer's knife,
And all be lost for ever 






Proclaim him to the world; each honest hand
Will grasp a sword, and, 'midst the circling guards,
Reach the usurper's heart or should they fail,
Should overwhelming bands obstruct the deed,
They'll greatly dare to die! better to die
With falling liberty, than basely lead
An ignominious life. Zaphimri lost,
Ne'er shall fair order dawn, but thro' the land
Slav'ry shall clank her chains, and violation,
Rapine, and murder riot at the will
Of lust and lawless pow'r.





Thou brave young man,
Indulge my fond embrace thy lovely ardor
It glads me thus to see. To ease at once
Thy gen'rous fears, the prince Zaphimri's safe;
Safe in my guardian care 






He does not then alarm you? 






I've nought to fear. 





Oh! sir, inform your son
Where is the royal youth?





Seek not too soon
To know that truth now I'll disclose the work,
The work of vengeance, which my lab'ring soul
Has long been fashioning. Ev'n at this hour
Stupendous ruin hovers o'er the heads
Of this accursed race 











I'll tell thee 
When Timurkan led forth his savage bands,
Unpeopling this great city, I then seiz'd
The hour, to tamper with a chosen few,
Who have resolv'd, when the barbarians lie
Buried in sleep and wine, and hotly dream
Their havock o'er again, then, then, my son,
In one collected blow to burst upon 'em;
Like their own northern clouds, whose midnight horror
Impending o'er the world, at length breaks forth
In the vaunt lightning's blaze, in storms and thunder
Thro' all the red'ning air, till frighted nature
Start from her couch, and waken to a scene
Of uproar and destruction. 












Mark me, young man. 
Seek thou my friends, Orasming and Zimventi.
In the dim holy cloisters of yon temple
Thou'lt find them musing near Osmingti's tomb
I charge they all convene; and there do thou
Await my coming. Bid them ne'er remit
Their high heroic ardor; let them know,
Whate'er shall fall on this old mould'ring clay,
The tyrant never shall subdue my mind.












_DREAM on, deluded tyrant; yes, dream on
In blind security: whene'er high heav'n
Means to destroy, it curses with illusion,
With error of the mind. Yes, wreak thy fury
Upon this captive youth; whoe'er he is,
If from his death this groaning empire rise,
Once more itself, resplendent, rich in arts
That humanize the world, he pays a debt
Due to his King, his Country, and his God.
His father, wheresoe'er he dwell, in tears
Shall tell the glory on his boy deriv'd;
And ev'n his mother, 'midst her matron shrieks,
Shall bless the childbed pang that brought him forth
To this great lot, by fate to few allow'd! 
What would'st thou, Mirvan? 








A rev'rend stranger craves access to Zamti 
His head hoary with age, with galling tears
His eyes suffus'd; his ev'ry look impatience 





Give him admittance 


How my spirits rush


Tumultuous to, my heart what may this mean?
Lo! where he comes 













Ha! thro' the veil
Of age, that face that mien Morat!






Let me once more embrace thee 







But wherefore art thou here? what of my boy?





Ah! what indeed? Ev'n from the ocean's margin,
Parch'd with the sun, or chill'd with midnight damps,
O'er hills, and rocks, and dreary continents,
In vain I've follow'd 





Why didst let him forth?





Think not thy Morat urg'd him to the deed.
His valour was the cause; and soon as fame
Proclaim'd the prince alive, the mighty din
Of preparation through all Corea's realm
Alarm'd his breast Indignant of controul
He burst his covert, and now, hapless youth 





Ah! dead! in battle fall'n! 






He drags the conqu'ror's chain. 






May still embrace her son. My boy may live,
To know the sweets of freedom, e'er he die.





Alas! the measure of your woes is full.
Unconscious of our frauds, the tyrant thinks
The prince his pris'ner in your son. 











Wild thro' the streets the foe calls out on Zamti.
Thee they pronounce the author of this fraud;
And on your Hamet threaten instant vengeance.





There was but this but this, ye cruel pow'rs,
And this you've heap'd upon me. Was it not
Enough to tear him from his mother's arms,
Doom'd for his prince to wander o'er the world?
 Alas! what needed more? Fond foolish eyes,
Stop your unbidden'gush tear, tear me piecemeal
 No, I will not complain but whence on him
Could that suspicion glance? 






E'er yet the battle join'd, a faithful messenger,
Who thro' the friendly gloom of night had held
His darkling way, and pass'd the Tartar's camp,
Brought me advices from the Corean chief, 
That soon as Hamet join'd the warlike train,
His story he related. Strait the gallant leader


With open arms receiv'd him knew him for thy son,
In secret knew him, nor reveal'd he aught
That touch'd his birth. But still the busy voice
Of fame, encreasing as she goes, through all the ranks
Babbled abroad each circumstance. By thee
How he was privately convey'd Sent forth
A tender infant to be rear'd in solitude,
A stranger to himself! The warriors saw
With what a graceful port he mov'd in arms,
An early hero! deem'd him far above
The common lot of life deem'd him Zaphimri,
And all with reverential awe beheld him.
This, this, my Zamti, reach'd the tyrant's ear,
And rises into horrid proof. 






Oh! what a sacrifice must now be made!






But when the secret shall be known 






Does thy poor bleeding country still remain
Dear to thy heart? Say, dost thou still revere
That holy pow'r above, Supreme of Beings,
Mistaken by the Bonzée, whom our fathers
Worshipp'd in happier days! 






For twenty years hath giv'n me strength in exile.





Then bending here, before, his awful throne,
Swear what I now unfold, shall ever lie
In sacred silence wrapp'd. 











Now mark me 
Morat my son  (turning aside.) Oh! cruel, cruel task,
To conquer nature while the heart-strings break; 





Why heave those sighs? and why that burst of grief?





My son his guiltless blood I cannot speak 






Ha! Wilt thou shed his blood? 





Thou wretched father! 






Oh! had you known the virtues of the youth;
His truth, his courage, his enlighten'd mind 





I prithee urge no more here nature's voice
Speaks in such pleadings: Such reproaches, Morat,
 Here in my very heart gives woundings here,
Thou can'st not know and only parents feel 





And wilt thou, cruel in thy tears 






In pity to a father cease Think, Morat,
Think of Zaphimri 





Ah! how fares the prince?





He fares, my Morat, like a God on earth,
Unknowing his celestial origin:
Yet quick, intense, and bursting into action;
His great heart labr'ing with he knows not what
Prodigious deeds! Deeds, which e'er long shall rouze,
Astonish, and alarm the world. 












Revenge, conquest, and freedom! 











Ay! Conquest and freedom!
The midnight hour shall call a chosen band
Of hidden patriots forth; who, when the foe
Sinks down in drunken revelry, shall pour
The gather'd rage of twenty years upon him,
And vindicate the eastern world. 






The news revives my soul. 





And can'st thou think
To save one vulgar life, that Zamti now
Will marr the vast design? No; let him bleed,
Let my boy bleed: In such a cause as this
I can resign my son with tears of joy Resign
him, and one complicated pang
Shall wrench him from my heart. 
The conqu'ror comes!
Warlike music within.


This is no hour for parlying Morat, hence,
And leave me to my fix'd resolve. 






Think of some means to save your Hamet. 






It cannot be the soul of Timurkan
Is bold and stirring when occasion calls,
He springs aloft, like an expanding fire,
And marks his way with ruin. Now he knows
Zaphimri lives, his fear will make him daring
Beyond his former crimes for joy and riot
Which this day's triumph brings, remorseless rage
And massacre succeed and all our hopes
Are blasted, for an unimportant boy.






That nearer sound proclaims his dread approach 
Yet once more, Zamti, think 





No more I'll send
Those shall conduct thee where Orasming lives 
There dwell, unseen of all. But, Morat, first
Seek my Mandane. Heav'ns! how shall I bear
Her strong impetuosity of grief,
When she shall know my fatal purpose? Thou
Prepare her tender spirit; sooth her mind,
And save, oh! save me from that dreadful conflict.




  22Two large Folding-gates in the Back-scene are burst open by the Tartars, and then enter TIMURKAN, with his Train.




Hail to this regal dome, this glitt'ring palace!
Where this inventive race have lavish'd all
Their elegance ye gay apartments, hail!
Beneath your storied roof, where mimic life
Glows the eye, and at the painter's touch
A new creation lives along the walls;
Once more receive a conqueror, arriv'd
From rougher scenes, where stern rebellion dar'd Draw
forth his phalanx; till this warlike arm
Hurl'd desolation on his falling ranks,
And now the monster, in yon field of death,
Lies overwhelm'd in ruin. 






No more to stalk thy realm; the eastern world
From this auspicious day, beneath your feet
Lies bound in adamantine chains. 






Shall Timurkan display his conqu'ring banners,
From high Samarcand's walls, to where the Tanais
Devolves his icy tribute to the sea. 





But first this captive prince. 






Zaphimri gluts my rage bring him before us first;
We'll crush the seeds of dark conspiracy 
For Zamti he, that false insidious slave,
Shall dearly pay his treasons. 






'Twere best to leave unpanish'd: vers'd in wiles
Of sly hypocrisy, he wins the love
Of the deluded multitude. 'Twould seem,
Should we inflict that death his frauds deserve,
As if we meant destruction to their faith:
When a whole people's minds are once inflam'd
For their religious rights, their fury burns
With rage more dreadful, as the source is holy. 





Octar, thou reason'st right: henceforth my art
To make this stubborn race receive my yoke,
Shall be by yielding to their softer manners,
Their vesture, laws, and customs: thus to blend
And make the whole one undistinguish'd people.
The boy comes forth in sullen mood what passions
Swell in his breast in vain! 








Thou art the youth,
Who mow'd our battle down, and flesh'd your sword
In many a slaughter'd Tartar. 





True; I am. 





Too well I mark'd thy rage, and saw thee hew
A wasteful passage thro' th'embattled plain.





Then be thou witness for me, in that hour
I never shunn'd your thickest war; and if
In yonder field, where my poor countrymen
In mangled heaps lie many a rood extended,
Kind fate had doom'd me to a noble fall,
With this right arm I earn'd it. 






Unsheath'd thy rebel blade, and bad thee seek
These wars? 





The love of honourable deeds;
The groans of bleeding China, and the hate
Of tyrants.





Ha! take heed, rash youth I see
This lesson has been taught thee. Octar, haste,
Seek me the mandarine let him forthwith
Attend me here. (Exit Octar.) Now tremble at my words!
Thy motive to these wars is known thou art
Zaphimri. 












Thou art Zaphimri thou! whom treach'rous guile
Stole from my rage, and sent to distant wilds,
Till years and horrid counsel should mature thee
For war and wild commotion. 






The last of China's race! nay mock not majesty,
Nor with the borrow'd robes of sacred kings
Dress up a wretch like me were I Zaphimri,
Think'st thou thy trembling eye could bear the shock
Of a much injur'd king? could'st thou sustain it?
Say, could'st thou bear to view a royal orphan,
Whose father, mother, brothers, sisters, all,
Thy murd'rous arm hath long since laid in dust?
Whose native crown on thy ignoble brow
Thou dar'st dishonour? whose wide wasted country
Thy arms have made a wilderness? 






Thou hast been tutor'd in thy lone retreat
By some sententious pedant. Soon these vain,
These turgid maxims shall be all subdued
By thy approaching death. 





Let death come on;
Guilt, guilt alone shrinks back appall'd the brave
And honest still defy his dare; the wise
Calmly can eye his frown; and misery
Invokes his friendly aid to end her woes. 





Thy woes, presumptuous youth, with all my fears,
Shall soon lie buried. 







Now, pious false one, say, who is that youth?





His air, his features, and his honest mien
Proclaim all fair within. But, mighty sir,
I know him not. 




Take heed, old man, nor dare, As thou do'st dread my pow'r, to practice guile Beneath a mask of sacerdotal perfidy: Priestcraft, I think, calls it a pious fraud.



Priestcraft and sacerdotal perfidy To me are yet unknown. Religion's garb Here never serves to consecrate a crime; We have not yet, thank heav'n, so far imbib'd The vices of the north. 





A vow Zaphimri, whom thy treach'rous arts
Conceal'd from justice; or else desolation
Again shall ravage this devoted land.





Alas! full well thou know'st, that arm already
Hath shed all royal blood. 





Traitor, 'tis false; 
By thee, vile slave, I have been wrought to think
The hated race destroy'd thy artful tale
Abus'd my cred'lous ear. But know, at length
Some captive slaves, by my command impal'd,
Have own'd the horrid truth; have own'd they fought
To feat Zaphimri on the throne of China.
Hear me, thou froward boy; dar'st thou be honest,
And answer who thou art? 





Dare I be honest? 
I dare; a mind grown up in native honour
Dares not be otherwise then if thy troops
Ask from the lightning of whose blade they fled,
Tell 'em 'twas Harriet's. 





'Tis it is my son 
My boy, my Hamet 






Where was your abode? 





Far hence remote, in Corea's happy realm 
Where the first beams of day with orient blushes
Tinge the fait wave there on the sea beat shore


A cavern'd rock yielded a lone retreat
To virtuous Morat. 












The pious hermit in that moss-grown dwelling
Found an asylum from heart-piercing woes,
From slav'ry, and that restless din of arms
With which thy fell ambition shook the world.
There too the sage nurtur'd my greener years;
With him and contemplation have I walk'd
The paths of wisdom; what the great Confucius
Of moral beauty taught, whate'er the wise,
Still wooing knowlege in her secret haunts,
Disclos'd of nature to the sons of men,
My wond'ring mind has heard but above all
The hermit taught me the most useful science,
That noble science, to be Brave and. Good. 





Oh! lovely youth at ev'ry word he utters,
A soft effusion mix'd of grief and joy
Flows o'er my heart.






Who, said he, was your father?





My birth, the pious sage, I know not why 
Still wrapp'd in silence; and when urg'd to tell,
He only answer'd that a time might come,
I should not blush to know my father. 






With truth declare, hast thou ne'er heard of Zamti?





Of Zamti? oft enraptur'd with his name


My heart has glow'd within me, as I heard
The praises of the godlike man. 








Each circumstance arraigns thy guilt. 





Oh! heav'ns! Can that be Zamti?





Yes, that is the traitor 





Let me adore his venerable form,
Thus on my knees adore 





I cannot look upon him,
Left tenderness dissolve my feeble pow'rs,
And wrest my purpose from me 







Thou specious traitor, thou false hoary moralist!


Confusion has o'erta'en thy subtle frauds.
To make my crown's assurance firm, that none
Hereafter shall aspire to wrench it from me,
Now own your fancied king; or, by yon heav'n,
To make our vengeance sure, thro' all the east
Each youth shall die, and carnage thin mankind,
Till in the gen'ral wreck your boasted Orphan
Shall undistinguish'd fall. Thou know'st my word
Is fate. Octar, draw near when treason lurks
Each moment's big with danger thou observe
These my commands 



Talks apart to Octar.



Now virtuous cruelty repress my tears.
 Cease your soft conflict, nature. Hear me, Tartar. 
That youth his air his ev'ry look, unmans me quite. 





Wilt thou begin, dissembler?





Down, down, down 
It must be so, or all is lost That youth, 
I've dealt by him as ev'ry king could wish
In a like case his faithful subjects would.





Ha! dost thou own it? Triumph, Timurkan,
And in Zaphimri's grave lie hush'd my fears.
Brave Octar, let the victim strait be led
To yonder sacred fane; there, in the view
Of my rejoicing Tartars, the declining fun
Shall see him offer'd to our living Lama,
For this day's conquest: thence a golden train
Of radiant years, shall mark my future sway.






Flow, flow my tears, and ease this aching breast.





Nay, do not weep for me, thou good old man.
If it will close the wounds of bleeding China,
That a poor wretch like me must yield his life,
I give it freely. If I am a king,
Tho' sure it cannot be, what greater blessing
Can a young prince enjoy, than to diffuse,
By one great act, that happiness on millions,
For which his life should be a round of care?
Come, lead me to my fate. 








Hold, hold my heart!
 My gallant, gen'rous youth! Mandane's air,
His mother's dear resemblance rives my soul.






Oh! let me fly, and find the barb'rous man 
Where where is Zamti? 





Ha! 'tis Mandane 
Wild as the winds, the mother all alive
In ev'ry heartstring, the forlorn one comes
To claim her boy. 







And can It then be true?
Is human nature exil'd from thy breast?
Art thou, indeed, so barb'rous? 






Fix not your scorpions here a bearded shaft
Already drinks my spirits up. 






'The trusty Morat Oh! I've heard it all. 
He would have shunn'd my steps; but what can 'scape
The eye of tenderness like mine? 






I cannot speak to thee. 





Think'st thou those tears,
Those false, those cruel tears, will choak the voice


Of a fond mother's love, How stung to madness?
Oh! I will rend the air with lamentations,
Root up this hair, and beat this throbbing breast,
Turn all connubial joys to bitterness,
To fell despair, to anguish and remorse,
Unless my son 





Thou ever faithful woman,
Oh! leave me to my woes. 





Give me my child,
Thou worse than Tartar, give me back my son;
Oh! give him to a mother's eager arms,
And let me strain him to my heart. 






How dear my boy is here: But our first duty
Now claims attention to our country's love,
All other tender fondnesses must yeild;
 I was a subject e'er I was a father.





You were a savage bred in Scythian wilds,
And humanizing pity never reach'd
Your heart. Was it for this oh! thou unkind one,
Was it for this oh! thou inhuman father,
You woo'd me to your nuptial bed? So long
Have I then clasp'd thee in these circling arms,
And made this breast your pillow? Cruel, say.
Are these your vows? are these your fond endearments?
Nay, look upon me if this wasted form,
These faded eyes have turn'd your heart against me,
With grief for you I wither'd in my bloom.





Why with them pierce my heart?






Have I then bore thee in these matron arms,
To see thee bleed? Thus dost thou then return?
This could your mother hope, when first she sent
Her infant exile to a distant clime?
Ah! could I think thy early love of fame,
Would urge thee to this peril? thus to fall,
By a stern father's will by thee to die! 
From thee, inhuman, to receive his doom! 
 Murder'd by thee! Yet hear me, Zamti, hear me 
Thus on my knees I threaten now no more 
'Tis nature's voice that pleads; nature alarm'd,
Quick, trembling, wild, touch'd to her inmost feeling,
When force would tear her tender young ones from her.





Nay, seek not with enfeebling fond ideas
To swell the flood of grief it is in vain 
He must submit to fate. 







He shall not die rather I prithee, Zamti,
Urge not a grief-distracted woman: Tremble
At the wild fury of a mother's love.





I tremble rather at a breach of oaths.
But thou break thine. Bathe your perfidious hands
In this life blood. Betray the righteous cause
Of all our sacred kings.





Our kings! our kings!
What are the scepter'd rulers of the world? 
Form'd of one common clay, are they not all
Doom'd with each subject, with the meanest slave,


To drink the cup of human woe? alike
All levell'd by affliction? Sacred kings!
'Tis human policy sets up their claim. 
Mine is a mother's cause mine is the cause
Of husband, wife, and child; those tend'rest ties!
Superior to your right divine of kings! 





Then go, Mandane thou once faithful woman,
Dear to this heart in vain; go, and forget
Those virtuous lessons, which I oft have taught thee,
In fond credulity, while on each word
You hung enamour'd. Go, to Timurkan
Reveal the awful truth. Be thou spectatress
Of murder'd majesty. Embrace your son,
And let him lead in shame and servitude
A life ignobly bought. Then let those eyes,
Those faded eyes, which grief for me hath dimm'd,
With guilty joy reanimate their lustre,
To brighten slavery, and beam their fires
On the fell Scythian murderer.





And is it thus,
Thus is Mandane known? My soul disdains
The vile imputed guilt. No never never 
Still am I true to fame. Come lead me hence,
Where I may lay down life to save Zaphimri,
 But save my Hamet too. Then, then you'll find
A heart beats here, as warm and great as thine.





Then make with me one strong, one glorious effort;
And rank with those, who, from the first of time,
In fame's eternal archives stand rever'd,
For conqu'ring all the dearest ties of nature,
To serve the gen'ral weal. 






Loses with me its horrid charms. I've sworn
To save my king. But should a mother turn
A dire assassin oh! I cannot bear
The piercing thought. Distraction, quick distraction
Will seize my brain. See there My child, my child, 
By guards surrounded, a devoted victim. 
Barbarian hold! Ah! see, he dies! he dies! 



She faints into Zamti's arms.




Where is Arsace? Fond maternal love
Shakes her weak frame  (Enter Arsace.) Quickly, Arsace, help
This ever-tender creature. Wand'ring life
Rekindles in her cheek. Soft, lead her off
To where the fanning breeze in yonder bow'r,
May woo her spirits back. Propitious heav'n?
Pity the woundings of a father's heart;
Pity my strugglings with this best of women;
Support our virtue: kindle in our souls
A ray of your divine enthusiasm;
Such as inflames the patriot's breast, and lifts
Th' impassion'd mind to that sublime of virtue,
That even on the rack it feels the good,
Which in a single hour it works for millions,
And leaves the legacy to after times.














_THIS is the place these the long winding isles,
The solemn arches, whose religious awe
Attunes the mind to melancholy musing,
Such as befits free men reduc'd to slaves. 
Here Zamti meets his friends amid these tombs,
Where lie the sacred manes of our kings,
They pour their orisons hold converse here
With the illustrious shades of murder'd heroes,
And meditate a great revenge  (a groan is heard) a groan!
The burst of anguish from some care-worn wretch
That sorrows o'er his country ha! 'tis Zamti!

ZAMTI comes out of a tomb.




Who's he, that seeks these mansions of the dead?





The friend of Zamti and of China. 






Come to my arms, thou good, thou best of men 
I have been weeping o'er the sacred reliques


Of a dear murder'd king where are our friends?
Hast seen Orasming?





Thro' these vaults of death
Lonely he wanders, plung'd in deep despair. 





Hast thou not told him? hast thou nought reveal'd
Touching Zaphimri?





There I wait thy will 





Oh! thou art ever faithful on thy lips
Sits pensive silence, with her hallow'd finger
Guarding the pure recesses of thy mind. 
But, lo! they come. 








Droop ye, my gallant friends?





Oh! Zamti, all is lost Our dreams of liberty
Are vanish'd into air. Nought now avails
Integrity of life. Ev'n heav'n, combin'd
With lawless might, abandons us and virtue 





Can your great souls thus shrink within ye? thus
From heroes will ye dwindle into slaves?





Oh! could you give us back Zaphimri! then
Danger would smile, and lose its face of horror.





What, would his presence fire ye!











This night should free us from the Tartar's yoke.





Then mark the care of the all-gracious Gods!
This youthful captive, whom in chains they hold,
Is not Zaphimri. 












Unconscious of himself, and to the world unknown,
He walks at large among us 











This night, my friends, this very night to rise
Refulgent from a blow, that frees us all, 
From the usurper's fate! the first of men,
Deliv'rer of his country!






Can this be possible? 





It is most true 
I'll bring him to ye strait  (calling to Etan within the tomb)
 what ho! come forth 
You seem transfix'd with wonder oh! my friends,
Watch all the motions of your rising spirit,
Direct your ardor, when anon ye hear
What fate, long pregnant with the vast event,
Is lab'ring into birth. 




ETAN comes out of the tomb.




Each step I move
A deeper horror sits on all the tombs;
Each shrine, each altar seems to shake; as if
Conscious of some important crisis. 






A crisis great indeed, is now at hand! 
Heav'n holds its golden balance forth, and weighs
Zaphimri's and the Tartar's destiny,
While hov'ring angels tremble round the beam.
Hast thou beheld that picture?






Hath paus'd on ev'ry part; yet still to me
It shadows forth the forms of things unknown; 
All imag'ry obscure, and wrapp'd in darkness.





That darkness my informing breath shall clear,
As morn dispels the night. Lo! here display'd
This mighty kingdom's fall. 






At sight of these sad colourings of woe,
Our tears will mix with honest indignation.





Nay, but survey it closer see that child,
That royal infant, the last sacred relict
Of China's ancient line see where a mandarine
Conveys the babe to his wife's fost'ring breast,
There to be nourish'd in an humble state;
While their own son is sent to climes remote;
That, should the dire usurper e'er suspect


The prince alive, he in his stead might bleed,
And mock the murd'rer's rage. 






Thro' all my frame, and my mind, big with wonder,
Feels ev'ry pow'r suspended. 






That strong imagination burns within thee. 
Do'st thou not feel a more than common ardor? 





By heav'n my soul dilates with some new impulse;
Some strange inspir'd emotion would the hour
Of fate were come this night my dagger's hilt
I'll bury in the tyrant's heart. 











By all the mighty dead, that round us lie,
By all who this day groan in chains, I will.





And when thou dost then tell him 'tis the prince
That strikes. 





The prince's wrongs shall nerve my arm
With tenfold rage.





Nay, but the prince himself!





What says my father? 





Thou art China's Orphan;
The last of all our kings no longer Etan,
But now Zaphimri!











O wond'rous hand Of heav'n!





A crow'd of circumstances rise 
Thy frequent hints obscure thy pious care
To train my youth to greatness. Lend your aid
To my astonish'd pow'rs, that feebly bear
This unexpected shock of royalty.





Thou noble youth, now put forth all your strength,
And let heav'n's vengeance brace each sinew. 






That word has shot its light'ning thro' my soul. 
But tell me, Zamti still 'tis wonder all 
Am I indeed the Royal Orphan? 






Thou art the king, whom as my humble son,
I've nurtur'd in humanity and virtue.
Thy foes could never think to find thee here,
Ev'n in the lion's den; and therefore here
I've fix'd thy safe asylum, while my son
Hath dragg'd his life in exile. Oh! my friends,
Morat will tell ye all, each circumstance 
Mean time there is your king! 


All kneel to him.



Long live the Father of the eastern world!





Sole governor of earth! 






Is then a great revenge for all the wrongs
Of bleeding China; are the fame and fate
Of all posterity included here
Within my bosom? 






Yes; they are; the shades
Of your great ancestors now rise before thee,
Heroes and demi-gods! Aloud they call
For the fell Tartar's blood .






That can alarm the pow'rs of man, now stirs
In this expanding breast. 






With hideous ruin on the foe. My gallant heroes,
Are our men station'd at their posts?











Is ev'ry gate secur'd?











The signal fix'd? 





It is: Will Mirvan join us?





Doubt him not. 
In bitterness of soul he counts his wrongs,
And pants for vengeance would have join'd us here,


But, favour'd as he is, his post requires him
About the Tartar's person. The assault begun,
He'll turn his arms upon th' astonish'd foe,
And add new horrors to the wild commotion.





Now, bloody spoiler, now thy hour draws nigh,
And e'er the dawn thy guilty reign shall end.





How my heart burns within me! Oh! my friends,
Call now to mind the scene of desolation,
Which Timurkan, in one accursed hour,
Heap'd on this groaning land. Ev'n now I see
The savage bands, o'er reeking hills of dead,
Forcing their rapid way. I see them urge
With rage unhallow'd to this sacred temple,
Where good Osmingti, with his queen and children,
Fatigu'd the Gods averse. See where Arphisa,
Rending the air with agonizing shrieks,
Tears her dishevell'd hair: Then, with a look
Fix'd on her babes, grief choaks its passage up,
And all the feelings of a mother's breast
Throbbing in one mix'd pang, breathless she faints
Within her husband's arms. Adown his cheek,
In copious streams fast flow'd the manly sorrow;
While clust'ring round his knees his little offspring,
In tears all-eloquent, with arms outstretch'd,
Sue for parental aid. 





Go on the tale
Will fit me for a scene of horror. 






The charge, which your great father gave me, still
Sounds in my ear. E'er yet the foe burst in,
"Zamti," said he Ah! that imploring eye! 


That agonizing look! 
"Preserve my little boy, my cradled infant 
"Shield him from ruffians Train his youth to virtue: 
"Virtue will rouze him to a great revenge;
"Or failing Virtue will still make him happy.
He could no more the cruel spoiler seiz'd him,
And dragg'd my king my ever honour'd king, 
The father of his people, basely dragg'd him
By his white rev'rend locks, from yonder altar,
Here, on the blood-stain'd pavement; while the queen,
And her dear fondlings, in one mangled heap,
Died in each other's arms. 






With more than lion's nerve I'll spring upon him,
And at one blow relieve the groaning world.
Let us this moment carry sword and fire
To yon devoted walls, and whelm him down
In ruin and dismay. 






By rashness you may marr a noble cause.
To you, my friends, I render up my charge 
To you I give your king. Farewell, my sov'reign. 





Thou good, thou godlike man a thousand feelings
Of warmest friendship all the tendencies
Of heart-felt gratitude are struggling here,
And fain would speak to thee, my more than father.
 Farewel; sure we shall meet again. 











Farewell Zamti, farewell. (Embraces him) Orasming, now


The noblest duty calls us. Now remember
We are the men, whom from all human kind
Our fate hath now selected, to come forth
Asserters of the public weal; to drench our swords
In the oppressor's heart; to do a deed
Which heav'n, intent on its own holy work,
Shall pause with pleasure to behold 






May the Most High
Pour down his blessings on him; and anon,
In the dead waste of night, when awful justice
Walks with her crimson steel o'er slaughter'd heaps
Of groaning Tartars, may he then direct
His youthful footsteps thro' the paths of peril;
Oh may he guide the horrors of the storm,
An Angel of your wrath, to point your vengeance
On ev'ry guilty head. Then, then 'twill be enough,
When you have broken the oppressor's rod,
Your reign will then be manifest Mankind will see
That truth and goodness still obtain your care  A dead march.

What mean those deathful sounds? Again! They lead
My boy to slaughter Oh! look down, ye heavens!
Look down propitious! Teach me to subdue
That nature which ye gave. 









Here let the victim fall, and with his blood
Wash his forefather's tomb. Here ends the hated race. 
The eastern world thro' all her wide domain,


Shall then submissive feel the Scythian yoke,
And yield to Timurkan. 



HAMET. Standing by the tomb.


Where is the tyrant? I would have him see,
With envy see, th' unconquer'd pow'r of virtue;
How it can calmly bleed, smile on his racks,
And with strong pinion soar above his pow'r,
To regions of perennial day 






Of the whole eastern world shall mark thee well,
When at to-morrow's dawn thy breathless corse
Is born thro' all our streets for public view.
It now befits thee to prepare for death.





I am prepar'd. I have no lust or rapine,
No murders to repent of. Undismay'd
I can behold all-judging heav'n, whose hand
Still compassing its wond'rous ends, by means
Inextricable to all mortal clue,
Hath now inclos'd me in its awful maze.
Since 'tis by your decree that thus beset
Th' inexorable angel hovers o'er me,
Be your great bidding done. 






Thirsts for his blood then let its light'ning fall
On his aspiring head. 








Off, set me free. Inhuman, barb'rous ruffians. 





What means that woman with dishevell'd hair,
And wild extravagance of woe? 






Scorn all restraint I must I will have way. 
She enters, and throws herself on her knees.
Me, me, on me convert your rage plunge deep,
Deep in this bosom your abhorred steel,
But spare his precious life. 






This wild, this frantic woman. 






You shall not force me hence. Here will I cling
Fast to the earth, and rivet here my hands,
In all the fury of the last despair.
He is my child, my dear, dear son. 





How, woman! Saidst thou your son? 





Yes, Octar, yes; my son, My boy, my Hamet (she rises and embraces him.)

Let my frantic love
Fly all unbounded to him oh! my child my child! 





Suspend the stroke, ye ministers of death,
Till Timurkan hear of this new event.
Mean time, thou Mirvan, speed in quest of Zamti,
And let him answer here this wond'rous tale.






The time demands his presence; or despair
May wring each secret from her tender breast. Aside.

And then our glorious, fancied pile of freedom
At one dire stroke, shall tumble into nought.






Why did'st thou dare return? ah! rather why
Did'st thou so long defer with ev'ry grace,
And ev'ry growing virtue, thus to raise
Your mother's dear delight to rapture?






In the deep mists of darkling ignorance,
To me my birth's unknown but sure that look,
Those tears, those shrieks, that animated grief
Defying danger, all declare th'effect
Of nature's strugglings in a parent's heart.
Then let me pay my filial duty here,
Kneel to her native dignity, and pour
In tears of joy the transport of a son. 





Thou art, thou art my son thy father's face,
His ev'ry feature, blooming in his boy.
Oh! tell me, tell me all; how hast thou liv'd
With faithful Morat? how did he support
In dreary solitude thy tender years? 
How train thy growing mind? oh! quickly tell me,
Oh! tell me all, and charm me with thy tongue.





Mysterious pow'rs! have I then liv'd to this,
In th' hour of peril thus to find a parent,
In virtue firm, majestic in distress,
At length to feel unutterable bliss
In her dear circling arms 









Where is this wild
Outrageous woman, who with frantic grief


Suspends my dread command tear 'em asunder, 
Send her to some dark cell to rave and shriek
And dwell with madness and let instant death
Leave that rash youth a headless trunk before me.





Now by the ever-burning lamps that light
Our holy shrines, by great Confucius' altar,
By the prime source of life, and light, and being,
That is my child, the blossom of my joys 
Send for his cruel father, he 'tis he
Intends a fraud he, for a stranger's life,
Would yield his offspring to the cruel ax,
And rend a wretched mother's brain with madness.




Sure the sad accents of Mandane's voice
Struck on my frighted sense. 





Once more, thou slave! 
Who is that stubborn youth?






This iteration of my griefs?






Thou marble-hearted father! 'tis your child,
And would'st thou see him bleed? 





On him! on him
Let fall your rage, and ease my soul at once
Of all its fears. 





Oh! my devoted child!






Support her, heav'n! support her tender frame 
Now, tyrant, now I beg to live  (kneels) lo! here
I plead for life; not for the wretched boon
To breathe the air, which thy ambition taints; 
But oh! to ease a mother's pains; for her,
For that dear object, oh! let me live for her.





Now by the conquests this good sword has won,
In her wild vehemence of grief I hear
The genuine voice of nature.






Ah! where is he?
He is my son my child and not Zaphimri 
Oh! let me clasp thee to my heart thy hard,
Thy cruel father shall not tear thee from me. 





Hear me, thou frantic mourner, dry those tears 
Perhaps you still may save this darling son. 





Ah! quickly name the means. 





Give up your king,
Your phantom of a king, to sate my vengeance.





Oh! my much honour'd mother, never hear
The base, the dire proposal let me rather
Exhaust my life-blood at each gushing vein.
Mandane then, then you may well rejoice
To find your child, then you may truly know
The best delight a mother's heart can prove,
When her son dies with glory. 






The stripling's pride 



Talks apart with Octar.




Ye mighty shades of China's, royal line,
Forgive the joy that mingles with my tears,
When I behold him still alive, Propitious pow'rs!
You never meant entirely to destroy
This bleeding country, when your kind indulgence
Lends us a youth like him. 
Oh! I can hold no more let me infold
That lovely ardor in his father's arms 
My brave, my gen'rous boy! 






Dost thou at length
Confess it, traitor? 





Yes, I boast it, tyrant;
Boast it to thee, to earth and heav'n I boast,
This, this is Zamti's son. 





At length the hour,
The glorious hour is come, by Morat promis'd,
"When Hamet shall not blush to know his father."






Oh! thou intrepid youth! what bright reward
Can your glad sire bestow on such desert? 
The righteous Gods, and your own inward feelings
Shall give the sweetest retribution. Now,
Mandane, now my soul forgives thee all,
Since I have made acquaintance with my son;
Thy lovely weakness I can now excuse;
But oh! I charge thee by a husband's right 





A husband's right! a traitor has no right 
Society disclaims him Woman, hear 
Mark well my words discolour not thy soul
With the black hue of crimes like his renounce
All hymeneal vows, and take again,
Your much lov'd boy to his fond mother's arms,
While justice whirls that traitor to his fate.





Thou vile adviser! what, betray my lord,
My honour'd husband turn a Scythian wise!
Forget the many years of fond delight,
In which my soul ne'er knew decreasing love,
Charm'd with his noble, all accomplish'd mind!
No, tyrant, no; with him I'll rather die;
With him in ruin more supremely blest,
Than guilt triumphant on its throne. 






Inhuman tyrant, I defy thy pow'r 
Lo! here, the father, mother, and the son!
Try all your tortures on us here we stand
Resolv'd to leave a tract of bright renown
To mark our beings all resolv'd to die
The votaries of honour! 





Then die ye shall what ho! guards, seize the slaves,
Deep in some baleful dungeon's midnight gloom
Let each apart be plung'd and Etan too 
Let him be forthwith found he too shall share
His father's fate. 





Be it my task, dread sir,
To make the rack ingenious in new pains,


Till even cruelty almost relent
At their keen, agonizing groans. 






Be that thy care. Now by th'immortal Lama
I'll wrest this myst'ry from 'em else the dawn
Shall see me up in arms 'gainst Corea's chief
I will unfurl my banners his proud cities
Shall dread my thunder at their gates, and mourn
Their smoaking ramparts o'er his verdant plains
And peaceful vales I'll drive my warlike carr,
And deluge all the east with blood. 






Mandane, summon all thy strength. My son,
Thy father doubts not of thy fortitude.






Mirvan, do thou bear hence those miscreant slaves.







Allow me but one last embrace 







Would I could rescue thee. 






























_HERE stretch'd at length on the dank ground he lies;
Scorning his fate. Your meeting must be short. 











And yet I tremble for th' event; 
Why would'st thou venture to this place of danger?





And can'st thou deem me then so mean of spirit,
To dwell secure in ignominious safety;
With cold insensibility to wait
The ling'ring hours, with coward patience wait 'em,
O'er Zamti's house while ruin nods? 






Thy fate's suspended on each dreadful moment.





I will hold converse with him; ev'n tho' death
Were arm'd against the interview. 





  54HAMET, still on the ground.


 What wouldst thou, Tartar?





Rise, noble youth, no vulgar errand mine 






Now speak thy purpose, 





Under this disguise 





If under that disguise, a murd'rer's dagger
Thirst for my blood thus I can meet the blow.






No ruffian's purpose lurks within this bosom.
To these lone walls, where oft the Scythian stabber
With murd'rous stride hath come; these walls that oft
Have see th'assassin's. deeds; I bring a mind
Firm, virtuous, upright. Under this vile garb,
Lo! here a son of China. 







Denotes a son of China; and those eyes
Roll with no black intent. Say on 





Inflam'd with admiration of heroic deeds,
I come to seek acquaintance with the youth,
Who for his king would bravely die. 






Dost thou applaud the deed? 





By heav'n, I do. 


Yes, virtuous envy rises in my soul 
Thy ardor charms me, and ev'n now I pant
To change conditions with thee. 






Accepts thy proffer'd friendship; in a base,
A prone, degen'rate age, when foreign force,
And foreign manners have o'erwhelm'd us all,
And sunk our native genius; thou retain'st
A sense of ancient worth. But wherefore here,
To this sad mansion, this abode of sorrow,
Com'st thou to know a wretch that soon must die? 





By heav'n, thou shalt not die I come to speak
The gladsome tidings of a happier fate. 
By me Zaphimri sends 






Kind pow'rs! Where is the king? 





His steps are safe;
Unseen as is the arrow's path. By me he says,
He knows, he loves, he wonders at thy virtue. 
By me he swears, rather than thou should'st fall,
He will emerge from dark obscurity,
And greatly brave his fate. 





Ha! die for me!
For me, ignoble in the scale of being;
An unimportant wretch! Whoe'er thou art,
I prithee, stranger, bear my answer back 
Oh! tell my sov'reign that here dwells a heart
Superior to all peril. When I fall,
A worm, an insect dies! But in his life.
Are wrapp'd the glories of our ancient line,


The liberties of China! Then let him
Live for his people Be it mine to die.





Can I bear this, ye pow'rs, and not dissolve
In tears of gratitude and love? 







That flood of grief? and why that stifled groan?
Thro' the dark mist his sorrow casts around him,
He seems no common man. Say, gen'rous youth,
Who and what art thou? 





Who and what am I! 
Thou lead'st me to a precipice, from whence
Downward to look, turns wild the mad'ning brain,
Scar'd at th'unfathomable deep below. 
Who, and what am I! Oh! the veriest wretch
That ever yet groan'd out his soul in anguish.
One lost, abandon'd, hopeless, plung'd in woe
Beyond redemption's aid. To tell thee all
In one dire word, big with the last distress,
In one accumulated term of horror, Zaphimri! 











He! that fatal wretch;
Exalted into misery supreme.
Oh! I was happy, while good Zamti's son
I walk'd the common tracts of life, and strove
Humbly to copy my imagin'd sire. But now 





Yes now if thou art He as sure


'Tis wond'rous like rais'd to a state, in which
A nation's happiness on thee depends.





A nation's happiness! There, there I bleed 
There a•e my pangs. For me this war began 
For me hath purple slaughter drench'd yon fields 
I am the cause of all. I forg'd those chains 
For Zamti and Mandane too Oh! heav'ns! 
Them have I thrown into a dungeon's gloom. 
These are the horrors of Zaphimri's reign. 
 I am the tyrant! I ascend the throne
By trampling on the neck of innocence;
By base ingratitude; by the vile means
Of selfish cowardice, that can behold
Thee, and thy father, mother, all in chains,
All lost, all murder'd, that I thence may rise
Inglorious to a throne! 






Thy wild disorder'd fancy pictures forth
Ills, that are not or, being ills, not worth
A moment's pause 





Not ills! thou can'st not mean it. 
Oh! I'm environ'd with the worst of woes; 
The angry fates, amidst their hoards of vengeance,
Had nought but this they meant to render me
Peculiarly distress'd. Tell me, thou gallant youth,
 A soul like thine knows ev'ry fine emotion, 
Is there a nerve, in which the heart of man
Can prove such torture, as when thus it meets
Unequal'd friendship, honour, truth, and love,
And no return can make? Oh! 'tis too much,
Ye mighty Gods, too much thus, thus to be
A feeble prince, a shadow of a king,


Without the pow'r to wreak revenge on guilt,
 Without the pow'r of doing virtue right. 





That power will come. 





But when? when thou art lost, 
When Zamti and Mandane are destroy'd 
Oh! for a dagger's point, to plunge it deep,
Deep in this ha! Deep in the tyrant's heart. 





There your revenge should point. For that great deed
Heav'n hath watch'd all thy ways; and wilt thou now
With headlong rage spurn at its guardian care,
Nor wait the movements of eternal Justice? 





Ha! whither has my phrenzy stray'd? Yes, heav'n
Has been all-bounteous. Righteous pow'rs! 
To you my orisons are due But oh!
Complete your goodness: Save this valiant youth; 
Save Zamti's house; and then, if such your will,
That from the Tartar's head my arm this night
Shall grasp the crown of China teach me then
To bear your dread vicegerency I stand
Resign'd to your high will. 





And heav'n, I trust,
Will still preserve thee; in its own good time
Will finish its decrees. 






A gleam of hope remains. Should Timurkan
D•fer his murder to the midnight hour,


Then will I come, then burst these guilty walls,
Rend those vile manacles, and give thee freedom.





Oh! no you must not risk 





A band of heroes
For this are ready; honourably leagu'd
To vindicate their rightis. Thy father's care
Plann'd and inspir'd the whole. Among the troops
Nay in his very guards, there are not wanting
Some gallant sons of China, in that hour,
Who will discover their long-pent-up fury,
And deal destruction round. 






And ev'ry thing dispos'd?






In silent terror all intent they stand,
And wait the signal in each gale that blows.





Why did'st thou venture forth?






While my friends die! that thought but, generous youth,
I'll not think meanly of thee No that thought
Is foreign to thy heart. 





But think, my prince,
On China's wrongs, the dying heroes' groans;
Think on thy ancestors. 






What is't to me a long-descended line,
A race of worthies, legislators, heroes,
 Unless I bring their virtues too? No more 


Thy own example fires me. Near this place
I'll take my stand, and watch their busy motions,
Until the gen'ral roar; then will I come,
And arm thee for th' assault. 





Oh! if thou do'st,
Yet once again I'll wield the deathful blade,
And bear against the foe. 





Yes, thou and I
Will rush together thro' the paths of death,
Mow down our way, and with sad overthrow
Pursue the Tartar like two rushing torrents,
That from the mountain's top, 'midst roaring caves,
'Midst rocks and rent-up trees, foam headlong down,
And each depopulates his way. 


A flourish of trumpets.




That sudden and wild harmony? 






The conqu'ror, and his fell barbaric rout,
For this day's victory indulge their joy;
Joy soon to end in groans for all conspires
To forward our design and lo! the lights
That whilom blaz'd to heav'n, now rarely seen
Shed a pale glimmer, and the foe secure
Sinks down in deep debauch; while all awake,
The genius of this land broods o'er the work
Of justice and revenge. 






Still unsuspecting plunge in guilty joy,
And bury thee in riot. 






To wake from that vile trance for e'er the dawn,
Detested spoiler, thy hot blood shall smoke
On the stain'd marble, and thy limbs abhorr'd
I'll scatter to the dogs of China. 







Break off your conf'rence Octar this way comes.





This garb will cloak me from each hostile eye;
Thou need'st not fear detection. 







There's your pris'ner. 







Lead him to where Mandane's matron grief
Rings thro' yon vaulted roof. 





Oh! lead me to her;
Let me give balm to her afflicted mind;
And soften anguish in a parent's breast.







What may this mean? I dread some lurking mischief. 






When the boy clings around his mother's heart
In fond endearment, then to tear him from her,
Will once again awaken all her tenderness,
And in her impotence of grief, the truth


At length will burst its way. But Timurkan
mpatient comes. 







Thus with disorder'd looks,
Why will my sov'reign shun the genial banquet,
To seek a dungeon's gloom?






A more than midnight gloom involves my soul.
Hast thou beheld this stubborn mandarine?





I have; and tried by ev'ry threaten'd vengeance
To bend his soul: Unconquer'd yet by words
He smiles contempt; as if some inward joy,
Like the sun lab'ring in a night of clouds,
Shot forth its glad'ning unresisted beams,
Chearing the face of woe. 





What of Mandane? 





At first with tears and bitter lamentations
She call'd on Hamet lost; but when I urg'd,
She still might, save her boy, and save herself,
Would she but give Zaphimri to your wrath,
Her tears forgot to flow; her voice, her look,
Her colour sudden chang'd, and all her form
Enlarging with th' emotions of her soul,
Grew vaster to the sight. With blood-shot eyes
She cast a look of silent indignation,
Then turn'd in sullen mood away.





Perdition O'erwhelm her pride. 





Might I advise you, sir,
An artful tale of love should softly glide
To her afflicted soul a conqu'ror's sighs
Will waft a thousand wishes to her heart,
Till female vanity aspire to reach
The eastern throne; and when her virtue melts
In the soft tumult of her gay desires,
Win from her ev'ry truth; then spurn to shame
The weak, deluded woman. 






I cannot stoop with love-sick adulation
To thrill in languishing desire, and try
The hopes, the fears, and the caprice of love.
Enur'd to rougher scenes, far other arts
My mind employ'd, to fling the well-stor'd quiver
O'er this manly arm, and wing the dart
At the fleet rain-deer, sweeping down the vale,
Or up the mountain, straining ev'ry nerve:
To vault the neighing steed, and urge his course
Swifter than whirlwinds thro' the ranks of war
To drive my chariot-wheels, smoaking with gore:
These are my passions, this my only science,
Above the puling sicknesses of love.
Bring that vile slave, the hoary priest, before me.







By heav'n their fortitude erects a fence
To shield 'em from my wrath, more pow'rful far
Than their high-boasted wall, which long hath stood
The shock of time, of war, of storms, and thunder,
The wonder of the world! 
What art thou, Virtue, who can'st thus inspire
This stubborn pride, this dignity of soul,
And still unfading, beauteous in distress,
Can'st taste of joys, my heart hath never known?








Mark me, thou traitor, thy detested sight
Once more I brook, to try if yet the sense
Of deeds abhorr'd as thine, has touch'd your soul.
Or clear this myst'ry, or by yonder heav'n
I'll hunt Zaphimri to his secret haunt,
Or spread a gen'ral carnage round the world.





Thy rage is vain far from thy ruthless pow'r
Kind heav'n protects him, till the awful truth
In some dread hour of horror and revenge
Shall burst like thunder on thee. 






Nor rouze my lion-rage yet, ere 'tis late,
Repent thee of thy crimes. 





The crime would be
To yield to thy unjust commands. But know
A louder voice than thine forbids the deed;
The voice of all my kings! forth from their tombs
Ev'n now they send a peal of groans to heav'n,
Where all thy murders are long since gone up,
And stand in dread array against thee.






Ungrateful mandarine! say, did not I,
When civil discord lighted up her brand
And scatter'd wide her flames; when fierce contention
'Twixt Xohohamti and Zaphimri's father
Sorely convuls'd the realm; did not I then


Lead forth my Tartars from their northern frontier,
And bid fair order rise?






Hast thou not smote us with a hand of wrath?
By thee each art has died, and ev'ry science
Gone out at thy fell blast art thou not come
To sack our cities., to subvert our temples,
The temples of our Gods, and with the worship,
The monstrous worship of your living Lama,
Prophane our holy shrines?






Nor dare with horrid treason to provoke
The wrath of injur'd majesty. 






Yes, thou hast smote us with a hand of wrath;
Full twenty years hast smote us; but at length
Will come the hour of heav'n's just visitation,
When thou shalt rue hear me, thou man of blood 
Yes, thou shalt rue the day, when thy fell rage
Imbrued those hands in royal blood now tremble 
The arm of the Most High is bar'd against thee 
And see! the hand of fate describes thy doom
In glaring letters on yon rubied wall! 
Each gleam of light is perish'd out of heav'n,
And darkness rushes o'er the face of earth.





Think'st thou, vile slave, with visionary fears
I e'er can shrink appal'd? thou moon-struck seer!
No more I'll bear this mockery of words 
Or strait resolve me, or, by hell and vengeance,
Unheard-of torment waits thee 






I offer'd up my boy? and after that,
After that conflict, think'st thou there is aught
Zamti has left to fear? 





Yes, learn to fear
My will my sov'reign will which here is law.
And treads upon the neck of slaves. 






The law in China! Ill-instructed man! 
Now learn an awful truth, Tho' ruffian pow'r
May for a while suppress all sacred order,
And trample on the rights of man; the soul,
Which gave our legislation life and vigour,
Shall still subsist above the tyrant's reach. 
 The spirit of the laws can never die. 





I'll hear no more. What ho!  
(Enter Octar, and guards)
 Bring forth Mandane 
Ruin involves ye all this very hour
Shall see your son impal'd. Yes, both your sons. 
Let Etan be brought forth. 





Etan, my liege, Is fled for safety. 








Him too would'st thou withdraw from justice? him
Would'st thou send hence to Corea's realm, to brood
O'er some new work of treason? By the pow'rs
Who feel a joy in vengeance and delight
In human blood, I will unchain my fury


On all, who trace Zaphimri in his years;
But chief on thee, and thy devoted race.








Woman, attend my words instant reveal
This dark conspiracy, and save thyself. 
If willful thou wilt spurn the joys that woo thee,
The rack shall have its prey. 





It is in vain. 
I tell thee, Homicide, my soul is bound
By solemn vows; and wouldst thou have me break
What angels wasted on their wings to heav'n?





Renounce your rash resolves, nor court destruction.





Goddess of vengeance, from your realms above,
Where near the throne of the Most High thou dwell'st,
Inspher'd in darkness, amidst hoards of thunder,
Serenely dreadful, 'till dire human crimes
Provoke thee down; now, on the whirlwind's wing
Descend, and with your flaming sword, your bolts
Red with almighty wrath, let loose your rage,
And blast this vile seducer in his guilt.





Blind frantic woman! think on your lov'd boy. 





That tender struggle's o'er if he must die,
I'll greatly dare to follow. 






I'll put thee to the proof Drag forth the boy
To instant death. 







Come on then Lead me hence
To some new world where justice reigns, for here
Thy iron hand is stretch'd o'er all. 






Quick, drag him forth.





Now by the pow'rs above, by ev'ry tie
Of humanizing pity, seize me first; 
Oh! spare my child, and end his wretched mother.





Thou plead'st in vain 






Etan, dread sir, is found. 





Ah! China totters on the brink of ruin.






Where lurk'd the slave?






He rush'd amid the guards that led forth Hamet;
"Suspend the stroke," he cry'd; then crav'd admittance
To your dread presence, on affairs, he says,
Of highest import to your throne and life.





Ruin impends, (aside) Heed not an idle boy. 







Yes, I will see him ring him strait before me.





Angels of light, quick on the rapid wing
Dart from the throne of grace, and hover round him.








Thou com'st on matters of importance deep
Unto my throne and life. 





I do. This very hour
Thy death is plotting. 

















What means my son? 





Quick, give him to my rage,
And mercy shall to thee extend. 






I meanly come to save this wretched being. 
Pity Mandane Save her tender frame  Kneels.

Pity that youth oh! save that godlike man. 





Wilt thou dishonour me, degrade thyself,


Thy native dignity by basely kneeling? 
Quit that vile posture. 





Rash intruder, hence.  
To Zamti.

Hear me, thou stripling; or unfold thy tale,
Or by yon heav'n they die Would'st thou appease my wrath?
 Bring me Zaphimri's head. 
























Then take it, tyrant.


Rising up, and pointing to himself.









I am Zaphimri I your mortal foe. 





Now by yon heav'n! it is not. 





Here strike here 
Since nought but royal blood can quench thy thrist. 
Unsluice these veins, but spare their matchless lives. 





Would'st thou deceive me too?












Here on his knees, Zaphimri begs to die. 





Oh! horror, 'tis my son by great Confucius,
That is my Etan, my too gen'rous boy,
That fain would die to save his aged fire. 





Alas! all's ruin'd freedom is no more. 






Yet hear me, Tartar hear the voice of truth 
I am your victim by the gods, I am. 



Laying hold of Timurkan.



Thou early traitor! train'd by your guilty sire
To deeds of fraud no more these arts prevail. 
My rage is up in arms, ne'er to know rest,
Until Zaphimri perish. Off, vile slave 
This very moment sweep 'em from my sight.





Alas! my husband. Oh! my son, my son 





May all the host of heav'n protect him still.






ZAPHIMRI, struggling with Timurkan, on his knees.


Ah! yet withold in pity hold a moment 
I am Zaphimri I resign my crown 





Away, vain boy! go see them bleed behold
How they will writhe in pangs; pangs doom'd for thee,
And ev'ry strippling thro' the east. Vile slave, away!


Breaks from him, and exit.

  72ZAPHIMRI, lying on the ground; officers and guards behind him.


Oh! cruel! yet a moment Barbarous Scythians! 
Wilt thou not open earth, and take me down,
Down to thy caverns of eternal darkness,
From this supreme of woe? Here will I lie,
Here on thy flinty bosom, with this breast
I'll harrow up my grave, and end at once
This pow'rless wretch, this ignominious king! 
 And sleeps almighty Justice? Will it not
Now waken all its terrors? arm yon band
Of secret heroes with avenging thunder? By heaven that thought (rising) lifts up my kindling soul
With renovated sire (aside.) My glorious friends,
(Who now convene big with your country's fate,
When I am dead, oh! give me just revenge 
Let not my shade rise unatton'd amongst ye; 
Let me not die inglorious; make my fall
With some great act of yet unheard-of vengeance,
Resound throughout the world; that farthest Scythia
May stand appall'd at the huge distant roar
Of one vast ruin tumbling on the heads
Of this fell tyrant, and his hated race.














_WHY dost thou lead us to this hated mansion?
Must we again behold the tyrant'sfrown?
Thou know'st our hearts are fix'd. 





The war of words
We scorn again to wage hither ye come
Beneath a monarch's eye to meet your doom.
The rack is now preparing Timurkan
Shall soon behold your pangs, and count each groan
Ev'n to the fullest luxury of vengeance.
Guard well that passage (to the guards within), see these traitors find
No means of flight; while to the conqueror
I hasten, to receive his last commands.









Thou ever faithful creature 






Still call me faithful? by that honour'd name


Wilt thou call her, whose mild maternal love
Hath overwhelmed us all? 





Thou art my wise,
Whose matchless excellence, ev'n in bondage,
Hath chear'd my soul; but now thy ev'ry charm,
By virtue waken'd, kindled by distress
To higher lustre, all my passions beat
Unutterable gratitude and love.
And must oh! cruel! must I see the bleed? 





For me death wears no terror on his brow
Full twenty years hath this resounding breast
Been smote with these sad hands; these haggard eyes
Have seen my country's fall; my dearest husband,
My son, my king, all in the Tartar's hands:
What then remains for me? Death, only death.





Ah! can thy tenderness endure the pangs
Inventive cruelty ev'n now designs? 
Must this fair form this lost perfection bleed?
Thy decent limbs be strain'd with cruel cords,
To glut a ruffian's rage? 






This feeble texture never can sustain it.
But this this I can bear 












Yes! this dagger! 
Do thou but lodge it in this faithful breast;
My heart shall spring to meet thee. 












My horrour'd lord, who taught'st me ev'ry virtue.
Afford this friendly, this last human office,
And teach me now to die. 





Oh! never never 
Hence let me bear this fatal instrument 
Takes the dagger.
What, to usurp the dread prerogative
Of life and death, and measure out the thread
Of our own beings! 'Tis the coward's act,
Who dares not to encounter pain and peril 
Be that the practice of th'untutor'd savage; 
Be it the practice of the gloomy north. 





Must we then wait a haughty tyrant's nod,
The vassals of his will? no let us rather
Nobly break thro' the barriers of this life,
And join the beings of some other world,
Who'll throng around our greatly daring souls,
And view the deed with wonder and applause. 





Distress too exquisite! ye holy pow'rs,
If aught below can supersede your law,
And plead for wretches, who dare, self-impell'd,
Rush to your awful presence; oh! it is not
When the distemper'd passions rage; when pride
Is stung to madness; when ambition falls
From his high scaffolding; oh! no if aught
Can justify the blow, it is when virtue
Has nothing left to do; when liberty
No more can breathe at large; 'tis with the groans
Of our dear country when we dare to die.





Then here at once direct the friendly steel.





One last adieu! now! ah! does this become
Thy husband's love? thus with uplifted blade
Can I approach that bosom-bliss, where oft
With other looks than these oh! my Mandane 
I've hush'd my cares within thy shelt'ring arms? 





Alas! the loves that hover'd o'er our pillows
Have spread their pinions, never to return,
And the pale fates surround us 
Then lay me down in honourable rest;
Come, as thou art, all hero, to my arms,
And free a virtuous wife 





It must be so 
Now then prepare thee my arm flags and droops
Conscious of thee in ev'ry trembling nerve.
Dashes down the dagger.
By heav'n once more I would not raise the point
Against that hoard of sweets, for endless years
Of universal empire.





Ha! the fell ministers of wrath and yet
They shall not long insult us in our woes.
Myself will still preserve the means of death.


Takes up the dagger.





Now then, detested pair, your hour is come 
Drag forth these slaves to instant death and torment.
I hate this dull delay; I burn to see them
Gasping in death, and weltr'ing in their gore.





Zamti, support my steps with thee to die
Is all the boon Mandane now would crave.







Those rash, presumptuous boys, are they brought forth?





Mirvan will lead the victims to their fate.





And yet what boots their death? the Orphan lives,
And in this breast fell horror and remorse
Must be the dire inhabitants. Octar, still
These midnight visions shake my inmost soul. 





And shall the shad'wings of a feverish brain
Disturb a conqu'ror's breast? 






Such desolation here 'tis drear and horrible! 
On yonder couch, soon as sleep clos'd my eyes,
All that yon mad enthusiastic priest
In mystic rage denounc'd, rose to my view;
And ever and anon a livid flash,
From conscience shot, shew'd to my aching fight
The colours of my guilt 
Billows of blood were round me; and the ghosts,
The ghosts of heroes, by my rage destroy'd,
Came with their ghastly orbs, and streaming wounds;
They stalk'd around my bed; with loud acclaim
They call'd Zaphimri! 'midst the lightning's blaze
Heav'n roll'd consenting thunders o'er my head;
Strait from his covert the youth sprung upon me,
And shook his gleaming steel he hurl'd me down,


Down headlong, down the drear hold, hold! where am I?
Oh! this dire whirl of thought my brain's on fire 





Compose this wild disorder of thy soul.
Your foes this moment die. 







What would'st thou, Mirvan?





'Near to the eastern gate, a slave reports,
As on his watch he stood, a gleam of arms
Cast a dim lustre thro' the night; and strait
The steps of men thick sounded in his ear;
In close array they march'd.





Some lurking treason! 
What, ho! my arms ourself will sally forth. 





My liege, their scanty and rash-levied crew
Want not a monarch's sword the valiant Octar,
Join'd by yon faithful guard, will soon chastise them.





Then be it so Octar, draw off the guard,
And bring their leaders bound in chains before me.








With sure conviction we have further learn'd
The long-contended truth Etan's their king 
The traitor Zamti counted but one son;


And him he sent far hence to Corea's realm,
That should it e'er be known the prince surviv'd,
The boy might baffle justice. 






Ourself will see him fall. 






At this dead hour you sought repose mean time
Justice on him shall hold her course. Your
foes Else might still urge that you delight in blood.
The semblance of humanity will throw
A veil upon ambition's deeds 'tis thus
That mighty conqu'rors thrive; and even vice,
When it would prosper, borrows virtue's mien.





Mirvan, thou counsel'st right: beneath a shew
Of public weal we lay the nations waste.
And yet these eyes shall never know repose,
Till they behold Zaphimri perish. Mirvan,
Attend me forth.





Forgive, my sov'reign liege,
Forgive my over-forward zeal I knew
It was not sitting he should breathe a moment:
The truth once known, I rush'd upon the victim,
And with this sabre cleft him to the ground.





Thanks to great Lama! treason is no more,
And their boy king is dead, Mirvan, do thou
This very night bring me the stripling's head.
Soon as the dawn shall purple yonder east,
Aloft in air all China shall behold it,
Parch'd by the sun, and welt'ring to the wind:
Haste, Mirvan, haste, and fate my fondest wish.





This hour approves my loyalty and truth.






Their deep-laid plot hath miss'd its aim, and Timurkan
May reign secure no longer horrid dreams
Shall hover round my couch the prostrate world
Henceforth shall learn to own my sov'reign sway.







Well, Mirvan, hast thou brought the wish'd-for pledge?





My liege, I fear 'twill strike thy soul with horror?





By heav'n the sight will glad my longing eyes.
Oh! give it to me. 








Ha! then all is lost.





Now, bloody Tartar, now then know Zaphimri.





Accursed treason! to behold thee thus
Alive before me, blasts my aching eye-balls:
My blood forgets to move each pow'r dies in me 





Well may'st thou tremble, well may guilt like thine
Shrink back appall'd; for now avenging heav'n
In me sends forth its minister of wrath,
To deal destruction on thee. 






'Tis false! with coward-art, a base assassin,
A midnight ruffian on my peaceful hour
Secure thou com'st, thus to assault a warrior,
Thy heart could never dare to meet in arms.





Not meet thee, Tartar! Ha! in me thou see'st
One on whose head unnumber'd wrongs thou'st heap'd 
Else could I scorn thee, thus defenceless. Yes,
By all my great revenge, could bid thee try each shape,
Assume each horrid form, come forth array'd
In all the terrors of destructive guilt; 
But now a dear, a murder'd father calls;
He lifts my arm to rivet thee to earth,
Th' avenger of mankind.





Fall on, my prince.





By heav'n, I'll dare thee still; resign it, slave,
Resign thy blade to nobler hands.









What ho! bring help. Let not the fate of China
Hang on the issue of a doubtful combat.





Come on, presumptuous boy.






Now, lawless ravager, Zaphimri comes
To wreak his vengeance on thee.







Oh! nerve his arm, ye pow'rs, and guide each blow.



To him, enter HAMET.



See there! behold he darts upon his prey. 






Die, bloodhound, die 






May curses blast my arm
That fail'd so soon. 





The Tartar drops his point. 
Zaphimri now 






 Have mercy! mercy! oh!






Mercy was never thine This, fell destroyer,
This, for a nation's groans. 





The monster dies; 


He quivers on the ground Then let me fly
To Zamti and Mandane with the tidings,
And call them back to liberty and joy.




HAMET remains; to him ZAPHIMRI.



Now, Hamet, now oppression is no more:
This smoaking blade hath drunk the tyrant's blood.





China again is free; there lies the corse
That breath'd destruction to the world.






Tyrannic guilt, behold thy fatal end,
The wages of thy sins. 







Where is the king?
Revenge now stalks abroad. Our valiant leaders,
True to the destin'd hour, at once broke forth
From ev'ry quarter on th' astonish'd foe;
Octar is fall'n; all cover'd o'er with wounds
He met his fate; and still the slaught'ring sword
Invades the city, sunk in sleep and wine.





Lo! Timurkan lies levell'd with the dust!
Send forth, and let Orasming strait proclaim
Zaphimri king; my subjects rights restor'd.


Now, where is Zamti? where Mandane? ha! 
What means that look of wan despair?



While here I trembled for the great event,
The unrelenting slaves, whose trade is death,
Began their work. Nor piety, nor age,
Could touch their felon-hearts they seiz'd on Zamti,
And bound him on the wheel all frantic at the sight,
Mandane plung'd a poniard in her heart,
And at her husband's feet expir'd. 





Oh! heav'ns! My mother! 





Fatal rashness! Mirvan, say,
Is Zamti too destroy'd? 






We found the good, the venerable man:
Releas'd from anguish, with what strength remain'd,
He reach'd the couch, where loft Mandane lay;
There threw his mangled limbs; there, clinging to the body,
Prints thousand kisses on her clay-cold lips,
And pours his sad lamentings, in a strain
Might call each pitying angel from the sky,
To sympathize with human woe. 


The great folding doors open in the back scene.




See on that mournful bier he clasps her still;
Still hangs upon each faded feature; still


To her deaf ear complains in bitter anguish.
Heart-piercing fight! 









The corpse is brought forward, Zamti lying on on the couch, and clasping the dead body.




Ah! stay, Mandane, stay, yet once again.
Let me behold the day-light of thy eyes 
Gone, gone, for ever, ever gone those orbs
That ever gently beam'd, must dawn no more.





Are these our triumphs? these our promis'd joys?





The music of that voice recalls my soul.

Rises from the body, and runs eagerly to embrace Zaphimri; his strength fails him, and he faints at his feet.

My prince! my king!





Soft, raise him from the ground.





Zaphimri! Hamet too! oh! bless'd event!
I could not hope such tidings thee, my prince,
Thee too, my son I thought ye both destroy'd.
My slow remains of life cannot endure
These strong vicissitudes of grief and joy.
And there oh! heav'n! see there, there lies Mandane!





How fares it now, my father?





Lead me to her 
Is that the ever dear, the faithful woman?


Is that my wife? and is it thus at length,
Thus do I see thee then, Mandane? cold,
Alas! death-cold 
Cold is that breast, where virtue from above
Made its delighted sojourn, and those lips
That utter'd heav'nly truth, pale! pale! dead, dead!
Sinks on the body.
Pray ye entomb me with her? 





Then take, ye pow'rs, then take your conquests back;
Zaphimri never can survive 






I charge thee live; 
A base desertion of the public weal
Will ill become a king alas! my son, 
(By that dear tender name if once again
Zamti may call thee) tears will have their way 
Forgive this flood of tenderness my heart
Melts even now thou noble youth this is
The only interview we e'er shall have. 





And will ye then, inexorable pow'rs,
Will ye then tear him from my aching heart? 





The moral duties of the private man
Are grafted in thy soul oh! still remember
The mean immutable of happiness,
Or in the vale of life, or on a throne,
Is virtue each bad action of a king
Extends beyond his life, and acts again
Its tyranny o'er ages yet unborn.
To error mild, severe to guilt, protect
The helpless innocent; and learn to feel
The best delight of serving human kind.


Be these, my prince, thy arts; be these thy cares,
And live the father of a willing people.





My father! see ah! see! he dies his lips
Tremble in agony his eye-balls glare 
A death-like paleness spreads o'er all his face.





Is there no help to save so dear a life?





It is too late I die alas! I die 
Life harrass'd out, pursu'd with barb'rous art
Thro' evry trembling joint now fails at once 
Zaphimri oh! farewell! I shall not see
The glories of thy reign Hamet! my son 
Thou good young man, farewell Mandane, yes,
My soul with pleasure takes her flight, that thus
Faithful in death, I leave these cold remains
Near thy dear honour'd clay. 






And art thou gone,
Thou best of men? then must Zaphimri pine
In ever-during grief, since thou art lost;
Since that firm patriot, whose parental care
Should raise, should guide, should animate my virtues,
Lies there a breathless corse. 





My liege, forbear, 
Live for your people; madness and despair
Belong to woes like mine. 






Are deep, thou pious youth yes, I will live,
To soften thy afflictions; to assuage
A nation's grief, when such a pair expires.
Come to my heart: in thee another Zamti


Shall bless the realm now let me hence to hail
My people with the sound of peace; that done,
To these a grateful monument shall rise,
With all sepulchral honour frequent there
We'll offer incense; there each weeping muse
Shall grave the tributary verse; with tears
Embalm their memories; and teach mankind, Howe'er
Oppression stalk the groaning earth;
Yet heav'n, in its own hour, can bring relief;
Can blast the tyrant in his guilty pride,
And prove the Orphan's guardian to the last.



