






ANY of our lads up here at the Toy since, Ned?



Yes, your Honor; the crew of your cutter dined with us last Sunday.



Is old Alibi the attorney down here much?



Yes, Sir; he's over at his house.



Have you seen his ward, Miss Sophia Seymour, lately?



Ah! poor young lady! he seldom let's her go out but to church A charity for some gentleman, like your Honor, to whip off to church with her.



Why, Ned, I have some notion but to give you a simile in your own way the old black
  4
rascal keeps her as close as a cork in a bottle; which, to get out, I mustn't bolt inward, but turn screw round and round, and then cluck's the word. Get me a room and put my things in it.


How shall I get to see her? My new rival too! Who can he be? Let's see Where did Sophia say she first saw him? (peruses a letter.)Noticed his watching me at the gate of Sir Ashton Lever's Museum heavy shower at Chelsea brought guardian and I to town in his hackney-coach A monstrous fool! Yes; but if this monstrous fool shou'd prove an over-match for all my wit If I cou'd only contrive to see her.





Please, Sir, to walk into this room.
Exit.







Aircourt! Who'd have thought of meeting you here at Hampton-Court?



Why, but what the deuce brought you here?



I'm here upon a love-scheme incog. hush! you remember I told you over the last bottle we crack'd together at the Bedford 



True; our candles went out, and your story set me asleep (yawns.)



Well, rouse now You know Alibi the attorney he's guardian to the most lovely the sweetest 












Will you, faith? (aside.) What, then, you're acquainted with her?



The first time I saw my charmer, she was engaged in a wrangle with her guardian at the gate of the Museum in a Leicester-fields.



Leicester-fields! Oh, ho! (aside.)



She would see the butterflies, ha, ha, ha! He in a rage slapping his cane on a show-glass of watch-strings, seals, and sleeve-buttons cries, "Zounds, it's half-a-crown" The exact price of that pane, says the man of the shop "Jack, fetch the glazier" The expence of this accident determined the affair; and the generous attorney, instead of Sir Ashton's, proposing a trudge to Don Saltero's, I whip'd in a hack before them to Chelsea Returning home, down comes an auspicious shower, and, to save eighteen-pence, Alibi accepts of part of my coach.



What, your own hack, Ha, ha, ha! Yes, this is Sophia's monstrous fool (aside).



I throw a tender glance Sophia blushes, and we exchange hearts through our eyes Such ogles!



Damn your ogles! (surly.)







That is, I want to know your scheme.







With pleasure to cut your throat (aside).



Vastly good! That letter (gives it).



To Capias Alibi, Esquire Dear Sir, the bearer is a young man from Yorkshire, being desirous to improve himself in the profession of an attorney, I recommend him to you; and think a dealing in this case will be to the advantage of both. Yours, Nol Pross, Well, what of this?



Ha, ha, ha! Can't you see? That, I procured for a little cash, of a brother rogue of Alibi's I deliver it it gains me free access to Sophia; of which, if I don't avail myself 



Must turn him off from this (aside). Won't Alibi remember you in the Chelsea shower? Ha, ha, ha! won't he?



No, he won't; ha, ha, ha! (mimicking.) For, to get the worth of his money in gaping about, he scarce look'd at me at Don Saltero's And then, to face my charming Sophia, I sat beside him in the coach; besides, I shall change my voice; and, to provide for that, I've made Nol say I am from Yorkshire Oh, you'd laugh to see I shall be clerkified all over (displays his dress).



But really now, do you think old Alibi is such a blockhead as not to perceive from your air, person, address the fashion that is in your manner altogether! What! take you for a sordid, shabby Cursitor-street ramskin scribbler? Ha, ha, ha! never! The gentleman in your coat wou'd belie Nol Pross's letter, and get you and it kicked out of the house, to the eternal disgrace of St. James's, and the triumph of Chancery-lane.



Egad, Aircourt, I believe you're right.



Depend upon't, the old attorney wou'd perceive the diamond, though set in copper.



Hang it! this air of travel which we acquire abroad I wish I wasn't so elegant in my manière I wish I had a little of the common vulgar Now you, Aircourt, how natural you'd look the ramskin scribbler!



D'ye think so? you flatter me.



O, you'd top the character!



Then, dem'me, I'll appear in it. I will secure this letter that will do and for change of
  7
dress, Ned the Waiter will equip me! (aside.) Zounds, it is two o'clock! but I can get to Drurylane by the second act.



'Sdeath! don't think of town or playhouses to-night!



Her Calista is one of the most capital When she tears the letter To atoms thus let me tear the wicked, lying evidence of shame  
(having, unseen, put LARRY's letter in his pocket, tears another).



Why, zounds, you've torn my letter!



And then her smile of contempt upon Horatio, after 



Damn you and Horatio, Sir! D'ye see what you've done? Knock'd up my whole affair!



'Pon my soul I ask pardon I did not think what I was about.



The devil! What am I to do now? This is cruel of you, Aircourt.



Come, O'Donovan, though I've destroyed your passport, no harm done. For any project to gain Sophia, I'm yours from a spank to Scotland, burning old Alibi's house, or any mischief of that sort.



My dear Aircourt, I thank you heartily I'll go dress, and then for Lady Arable's, a charming young widow here at Hampton Court Has been over in Ireland to view some of her estates there, and my father has squir'd her back again Designs her as a match for me Ha, ha, ha!. Rather a nice thing to match me, Eh, Aircourt?



Yes; but I think I'll match you, ha, ha, ha!



My father don't know I have been five months diverting myself in England under an assumed name Dad thinks I'm still on my Italian
  8
travels my bills will come pelting in upon him rarely An't I right, my boy? Lovely Sophia! Love, fire, and frolick, that's my motto!



Plague of your frolicks! (aside.) Sophia, perhaps, is at home now? That is he keeps her close.



Close! she saves him the expence of a clerk. But, Aircourt, don't think of London tonight.








Honest Nol Pross's letter What the devil's to be done?



Oh, Nol Pross's letter (looking at it); it will do something yet, ha, ha, ha!
Exeunt.





(SOPHIA discovered writing at a high Desk.)



(dashes the pen away).
I will not write any more of his law-gibberish! Was ever poor girl so used as I am by this wicked old attorney! Cruel mamma! to make such a wretch her executor; and condemn me to the guardianship of one who will never suffer me to be united to the man I love, whilst it's his interest to keep my fortune in his hands. O, my beloved Aircourt! (sings) "Young Harry's the lad for me!"



(without). Yes, the very thing I wanted. 
Enter ALIBI. Sophy, look at my forehead any blood come? I only wish it wou'd! I've been endeavouring to provoke the exciseman, and abusing him these six
  9
weeks; but at last he has given me a choice knock on the pate The rogue's worth money, and I'll have swinging damages!



Lord, Sir! Do you go out to quarrel with the people only on purpose that they may beat you?



To be sure! Beat! Why, I have made 50 l. out of the wag of a finger, and have earned a hundred guineas of a morning, only by single tweaks by the nose. Now, Miss, have you drawn up the bill of indictment? Egad! child, you'll have no use for your fortune! By the Lord! you'll make a choice chamber counsel.  (Reads)Parish aforesaid county aforesaid did make an assault upon one and did then and there beat, wound, and cruelly illtreat against the peace of our sovereign lord the king But of all the fine wrestlers that dance on the green, young Harry's the lad for me! Oh, the devil! here's a bill of indictment to come before a grand jury! So, the exciseman breaks my head with his gauging stick, and then Young Harry's the lad for me!



Well; and so Harry Aircourt is the lad for me, in spite of you or all Westminster-hall, with Lord Chief Justice at your head.



I wish I could but once see this fine Mr. Harry Aircourt in the street though, only to see if he's such a prime serjeant as you make him.



He a prime serjeant! No! heaven made my Aircourt handsome, witty, gay, elegant, generous, and good natur'd.



It's his good nature that shoves him on to make ballads about me, and set all his drunken companions at the Anacreontic roaring out in
  10
chorus "O rare old Alibi!" But if he comes, if I don't set my bull dog at him 



O, then, from your bull dog Heaven defend me ha, ha, ha!







(sees AIRCOURT, puts SOPHIA out).

Who are you? What do you want?



I want to larn the laa.



You want to larn the laa! I wish you'd larn manners.



Oh I have for I daunce mortishly weel.



You daunce! Then, perhaps, you come here for a partner 
(looking after SOPHIA).







What do you want?



I want that letter (gives one).



You want this letter? then what the devil do you give it me for?



Look at the outside.



Capias Alibi Bearer from Yorkshire attorney recommend dealing this case advantage Yours, Nol Pross. Well Yorkshire's a good country to produce an attorney. My friend Nol Pross gives you a good character.



Oh yez, Sir I'm a very honest lad.



Honest! and want to be an attorney! Hem! I don't think I can do anything with you.



No! Then what am I to do with the money feyther sent up wi' me for it?



You have money! Now I look at you again, you're a very promising lad.



Cousin Nol said I might larn, board, and sleep here.



Ecod! if you sleep here, you must board; for I've no bed for you (aside).



You see my money is ready, so I hope, you'll afford me a good bed?



Why, you dog! your ready money shews you don't want to lie upon tick, ha, ha, ha? Hark ye! Perhaps I sha'n't beat you above once before you commit a fault.







Yes; I may thrash you out of pure good nature, only to shew you what you are to expect if you deserve it.



Oh, then I'm to be beat to save me from a threshing! Good natur'd indeed, he, he, he!



You're not given to girls, are you?



I sometimes play in the meads a wi' bit.



Well said, Yorkshire! But you wont dare to speak to a young lady?



Not for the vorld! I'd blush so hugely.



That's right I like a modest youth because I have a young Miss within here.



Lacka-daisy! do you keep a Miss?



Ha, ha, ha! What a simpleton! Before I determined to retain him, I'll first see their behaviour together Miss Sophy!





My beloved girl! I hope shell know me (aside).



Well, Sophy, I've got a new clerk.



This must be the fop that followed me to Chelsea He said he'd visit me in some disguise;
  12
but I'll discourage his impertinence in time (aside). Ha, ha, ha! my very wife, vigilant, shrewd, sagacious guardian! A clerk! ha, ha, ha! This is a very facetious gentleman, that's come hither on a scheme to run away with me! ha, ha, ha!



S'death! what can she mean? (aside.)







Look! You can't know the polite Srephon that brought us from Chelsea in his hackney coach?







What! I! he, he, he!



Bless me! it's my Aircourt himself (aside.)



Why, Sophy, you're the most conceited When, neither you nor I ever saw this young man before. That coxcomb Aircourt has blown you up so with his love nonsense, that you imagine all the young men in the town are laying plans and stratagems, ha, ha, ha! You are welcome, my lad, and so is your money! (takes it.)



Now I look at him again, he's vastly like Aircourt.



She only says this to vex me. He shall be my clerk above all the clerks in Christendom.



He, he, he! Thank you, Sir (bows).



"He, he, he! thank you, Sir" Oh, you shock!



He's no shock! he's a pretty boy, and will be Lord Chancellor, won't you, Robin?



Ecod, that's my name sure enough.



Well, mind, Jack Robin since guardian will keep you, you shall be my beau, and make love to me.















Go  (puts her in.) Don't mind her, Robin Her heart's so full of this Aircourt, that I believe she'd despise even a Judge upon the bench.



What, then she loves one Aircourt?



But, my young clerk, by way of beginning, I'll set you a task Step into that room there, and ingross this deed 
(gives him papers) AIRCOURT going towards the door where SOPHIA went off)
 Stop that door (pointing to the centre door).



I thought I was to ingross there, he, he, he!



Robin, you're a good lad; but for a lawyer, heaven save us!



Then you think my coming here answers the purpose.



Oh, yes, your coming here answers the purpose!
(clinking the money.)



And that by this means I shall get all I want (steals the key out of SOPHIA's door).




Yes; by this means we get all we want Go yonder.



Dear, how much I am obliged to Mr. Nol Pross!
Exit at centre door.



Write away, my boy! and I warrant you'll be Lord Chief Baron some Sunday or other Dam'me, I'll dress my wig on your pate next Saturday evening. As I am going out, no harm to lock up my ward The key gone! How's this? Soft! (locks the centre door, and takes the key.) One key is as good as another. Good bye, Robin.
Exit.









Never mind, young man? I don't want any refreshment I've set Lady Arable down at her house, and am only walking about to see your town and palace. And, Joy, so this is your coffee-room? Oh, newspapers! Let's peep at the Lie of the Day(reads).






This poor young man seems to have had a long walk of it.
O'DONOVAN rings Enter WAITER.


Did your Honor call? 
(to Sir CARROL.)



'Twas I that rung A little wine and water.



(surveys him contemptously.) Coming, Sir.



I spoke to you.



This room is only for gentlemen Coming.



(looks sternly at WAITER.) Sir, I ask pardon 
(bows to Sir CARROL, and is retiring)
.



Stop, Sir.  
(turns to WAITER) Hark ye, friend! remember, as you live by the public liberality, your guest, be his appearance what it may,
  15
has a claim, at least, to your civility. You say this room is appropriated to gentlemen I am one, and master of a parlour in Ireland to the full as good as this: and by my soul, I cou'd never think it more highly honor'd than by giving a welcome to the weary traveller. Go.


I ask pardon, Sir whence are you?



Sir, I came from London now, and got there only last night from Ireland.







Sir, I have that honor.



And pray, my young traveller excuse my questions; but I feel myself interested in your concerns, though a stranger to them. Tell me, what are your views?



In my infancy, my father, Sir, (I never knew the cause,) came over to England, and thus destitute, Providence raised a friend, who placed me at Dublin College. The death of this benefactor stopping my resources, obliged me to quit my studies, and I have been drawn to Hampton-Court on the credit of a disjointed kind of story, that my father had retired here in the enjoyment of an ample fortune, which he had acquired by the practice of an attorney: but after a long journey, and every possible inquiry, I can hear of no such person.






Povot! bring a glass Such an abominable room to dress in! For a glass you thought, I suppose, Narcissus-like, I was to set my face in a bason of water.



Hah! this is something! (adjusts himself before a glass.) There you are, from toupee to shoe string As this lady's house is so near Povot, another volley from your powder-puff.



Why, you scoundrel! what, do you mean to make a barber's shop of a coffee-room?



A little more on this curl, Povot.













And your master's a puppy, whoever he is.



Can you fence, old Touchwood?



(interposing.) I. can a little, Sir.



You ah! (contemptuously.) Tol, lol, lol!






(looks after LARRY, then at O'DONOVAN). Oh, what a bitter mistake has fortune made! Now that thing, void of manners and humanity, may have a worthy father, who, while he supplies with a liberal hand, little thinks he's throwing his money away upon a rascal! Ah, this is your home-education! I have a son abroad that I expect in a few days, stay till you see him, my generous lad he shall thank you for your spirited politeness to me. Since you have lost your friend, and can't find your father, inquire for me at Lady Arable's Something may be done Hold! I'll perform first, and that saves the trouble of a promise, and precludes even a chance of disappointment (offers money).



I thank you, Sir; but it's too soon to accept of favors, even when we stand in need of them (declines).



Well, well, my boy I I like your spirit I was abrupt I ask your pardon.





Sir, Lady Arable has sent over.



Very well. Ask for Sir Carrol O'Donovan (a fine young man!) What an unhappy father must he be, that could abandon such a son. 
Exit Sir CARROL and WAITER.



Sir Carrol O'Donovan! Then the son that he speaks of must be the child my mother nursed Now I shall know if she's yet living. But alienated by her neglect, as I never knew the tender care of a parent, I don't feel that impulse of filial affection Sir Carrol shan't know who I am The meanness of my birth might add contempt to the compassion that my poverty has already excited.
Exit.


