



GOOD morrow Mr. Anthony.



Who is that, Mr. Pedagog, my Reverend School-master?



The very same: Bless me! Not ready yet? You must not be so slothful; Aurora is a Friend to the Muses.



A Duce take her, she's an Enemy to sleep; I'll be sworn Tutor, I think Ce∣phalus is but a Platonick, else his Mistress wou'd lye longer in Bed with him, and would not come every Morning peeping into my Curtains. Ah my Domine, should your Mistriss serve you so. 



My Mistriss Alas, Mr. Anthony, my Books are my only Mistresses.



By this light then, I think you are a Platonick too; for you seldom have to do with them your self, and so constantly set me to turn them over, that I want time to sleep. Pray Praeceptor meus, make your Addresses to them for 3 or 4 sixty minutes, while I take a Nap of a Parallel Extent.



Yes, yes, and let Mr. Cudden for so long undisturbedly Court Mrs. Philadel∣phia, and Mr. Isabella, in the Garden, for there I left them, just now, together.



Light, did you so   Nay then  
He buttons his Vest apace.



What then you are not jealous.



Yes, as a Turky-cock, not that I care much for either of them; but a man looks so like a Solyman the Magnificent, when he is Cock of all the Hens on his own Dunghil. Why I tell you Tutor, 'tis the Noblest Prerogative that a Gentleman can have in his own House.



Out on it, 'tis to be a Tyrant.



And pray, Reverendissime Domine, who would not be a Tyrant if he could: We only inveigh against the Name, because we cannot be the thing, as Old Women declaim against Love, because none will make it to them.



Sure you think by these Excursions to draw me from my point; come, come Mr. Anthony, have you no Twitterings for Mrs. Isabella, and Mrs. Philadelphia? No Dissembling? I have seen you often cast Sheeps Eyes at them.



Sheeps Eyes said you? That may be the Colledge way, indeed, of discover∣ing an Amour, but when I make Love, I cast Lyons Eyes on my Mistriss, mine are all fire; for he that Courts but with Sheeps Eyes, 'tis ten to one, after he Weds, he will Wear the Sheeps Horns too.





What, Mr. Anthony, are you so early at your Study?



No, Mr. Plot, I am at my Catechism, my Instructer is questioning me if I am not in Love with Mrs. Philadelphia, and Mrs. Isabella.



I would not have you half so much as he is with your Mother-in-Law, and with her two Nieces, Mrs. Betty and Mrs. Nan, for I have seen him fold his Arms, and sigh at them, as movingly as a lean Benefic'd Parson looks at a Living of 400 l. a year.



But is this so in saith, Iack?



'Slid, can you doubt it? See what a hanging look he has.



By this light he has: Ah ha; Director of my Fathers Son: Go his Face Pleads guilty.



You amaze me, I profess.
Lifting up his hands.



Chaste Mr. Professor: Nay, now I have got you over this hip, I am resolv'd to be a Dionisius to thee, for if I may not sleep as long as my Laziship pleases; if thou dost Cast. I will not say a Sheeps Eye, but so much as a Lambs Eye, on any of the Female Name within those Walls, from the Age of 8 to 80, (for all the rest under and over, I will vouchsafe to leave them to thy Discipline) If thou dost not daily cer∣tify my Dad that I am a greater Proficient in Learning than I am; nay, than ever I will be.



How like you this, Mr. Pedagog, have I not taught your Pupil rarely this Morning?



Prethee let me have my full swinge at him (for he has had his many a dismal time at me:) I say, if thou dost not conform to all the Maxims of Iack Plot, Tom Art, and my own dear self, I will peach thee at such a rate to my Sire, as shall provoke him to uncase thee out of thy Pedagogical Cassock, Condemn to the Flame, Martyr∣like all thy Ferula's Grammars, Dictionaries, Classick Authors, and Common-Place Books; nay, take thy Green Glasses out of thy Spectacles, and leave thee only thy Horn-cases to look through; by which, thou wilt be as able to read Prayers with thy Nose as with thy Eyes.



Nay, if thou dost not frisk as lustily to a single Kit, whenever thy late Pupil and my present Convert bids thee, as to 24 Violins, I will Convert thy Lictorian Bun∣dles of Birch, which Consul-like thou hast carryed before thee, into Rods for thy own Posteriors, and have no more mercy on thy Hanches, than thou usest to have on my Friend Anthony's, when he cannot say his Lesson, though he be the greatest Dunce of the two; only his Imbecillity, varnish'd over with a Pythagorean Gravity, passes for profound Knowledge in thy Fathers Shallow Pate; where, if there is a Vacuum in Nature, there it needs must be.



By this hand, I long to open it, to try the Experiment.



Verily, I do no longer wonder you would Murder my fair Fame, when you long to Murder the Person of your Reverend Father, only to try an Experiment of Philosopher Plot's. In sooth, though I say it, Mr. Anthony was a very hopeful Scholar, I mean of a Gentleman, before he kept such Lewd Debauch'd Society; he had a pritty smattering of the Greek, and for Latin he would declaim in it Extempore, and very rarely break Prissian's Head, but now forsooth, fresh and fasting, he longs to break his Fathers.



O Times! O Manners!



Well, Mr. Plot, what you and my unnatural Pupil have said, I will depose before Sir Timothy, and then woe will insue, for tho 'tis common for Sons to wish their Fathers in Heaven, yet it is extraordinary for them to say it, and that before two Witnesses; remember this Mr. Anthony.Clapping his hands at him.



By this hand, Iack, I fear thou hast embark'd me in a damnable Intrigue, I would I were well out of it.

He scratches his Head, then quits Plot, and goes to Pedagog.
There's no way but a hasty comission: Pray, dear Tutor, be not offended at what I have said, second thoughts, you have told me, are the best.



Oh are they so, are they so, Mr. Anthony?



And now give me leave, I beseech you, to practise what your Learnedship did vouchsafe to teach me. Come, my dear Aristotle the second, I vow you wak'd me so early, that I know not what I said; but on better advice, I'll be sworn I had rather
  3
break Prissian's Head a thousand times, then say once (especially before two Witnesses) that I would break my ••thers.



I protest, Mr. ••••ny, this excuse is as bad as the fault; you are not troubled because you spoke parricide, but because two Witnesses heard it.



Oh my Instructer if thou wilt be Friends, I will henceforth submit my Juicy Palm to the Correction of thy dry Ferula. I will every Night Cap Verses with thee for Sack Possets, and lose as formerly I us'd to do. I will Study like a Bellarmine, Declaim like a Cicero, Dispute like a Thomas Aquinus, Sillogize like a Ramus, Poetize like a Horace; in one word, I will make thee famous by my Literature.

For if the Pupil so much Honour have,
What shall he that taught the Knave.

Prithee, dear Iack, interceed for a poor miserable Mortal which thou thy self has made so.



Troth, Mr. Pedagog, at my request, condescend to wear your Penitent Pupil on the left side of your Girdle, as you do your Ferula on your right side, for 'tis sit the Corrector should take the upper-hand of the Corrected; then your Weeping Disciple thus worn, will be call'd, instead of Mr. Anthony, Mr. Tony, and his younger Brother may beg him, so that you may afterwards put him in the long Coat-Livery, fit for the great Family of the Ante-Solomons, that you may boast what a Scholar you have made of him e're he was last put in Breeches: Do so Mr. Tony, that habit will well become your Fathers Son, for 'twill be a comely Dress.
Ant. runs to Plot's side.




Have you heard all this Domine Doctor? Rather than I will be so jeer'd, clad, and endanger my Estate to be begg'd, I will turn down-right Mutineer, and defie Nature and Art, that is my Father and Tutor.   Hey   day   you think to use me without discretion, when this day I am come to the years of it.



Well said, Mr. Anthony, this is spoken and resolv'd like one of my Scholars; hang the Name and Office of Pedagog.



I hope suddenly to see you both wear the Order of the Hempen Riband at Tyburn, one for advising the Murder of the Father, and the Son for consenting to it. Go Mr. Tony, (for such he has made you) quit your Father, and couple with your Godfather, learn from your Tutor Plot, to Drink, Swear, Whore, Lye and Quar∣rel; he will be an admirable Teacher of such Modern Natural Philosophy, while I Dedicate my Oil and Labour to Cultivate the Intellectuals of Mr. Nicholas, your Ju∣nior by Birth, but your Fathers Heir by Merit.



Dost thou hear all this Iack?



Do, Mr. Tony, do, 'twill be a very friendly part in you to subvert the Or∣der of Law and Nature, and make your Fathers younger Son your eldest Brother; 'twill be a prettier Metamorphosis than any I ever expounded to you out of Ovid. Alas Pupil mine, I see you need the Ferula of Affliction, to drein the boasted of moi∣sture in your Lascivious Palm; the Salubrious Air of Nowgate, with the two Ante∣humecting Courses of brown Bread, and Charity-fragments, may operate more effi∣caciously on your Manners, than all my Morals hitherto have done.
Ant. runs agen to Pedag.



Law you there agen, Mr. Plot, rather than I will venture to be a Knight of the Order of the Tripple-Tree, be confin'd to a Cittadel Garrison'd with Malefactors, and daily eat those Mosaick-Work Dinners he mention'd, I will abjure all the Plots and Arts in the World.



How, Mr. Anthony, Abjure all the Arts in the World, what then shall I teach you?



By this light that's a good one; I meant all the Sirnames of the Arts, not the Sciences themselves.



Oh! I cry you mercy.



Nay, in troth, Mr. Tony might still have liv'd with your Dullmanists, and yet have kept his Abjuration, though he had meant it literally. Why, thou impudent Mis-teacher of Youth, do I not know thou art good at nothing but Wenching, and so good at that, as even the Old House-keeper Goody Winifred had been forc'd by thee, had not her own willingness accepted the Courtesie. You Courted Mrs. Nell, and Mrs. Nan, and enter'd into a Confederacy with them, to seduce Mr. Tony's Mother-in-Law; and that Indentures Tripartite are sign'd and seal'd, and deliver'd before Wit∣nesses, that as soon as thou hast gotten the ascendent over the Lady, you three will Rule the Family Despotically; deny this if thou canst. Look now, Mr. Tony, how like a Sheep-biter he looks.
Ant. runs to Plot's side.




Ah ha, Doctor Tarquin, are these your Morals? Would you Cornute my Father? Whore my Mother-in-Law? And to act this set up a Triumvirat?  'Slid, I have broke Prissian's Head, and call'd an Association of three, whereof two are Maids, or at least should be a Triumvirate, forsooth. How that Phallaris would have tormented me with this Bull, had he not been depos'd e're I had Calved it. But Iack, what Proofs, Evidences and Testimonies, of this Conspiracy? I wish I have not committed Credulity.



Is not his silence Confession? Do you not see this University Professor, which pretends to know every Tongue, has lost the use of his own.



You shall find I have not, for I will instantly run and Peach you to Sir Timothy.


Offers to go hastily out, but is stopp'd by Plot, who offers to search his Pockets.



Will you so, Doctor Wencher? I will therefore first rifle your Pockets, where I will get better Evidences against you than all your Oaths will be against us.



What, rob a man in his own Chamber? I knew you were good at it on the High-way. Help, help, Mr. Anthony, remember Accessaries are Principals: I charge you in the Protectors Name, to Rescue Innocence from Oppression, or else I'll peach you with him.



By my life, I will not run the hazard and scandal of being Peach'd by him, I may loose a better Estate by it than thou canst intail on me, for being thy Second.



Well said, my Wise Pupil, stick to me now, and I'll give thee a Verbal Obli∣vion for all that's past.



Why then, I'll stick as close to thee as the Horns do to the Cuckold.





Art thou mad, why I tell you, he has at this instant in his Pocket, all the Articles and Deeds I mention'd, and if we do not now recover them he'll ruine us both; but if we do, thou shalt henceforth ride the Beast, thy Tutor, with a Port∣bit, Caveson, a Muzzle-robe, three Girts and a Sussingle. 'Slid, I say, I now fight for thy Priviledges and Freedom; on my life I tell the true.



And on my life then, I will in a trice change my side; and thus I begin the Civil War.
Ant. kicks Pedag. then holds him while Plot rifles his left Pocket of a Parchment, which he flings to Ant.



There's thy Magna Charta, Anthony.



Help, help, Murder, Murder.




Who's that cries Murther in my Sons Chamber?



'Tis poor Pedagog! Help, help.



'Slid, 'tis my Fathers Voice, I hear him coming; Iack, I am undone.








Lye down instantly and sprawl; oppose not what ever I say, and I'il not shew Sir Timothy the Articles: else by all my hopes I will.
Pedag. falls, and lyes sprawl∣ing on the ground.







What's the matter? Who cry'd Murder here, and call'd for help?



Alas, Sir, as I was hearing Mr. Anthony make an excellent Declamation in Greek! Poor Mr. Pedagog, I think charm'd with the Raptures of it, suddenly started up, cry'd Murder and Help, and immediately fell into a Fit of the Falling Sickness; in which, see how he lyes sprawling.



I protest, Sir, he half frighted me, his Eyes so roul'd in his Head, he look'd so ghastly, and so struggl'd with us that came to help him, as he could not have us'd us worse, had we come even to have rifled his Pockets; but I hope the Fit does mitigate.



Let's rub his Temples, for he begins to breath.
Plot whispers to him.

That's a good Boy, thou'lt make a rare Scholar, for thou hast learnt a most hard Lesson in the twinkling of an Eye.




Ah, Tutor, had I been but half so apt to learn under you, as you are to be taught under me, I had been e're now a Scaliger Junior.



Alas, poor Mr. Pedagog, I never knew that he was subject to this Disease.



Indeed Husband, now I remember it, Goody Winifred told me, that one day, when Mr. Pedagog had over-labour'd himself, she found him inclin'd to the Infirmity call'd the Falling Sickness; which is very troublesome to the Party himself, and to those he has to do with.



Pray, Madam, leave him to our Care, I dare half promise you we'll soon set him right again, by the help of Goody Winifred.



Come Husband, let's leave him to their management, for you know we have scarce time enough to prepare for the Entertainment, which is to Celebrate your Son Anthony's being to day of full Age.



I would he were come to Discretion, as well as to the years of it.
Ex:



Hold, thou Quondam Tyrant, darest thou peep up thy

Sir Tim. and Lady.

Muzzel before I have spoken my Spell in Verse and Rhime?


Thou who dost pretend such strictness,
Yet counterfeist the Fallen Sickness.
Thou, who e're thou wert discover'd,
O're my Breech with Birch still hover'd;
By this Indenture Tripartite,
I charge thee leap up like a spright.
Pedag. leaps up.





You see, Gentlemen, I obey, and if you will be secret, I solemnly promise, that the Credit I have with Sir Timothy and his Lady, I will always employ to act yours, and Mr. Anthony's ends.



But what security of performance, Disciple mine? for so I will Christen you, having had the honour to teach you this good temper you are now in.



Any security you will desire; name it and I will give it.



First swear by the Tripartite Indenture you made.







Then as some slight Pennance for your Crime, I confine you for ten Nights in sequence to Goody Winifreds Embraces.



You see your late Pupil is not a severe Judge, for Goody Winifred is a pretty bucksom Girl for one of her Age.



Then cry up my proficiency in Learning to my Father; and when he puts his Ear to the Key-hole of your Closet, to listen what we are doing, cry aloud, Admirably well declaim'd Mr. Anthony; I swear if you proceed at this rate you'll be a Miracle.



I never taught you lying.



Not with Goody Winifred, I thank you; that Learning you reserv'd to your self.



'Slight, does he scruple at any conditions you think sit to honour him with.



Yes marry does he, he has taught me a thousand times to lye with him while I was his Scholar, and he will not learn to lye once for me now he's mine; he's an Impudent Rogue.



Ah ha! Is he at that Lock already? Why then, lend me your Cane.



Here take it, and if it be to bestow it on his Shoulders, I wish it were of Lig∣num Vitae for their sakes.



I beseech you, Sir, forgive me, I will do whatever you will.



I'll try his Conversion: Come, little Ped, come aloft over this Cane, for Mr. An∣thmus sake; quickly, I say, or the Cudgel shall come aloft over you.
Ped. leaps over the Staff.

Face about as you were.
Leaps back agen.



'Snigs Tutor, why among all my exercises did you not teach me this, for I perceive you understand it much better than any you indeavour'd to instruct me in.



I hope you are satisfy'd I'll obey you in every thing.



Soft, a Wise Scholar can never have too many proofs of his Tutors Obedi∣ence; therefore, Iack, give me the Cudgel. And now, Domine Ped, you must re∣hearse Mutatis Mutandis, your Lesson to me, which Iack Plot taught you; I am his Usher, and you must come aloft again, and for whose sake do you think?



Alas! Mr. Anthony, how can I guess?



I will inform you then: 'Tis e'en for your pritty Mistriss Goody Winifred; she has made you come aloft for her, and now I but entreat you to do it for her sake.



