


Phaltiel and Samias enter hastily, Antipater comes out to meet them.


THrough all Ierusalem they have spread the News,
Which is receiv'd in Raptured by the Jews,
That Faithless People in their looks display,
How much their hearts long'd for this fatal Day.



When Herod to the Isle of Rhodes did go;
We all foresaw 'twould prove his Overthrow.

Caesar the Friend of Anthony must hate,
And make Revenge an Interest of State.



How natural was it for a Prince to frown,
When but by doing it, he gain'd a Crown?



But Honour should have made Octavius Just,
Seising my Father, he deceiv'd his Trust.




Caesar will judge that Imputation weak,
Since Herod his Safe-Conduct did not seek▪



Yet all the World must this black deed upbraid,
The noblest trusts are without Bargain made;
The height of Honour Herod's Ruin was,
Trusting his Vertue, he contemn'd his pass.




The Sanhedrim are now resolv'd to meet,
To lay the Crown at Mariamne's Feet:
For she, in highest Vertue first does shine,
And is the last of the Asmone Line.
Sir, You should instantly our self declare,
Ere they, beyond Retreat, engage are.




Ten of the Priests are from the Temple come,
Who told the People in the Hippodrome,
That as last night, their Sacred Watch they kept,
They heard in Tombs, where Kings, and High-Priests slept,
Noises, much like to dying Warriors Groans:
Then saw great drop, spring from those polish'd Stones;
Which seem'd to weep, that so much precious Dust,
Ere the last day, was Ravish'd from their Trust.



O Heavens what may this Prodigy portend.



Restrain your Wonder till you hear the End:
The Grief, which did those Tears from Marble draw,
So Powerful was, it did the Marble thaw.
Then from the gaping Tombs there did appear!
All those who Israel's Sacred Crown did wear:
From Saul till fatal Zedechiah's days,
The bad Kings Crown'd with Flames; the Good with Bayes.
Every one smote his Breast, and shook his Head,
The trembling Priests with fear were almost dead.





Sure dismal Changes in this Place must fall,
Since Heaven out of their Graves theDead does Call.



But that which most of all increas'd their fears,
Were direful Noises which did wound their Ears.
Then Troops of Furies did the Priest surround,
And danc'd with Impious Feet on Sacred ground.
Each Fiend in Course the Dances leading takes,
And when they chang'd, all crack'd their Whips of Snakes.
The Priests were then yielding to their despair,
When all the Furies did resolve to Air;
At which the Temples vast Foundation shook,
And three times, Woe, by all the Ghosts was spoke;
The Tombs did then with hast their Dead enclose,
When straight Aurora pale, and trembling rose,
As if she seem'd concern'd and in a fright,
At the dire Visions of the vanish'd Night:
Nor has the Temple only haunted been,
Strange sights have too been in the Palace seen;
But yet the Queen her Courage has not lost,
Though her slain Brother, and Hircanus's Ghost,
Have to th' Arabian Guards appear'd to Night.
Nor does it Mariamne seem to fright;
Though both the Ghosts did bid them tell their Queen
In the black Hall, this Night they should be seen:
For she, to evidence she knows no fear,
Boldly declar'd, she would expect them there.



These are strange things! But th' event must tell,
If these Presages come from Heaven, or Hell.
Lest in that Dread these Visions have begun,
The giddy People to extreams should run;
You to the Hippodrome again must go,
And let me hourly, all that passes, know.

Phaltiel and Samias here with me shall stay,



You must resolve, and act without delay.



Good Fortune rarely visits him who mourns;
But when she does, if slighted, ne're returns.





Sir, you must now your Father's Army lead,
And by their Swords the Crown fix on your Head.



O no, my Phaltiel! why should I pursue
Gaining that Crown, which to the Queen is due:
'Twere Sin if I her double Right withstood,
'Tis Hers by merit, and 'tis Hers by Blood.



Since you Her Right above your own prefer,
First take the Crown, and then present it Her.



Giving a Crown which I that way shall win,
To pay a Duty, I must act a Sin;
But if the Crown I from her Love receive,
To the great Gift, 'twill double Lustre give.



O, Sir, that guilty hope you should suppress,
The Queen can never make your happiness:
Her Vertue should in you all thoughts remove,
Ere to possess her by Incestnous Love:
And 'twould eclipse the Glories of your Life,
Should you attempt to wed your Father's Wife.



My Father's Wife! Witness ye Powers above,
She was first mine, by Sacred Vows, and Love.


But as the Priest our willing hands did ty,

Herod from me forc'd her by Tyranny;
For which my Sword I did against him draw,
He broke Our Match, and then I broke his Law.



No one can say but he in that did ill,
Yet, Sir, Forget not, he's your Father still.



And to that Sacred Name a Debt is due.



And to offended Love there is so too.
All that I ow'd, he to himself did pay,
That Life he gave, he more than took away.
These guilty Tears which from my Eyes would flow,
Too little Love, and too good nature show.




Blame not that Piety which makes you mourn;
Consider, Sir, your Father may return.



That thought in your belief should find no room,
A Prince's Prison's Prologue to his Tomb.
The Folly equal to the guilt would be,
First to Restrain, then set a Monarch free.
He never can again his freedom win.



Grant it, yet Incest is a Crying Sin.
Methinks that word alone should make you start.



Incest, most think, is but a term of Art.
A name with which thePriests keep Fools in aw,
For no such thing is found in Nature's Law.
He must himself, and not his Fortune blame,
Who from his Joyes is frighted by a Name.



What we have said we wish we could unsay,
Since it augments the Storm it should allay.



But in a calmer hour we hope 'twill move.



You speak your Friendship, and I speak my Love.
Yet I conjure you leave me for some time,
Else you will both participate my Crime:
For I am now into a Chaos hurl'd,
Darker than that, which first involv'd the World.




His Passion thus oppos'd does higher grow.



May Heaven that Quiet which you want bestow.





Before she knows I live, 'tis fit I see
If she preserves her Constancy to me:
But if my feign'd Death made her prove untrue,
What Herod thinks is done, my hand shall do.










Madam, the Prince Sohemus now is come.



Call him, and when he enters, leave the room.





How should I, without blushes, on him look,
Whom while we lov'd, so meanly I forsook.



Sohemus, does it not your Soul surprise,
That Solome is without weeping Eyes.
When Herod now is Dead; a Loss so great,
That all our Glories, in his fall, are set.



Madam, th' Assaults of Fate, though nere so rude,
Have still been Conquer'd by your Fortitude.





This Conquest you ascribe to a wrong Cause,
'Tis Love alone, which to my grief gives Laws.
Nothing can now my Inclinations cross,
This Joy does more than recompence that loss.
For I can now do your brave Passion right,
Our hearts which Power divorc'd, Love shall unite.



I am amaz'd to hear such words as these;
Madam, have you forgot Cossabanes;

To whom by Sacred Marriage you are ty'd,
And how you did my grief for him deride;
A grief, which I one day could not have born,
And which my Death had cur'd, had not your scorn.



Though I was forc'd by Herod's stern Command,
To give the abhorr'd Cossabanes my hand.
Yet 'twas above his Tyranny, and Art,
To make me from Sohemus give my heart.
Your doubts of me on a false ground are built,
You should not call my punishment my guilt.



Ah to that Punishment you seem'd inclin'd.



I seem'd more faulty, but to be more kind.
For had you by my words or Actions, seen
How firm for you my Passion still has been;
Your Love, or your Revenge, had made you run
To those extreams, I found it wise to shun:
With Joy I did submit to be his Wife,
Since I had no way else to save your Life.



Could you think fit to me your Love to give,
Yet hope I could the loss of it outlive?



In that fierce Storm we then did both endure,
A seeming scorn could only be your Cure.



The Power of Love for me you never knew,
Since while you lov'd, you seem'd to scorn me too.
Darkness, and light may both together reign,
As well as perfect Love, and such disdain.
Though a Just Person may a Sin commit,
Yet his Soul trembles, while he's acting it:
But when your Vows to me you did decline,
Nothing but Joy in your fair Eyes did shine.



Though for your sake I did that guilty deed,
Yet while my Face did smile, my Heart did bleed:
I did, to break that match, all I could do,
Both with Cossabanes, and Herod too:
But when all fail'd to which I had recourse,
I from my heart, that Brother did divorce;
And on his Ruin ever since was bent,
In hope of this blest time, Heaven now has sent.



These are strange Secrets which you now declare.



Listen, and I will tell you stranger far:
'Twas I made Herod to Octavius go,
And made Pheroras wait upon him too;
That Caesar having both, might more incline
To cut off the Male Race of all Our Line.
'Twas I made Herod to all else unjust,
And leave his haughty Wife to your sole trust;
With Orders, if he Caesar did not win,
You instantly should put to Death his Queen.



He told me none but I those Orders knew.



You see he told you then, what was not true.





But to what end did you those Crimes pursue.



For my great End; That of obtaining you.



Madam, against the Power of Heaven you strive.







Is not Cossabanes alive?



'Tis Man, not God, makes Marriages by force;
Therefore this day I sent him a Divorce.



That right is only by our Sex enjoy'd.



That Usurpation I for you destroy'd.
'Tis just, where two under one Contract are,
That they alike, the priviledge should share.
Affection only ties true Wedlock Bands,
Where hearts divide, in vain Priests join the hands:
He now in his Arabia does reside,
Where I have sent him leave to choose a Bride.
Now if you act your Prince's last Command,
Nothing between us, and our Joyes doth stand:
For when the Queen you have of Life bereft,
I only of both Royal Lines am left:
Then will a Crown which my free Love bestows,


Make some Atonement for my breach of Vows.
Why do you start, and such disturbance show?



'Tis at the Mischiefs you would make me do.



To a true Subject then can any thing
Look like a Crime, when 'tis t' obey his King?



Those who by Power alone have Scepters sway'd,
Ought not when Dead, to have their wills obey'd:
Only to Lawful Kings that Duty's shown.



Then do it for my sake; or, for your own.
I would have done it ere I spoke of it,
But that to me it did appear unfit;
That I for you should every guilt contract,
And leave you for my sake, not One to Act.
Too much it did like to Engrossing look,
But finding now how highly I mistook;
Admit me to this Queen, and you shall see,
I dare do more for you than you for me.



Who lets you act the Sin he can withstand,
Does himself act it by another's hand.



Will you not then let me a Crime commit,
Of which you are to have the benefit.



O, Madam; were you now what once you were 



What Herod forc'd me to, I will repair.







But what? Speak without more delay,
I'm arm'd against whatever you dare say.



But wrongs which Honour, and which Love endure
From those who did them, can admit no Cure.



Ungrateful Man! Have I in vain for you
Ruin'd my King, my Fame, and Brothers too.
Through all your Vails I see what you would hide,
I could not else thus rudely be deny'd.



Madam, but hear me out 



I'll hear no more.
'Tis Mariamne's Beauties you adore:
What you would not confess, your blushes do;
I fear'd the Change, and now I find it true.


No other Passion could so powerful be,
As thus to make you scorn a Crown and Me.
Begone; and to your Cost you soon shall prove,
A Woman's hatred does transcend her Love.






Antipater muffl'd up with a Cloak, and a  with a Flambeau.


'Tis in this Room the Queen will watch to night.



Where I may see, and yet be out of sight.



There you may all things see, and not be seen:
But should this be discover'd to the Queen;
I shall, past hope of Pardon, be undone.



Fear not, there's your Reward; and now begone.

Love only could this strange Design inspire.

What noise is that? The Queen! He looks I must retire.

The Queen and Mariana they bolt the door after them.



Why to these Horrors, Madam, will you run.



'Tis brave to seek, what 'tis in vain to shun.
One of the Noblest Joyes that is above,
Is there to meet those whom we here did love.
Since Fate to grant that Blessing does delay,
I would possess what here of it I may.



Should the best Friend of mine that's dead appear,
I should be soon as dead as he with fear.



Poor Mariana; this too much doth show
Thy Soul the Charms of Love did never know.
Hadst thou been ever warm'd with that blest Fire,
What makes thy fear, would then be thy desire.



Sure you at Herod's Ghost would startled be.



His Ghost! 'tis all of him I long to see:
But since Hircanus and my Brother have
The Priviledge to wander from the Grave;
And pay their Visits where they're justliest due,
Why may not Antipater do it too.
For if Departed Souls about them bear
Those Vertuous Loves, which did inflame them here;
No place to him, a place of Joy can be,
Where he is banish'd from attending me.



But durst you look on Antipater's Ghost?



Durst I? You know that I disdain to boast;
But though he were in that dark place of pain
Which Priests do preach of, and which Poets feign:
Yet there, were I but sure with him to stay,
I would I would do more than I will say.



But an Infernal shape like his may seem.



Nothing Infernal can resemble him.




Bless me; what means this sudden flash of light?
My trembling Knees do one another smite;
My Hair does stare, I scarce can draw my Breath,
And a Cold seises me like that of Death.




Guard me, ye blessed Angels, for I find
My timorous flesh strives to infect my Mind:


In Fears Men Sin, I scorn to be involv'd,
What is it can resist a Soul resolv'd?
While terror does the mortal part invade,
To the Immortal, it should Courage add.
Why Mariana dost thou tremble so?
Canst thou be Innocent, and fearful too?



I dare not stay more Prodigies to see,
Impute this Rudeness to my fear, not me.








Ha? 'tis Hircanus Spirit does appear,
But why should I my Mother's Father fear.
See how he shakes his Head, and seems to groan;
Oh, since 'twas Herod that Usurp't your Throne,
Why do you not, him, or his Ghost pursue,
Rather than me, who still does weep for you.



More Horrors yet? 'tis Aristobulus.

What makes you, my dear Brother, haunt me thus?
Is it because that I was Herod's Queen,
And that by him, you both have murthered been.
'Twas by Hircanus, and by your Command,
That to the Tyrant I did give my hand;
But when to that dire deed I did consent,
Of both your Murthers, he was Innocent.

Then I perceive you judge that I did ill,
Not to kill him, who both of you did kill.
But Heaven does know, I fear'd to do amiss,
And by a Sin of mine to punish his.



You little know the blest place where we are,
Who think, Revenge can find admittance there:
Nothing so Hellish up to Heaven can fly,
Passions in Bodies live; and with them dye.



No, Mariamne, we both now appear,
To tell you, that your hour of Death is near;
And then from Death, you must to Judgment come,
To hear from Justice self, your endless doom;
Before that Bar Actions are truly weigh'd,
The Kings, and Slaves, are in one Ballance laid:
Mitres, and Crowns, which here the World adore,
If ill employ'd, are weights to sink us more.
Life's but a Race, the longest quickly ends;
Yet on it, our Eternity depends.




ETERNITY; That word so much does weigh,
As if it were pronounc'd but once a day;
With the Belief, and Reverence that is fit
For Worldly trifles, who durst hazard it?
Since but one Moment of those Joyes w' are in,
Does far transcend the longest Charms of Sin.



Farewel; Remember your last hour is near.




Only the unprepar'd should dying fear.
Blest, and Kind Ghosts, who Heaven awhile could miss,
To teach me here the Glorious Way to Bliss.







The Queen's great Soul is a Reproach to me;
She speaks with those I trembl'd but to see:
Now that the Ghosts are vanish't, I'll appear.




More Ghosts; or am I cheated by my Ear?


Ha? 'tis Antipater's dear Ghost I see;
In Death as Life he is still kind to me.
Stay, stay, you blessed Spirit; for I know,
Assuming of that shape, you must be so▪
Come you to tell me of my dying too?
No news, unwelcome is that's brought by you.
Or com'st thou to accuse me that did wed▪
The bloody Tyrant, who cut off thy Head?
Ah Generous Prince, it was to save your Life
That I did yield to be the Monsters Wife.
My kindness only made me seem untrue,
And for your sake, I became false to you.



Madam I am not Dead 



Not Dead? O why!
Do you alas the fatal truth deny?
But know, (for I now see what you would do)
I dread not Death when I may go with you.
This unkind Doubt of me does make me fear,
Lovers in the other World love less than here.



By your fair Eyes, the Oath I value most,
I am Antipater, and not his Ghost:
And, if, of what I swear you doubtful stand,
Allow me to confirm it on your hand.



Take it but wonder not I tremble so,
That's sit, whether you are a Ghost or no.





Why to this: Joy would you a period give.



I would not know by guilty proofs you live.

I am convinc'd that you no Spirit are,
But how you scap'd, I beg you will declare.




To tell that story I too dearly pay,
Yet since it is your will, I must obey.
When Herod's Guards did my Revenge prevent,
To Massada I was close Pris'ner sent.
The Generous Samias, to whose Friendly Care
The Orders for my Death, intrusted were,
Beheaded a young Slave of his by night,
And to his Body, paid my Funeral right;
Which made all Palestine, and Herod too,
Think he had done the Sin he bid him do.
Thus Heaven preserv'd whom Herod meant to kill,
By which I now have priviledge to kneel.

And beg thus at your Feet that you will give
That Joy, which if deny'd, I dare not live.



Rise, Generous Prince Ah what is't you implore.



That Blessing now you could not grant before.



Into the blackest Incest I shall run,
If I should wed the Father, then the Son.



True Love mistaken Scruples should despise,
The hand of Death cancels all humane tyes.


Dare you not end what Love made you begin?



Prince; I for you dare dy, but dare not Sin.



By such false Maxims be not kept in awe.



But Incest is forbid, by Heavens great Law.



If Incest, Madam, be the Sin you fear,
I of that Incest the whole Guilt will bear.
My Love were neither generous nor true,
Would I not act one Crime to purchase you.



Ah do not ask what Heaven bids me deny.



Then give me leave, here, at your Feet to dye.





Hold, Generous Prince, I might as soon agree
To Sin for you, as let you dy for me:
But if you think your Cure in Death to find,
Be not so Cruel to leave me behind:
Do not refuse what now I press you to;
Or live with me, or let me dy with you.



Alas when of your dying I but hear,
All my despair I yield up to my fear.








That's Tamar's Voice, Retire awhile, I know
Something Important brings her hither now.







Madam, I hope this Rudeness you'll excuse,
Since 'tis to bring you most surprising News.

Herod, whom we believ'd till now, was dead,
From his Restraint is by Octavius freed;
And Caesar on him has confirm'd the Crown,
And what's as strange, Herod is now in Town.
He fear'd some Insurrection from the Jews,
And therefore brought of his Success the News.
The Sanhedrim to his great Fortune bend,
And through the Streets they all on him attend.



Never a greater Change was wrought by Fate.




Madam, the King is at the Palace Gate.



Will my Misfortunes never have an End?
In my Apartment all of you attend.







You hear the News of this prodigious turn.



Yes, Madam; but what News should make me mourn?
For I have nothing now to hope or dread,

Herod's alike to me, alive or dead:
Yet my Complaints my Duty shall subdue,
Since I can now complain of none but you.



Do not complain of her whose only fault
Is that she loves you much more than she ought.
After these guilty words I dare not stay,
Shame now, like Herod, hurries me away.





Prodigious Fate! what is't thou dost mean?
How in an instant hast thou chang'd the Scene:
But thou hast Joyful hours as well as sad,
The good I'll court, and I'll outbrave the bad.









The Temple appears, and Herod seated on a Throne within it. On his right hand Annanelus the High-Priest stands drest in all his Pontifical Habits: On his left hand Pheroras, Abner, Phal∣tiel, Samias, Asdrubal, with all the Courtiers and the Guards.
The Singing Priests are all in their white Robes, with wreaths of Laurel on their Heads; after some time of silence, the chief Singer lifts up his right hand, and then the whole Quire of Priests sing the following Song.
SONG.THose Clouds which dare the Sun obscure,
But a short time endure;
And when he breaks what did his Light confine,
His Beams with brighter Lustre shine.
So Herod's Danger which we did deplore,
Serves but to raise his Glories more;
He now appears to his glad Subjects sights,
Like cheerful Mornings after stormy nights.
In sign that we this blessing prize,
We offer up whole Herds in Sacrifice:
And flaming Incense on our Altars burn,
To Celebrate Our King's return:
Since to this Temple he new Life does give,
His Fame shall in his Piety still live.








The Sanhedrim are at your Palace Gate,
And beg admittance.



No. There let them wait.
By Fear, not Love, they now are hither drawn,
Base Spirits; when insulting fails, they fawn.
When they but dreamt Fortune had cast me down,
They did consult how to bestow my Crown.
Since they'll not tell on whom that guilt does fall;
Rather than punish none, I'll punish all.
Justice must not be mockt.




Should not designedly punish guiltless Men.


Because to you the faulty are not known,
You'll punish All, rather than punish none.



Since all were present at the black Debate,
'Tis they the Guiltless must discriminate.

My Resolution is on Justice built;
Who in this Case conceals, does share the guilt.

Pheroras, take my Guards, and carry all
The Sanhedrim into the Judgment-Hall,
There torture them, till you from some have got,
Who first propos'd, and then approv'd the Plot.



The Jews will rise in Tumults through despair.



Tumults the Frenzies of the People are.
And who in Frenzies strive must be withstood,
Such fits are quickly cur'd by letting Blood.



'Tis hard with a whole Nation to dispute.



But harder when Kings are not Absolute.
He of a Throne should be unworthy held,
Who to his will makes not his Subjects yield.
Who to obtain that end his Life does give,
Does dy more glorious than he else can live.
Brother you seem as if you were afraid:
Go you; and see these Orders now obey'd.





Sir, I will never give you cause to say,
That what you Order, I dare not obey.
Come all with me 






Abner, to thee alone
My Counterfeited Passion I made known;
But now I fear 'tis Mariana's due,
That false Love made to her must change to true;
Love by her Eyes, that Fiction would upbraid,
And burns me in those Flames with which I play'd.



Sir, since the Queen some coldness did express,
While she unrivall'd did your heart possess.
May it not, Sir, provoke her to despair,
Seeing another in that Glory▪ share.



Perhaps it may Perhaps too It may not,
Few Women are by reason lost or got:
Since to the Love I paid her shee'd not bend,
I try'd a different way to reach my end.
Yet Abner, I must say, to be possest
As much of hers as she is of my Breast;
And to enjoy that Monarchy alone,
I would despise the Universal Throne.
Though I her Coyness, and her Pride abhor,
Yet her triumphant Beauties I adore.
Oft I resolve her coldness to resent,
But I as often that Resolve repent.
How was it Mariana did receive
Those Jewels which to her I bid you give.



As soon as the vast present she had seen,
She said, I had mistook her for the Queen;
But when to her I solemnly did swear,
That they by you presented were to her;
She trembl'd instantly, then blushing said,
They were too mighty Presents for a Maid;
And beg'd me I would make you her Excuse,
Since 'twas her Vertue did those gifts refuse:


Then from the Chamber she in hast did go.



She had good Cause, the Off'ring was too low.
'Twas fit so great a Beauty should decline
A present made by any hand but mine.
O Love; where didst thou get the Power or Art,
Thus to erect two Thrones within one heart:
That Empire must be stormy, and decay,
In which at once two different Powers bear sway.
My Queens aspiring Soul does daily rise,
Her Mind is as Imperious as her Eyes.
While Mariana with as Conquering Charms,
By her humility my heart disarms;
Thus to subdue me Opposites agree,
Yet both produce the same effects in me.
Let the Queen know I'm to the Garden gone,
And tell her, I expect her there alone.









O Sister, I am now for ever lost,
My flatt'ring hopes by my ill Stars are crost:
The Queen to my Address does cruel prove,
My Services she takes, but slights my Love.
While Solome her former flame renews,
And with such guilty Love my Love pursues;
That I perceive 'tis the Decree of Fate,
I must be ruin•d by her Love or hate.



If you but for the Queen can Love admit,

Solome must be paid with Counterfeit;
Else all your hopes of Life will be but Dreams,
Her Soul no Passion knows but in extreams.



Sister, you know my Heart could never brook
Whatever did but like dissembling look.



Dissembling must to you uneasy be,
And to perswade you to it, is to me;
But since on you depends all I hold dear,
My Virtue now indulges to my fear.
When in this Love you did at first engage,
The sad effects of it I did presage;
Now my Prophetick fears I find are true,
 But may it not be yet supprest by you.



O 'tis in vain me to that change to move,
Who once lov'd well can never cease to Love.



Then you at first lov'd Solome but ill,
Or by that Rule you ought to love her still;
And if for her a Passion you did feign,
For both Our Sakes dissemble it again.



Though once her Beauties gave my Heart the Law.
Yet her Change froze more than her Eyes can thaw.
And you as well may raise the dead again,
As Love which has been murther'd by disdain:

Solome order'd me to meet her here 
Sister, retire, yonder she does appear.



O ere I go, let me this promise win,
That you'l not think what saves us both a Sin.


This on my Knees I would of you implore.





I'll do what Honour bids me, and no more.





Though the last usage I endur'd from you,
Made me resolve your Ruine to pursue;
And by the Power which I with Herod have,
I with one word can send you to your Grave:
Yet Love has purchast for you a Reprieve,
And makes me this last meeting to you give.
You know the trust which he on you did lay,
And Love, I know, made you that trust betray:

Herod, as Lawful King, you would not own,
Either of these, by me, to him made known;
Would raise his Anger, and Revenge so high,
As nothing but your Death could satisfy.



Madam, you need not to your Brother sue
To take a Life that is abhorr'd by you.
From me your Will shall no resistance meet,
I freely lay it, Madam, at your Feet.



Your Life, Sohemus, would my Blessing prove,
If you would reassume your former Love.




Why would you have that Passion live again,
Which when you could reward, you did disdain:
In pity, Madam, do not press me more,
To suffer Shipwrack twice upon one Shore.



I told you Herod forc'd me to that Crime.



Force which once aw'd you, may a second time.



But to repeat a Sin few dare consent,
Of which they once did really repent.




Herod I know will make you soon repent
Of that Divorce you to your Husband sent.



Brother, and King, Husband of best degree,
Are empty Names to one that loves like me.
Do but declare that I possess your Heart,
Then all the rest trust to my care and Art:
Those who oppose me I'll to Death pursue,
And in vast Crimes shew as vast Love for you.



So much your Servant I resolve to be,
That you shall never act a Crime for me.



Perfidious Man; since you my Love disdain,
I'll tear you hence, where you too long did raign:
All those Objections you to me did move,
Were now I see to triumph o're my Love;
And when all Obstacles I would subdue,
I find my greatest, nay my Only You.



Were I as proud, or false, as now you say,
I might with ease you by your Love betray:
But by my Faithfulness I make you shun
Crimes, which would make you hate your self when done:
Ah Madam, 'tis severe to use me thus,
We give not Laws to Love, but Love to us:
Could we at will quench or revive •is Flame,
You'd kill that Love which now you blush to name.
If what I say cannot your wrath asswage,
Here, in my Blood, be pleas'd to drown your Rage.



If over Love I could the Victor prove,
To whom I give my Life, I'd give my Love.



Too deep a wound thy bold contempt affords,
Ere to be heal'd by Fawnings and by words.
Since thou with scorn my proffer'd Love dost brand,
'Twere too great Death to perish by my hand.

Thus with one blow Love's Image I deface,
Revenge, do thou ascend, and take the place.
In thy black Empire few successless prove,
Whose Hearts are fill'd with Rage, as once with Love.





I see her fury cannot be withstood,
She will allay this tempest in my Blood:
Yet to my Death 'tis nobler to submit,
Than to Contract a guilt which merits it.










Disswade me not, by all my hopes I swear,
Nothing shall hinder me to wait on her.



Your Life in doing it will hazard run.



'Twill run more hazard if it be not done:
For Life on no account to me is dear,
But only as it does belong to her.



Lose not that Life which for her sake you prize.



Ah 'tis not Life while banish'd from her Eyes.
To them Phaltiel and Samias.




Sir, from the Judgment-Hall we now are come,
Where forty noble Jews receiv'd their doom:
Th' Arabians putting many to the Rack,
Which in the Plot did not at all partake.
The rest urg'd by a Vertue most sublime,
The guiltless clear'd, and did confess their Crime:
But those which were absolv'd did boldly say,
They'd rather perish than be sav'd that way.



Never did men so generously contend,
Each would have lost his Life to save his Friend.



My Father's Crown and Life in danger lies,
Attempted thus by them who Death despise.



He that in this great Action led the way,
Was Abner's Father, aged Barzillai:

All hop'd the favour Herod shews the Son,
Would for the Father a Reprieve have won:
But as we came out of the Hippodrome,

The Orders that he first should dye were come.



What is this Abner, for whose sake you thought
My Father might from his revenge be brought?
Since my disgrace he did to favour climb.



To draw him, Sir, at length, requires much time.
He is, to give his Character in short,
In War most fierce, most humble in the Court
Who merits favour, yet obtains it not,
In him unask'd an Advocate has got.
Respect for him he in all hearts has bred,
Because it is not sought, but merited.


Malice does fear such Vertue to pursue,
Which makes him favour'd without Envy too.
Enter Hazael hastily, who takes Antip. aside.




Tamar, your Trust did with such Joy receive,
And in such Raptures learnt you were alive:
That in disguise as you desir'd, she's gone
To Nathan's Tomb, to meet you there alone.
Your stay with her she begs may be so short,
As none may mind her absence from the Court:
Where over her there are suspicious Eyes.



My Joys from this blest meeting take their Rise▪
My generous Friends, excuse me for one hour,
I'm drawn from hence by Love's Resistless Power.
Mean while, disperse your selves in several ways,
For this rough Justice must a Tempest raise:
And drive into despair the furious Jews,
What ere you learn, let me soon hear the News.





I'll try to stay him.



Do not, 'tis in vain.
Reason and Love never together reign.










'Tis to Agrippa, Madam, that I owe
At once my Liberty, and Kingdom too.
With such success he did my Cause debate,
As he did alter what was thought my Fate.



Does it not meanly in a Monarch show,
Both those to a Proud Roman King to owe.
But to his Subject thus in Debt to run,
Is what I should elect by Death to shun.



Freedom you seem, and Empire to abhor.



No; I love both, but I love Glory more.
For those who do not Glory more esteem
Than Life and Empire, cannot merit them.



You my Return so coldly entertain,
As if some other in your heart did reign.



I for your absence had no cause to mourn,
Nor can I joyful be for your Return.
Neither in me had reason to prevail,
Since I but change my Jaylor, not my Jayl.
Your part Sohemus acted, you being gone;
And now you are return'd you act your own.



While Rules of Honour you on me obtrude,
You quite forget your Debts of gratitude.
'Twas I that rais'd you to my Bed and Crown,
When all your House were by their Fate cast down.



You made them Victims to your Pride and Hate,
And then ascribe their Ruins to their Fate.
With them I rather would have lost my Life,
Than be Condemn'd to live their Murtherers Wife.



Madam, there are affronts which press so near,
That 'tis beyond the strength of Love to bear.



And there be Loves which so offensive are,
That to be hated were more pleasant far.





Take heed, your Death may end so bold a strife.



You should not threaten me with Death but Life.



Oh Cursed Herod to give all thy heart
To her who is unworthy of a part.



'Tis hard to credit I have all your heart,
Sure Mariana does possess a part.
Love that divided is must quickly fall.



Then Mariana shall possess it all.
Unworthy 'tis of Monarchs, nay of Men,
To pay their Loves where they're not lov'd again.
He merits scorn who tamely scorn endures,
Yes, I'll recal my heart as you do yours.



The losing such a heart should I take ill,
Which you can give and take when ere you will.
Pray teach me too how I should grieve for it,
 Yet such a Passion is for her most fit;
Whose Family you for her sake thought good
To waft to Heaven through a Sea of blood:
Of this new Love let this new proof appear,
By the like passage pray, Sir, send me there.
The greatness of your Love will more be seen
In making me your Martyr than your Queen.



Spight of affronts so sensible and high,
Yet for your Beauties sake you shall not dye;
Since while you scorn me I my wrath subdue,
Judge how I'd love you, would you love me too.




Love you? Methinks at those two words alone,
I hear the Ghosts of all th' Asmoneans groan.
Should I once more that guilty motion hear,
Out of their bloody Urns they'd all appear:
And could I grant that Love which now you crave,
They'd fright me with their looks into my Grave.



As well your weakness as your hate I see,
Can you fear Ghosts, and not fear angring me?
The dead nere to the living durst appear,
Ghosts are but shadows painted by our fear.
But were your House reviv'd, did they all reign,
My looks would fright them into Ghosts again.
Looks, which if you your Crimes do not redeem,
Shall act on you what I but talk'd of them.



Your trembling Limbs could not your weight sustain,
If once you saw me head that Ghastly Train:
The sight would make the Crown upon your brow
Totter as much as Usurpation now.
If you doubt this, let me to them be sent,
Heavens, how I long to try th' Experiment.



Imperious Woman, by thy Pride and hate,
Thou hast at length hurl'd on thy self thy Fate.
Were I as timorous as thy weak Sex,
Me thy Contempt more than thy Ghost would vex.
Ho, who waits there?


Go instantly, and call
Some of the Arabian Guards, and Asdrubal.



Since thou so longst in hope to frighten me
To be a Ghost, that Ghost thou now shalt be:
In my Apartment thou thy Life shalt lose,
And I that place before all others chose:


That if thy Ghost to me it self dare show,
The trembling shape shall not have far to go.



Though all the Asmoneans dy'd by your Command,
Yet let your Wife, pray, dy by your own hand.
You should in Justice some distinction place
In murth'ring her, and others of her Race.
I do not beg you would delay my Fate,
But that your self would shed the blood you hate.
Since I the Title of your Queen possest,
Do not deny my first and last request.
Here let your Sword your own Revenge pursue,

And pierce that Heart, your feign'd Love could not do.



Feign'd Love! Witness ye Sacred Powers above,
What she calls feign'd, till now was Real Love.
A Love which here did with such Empire Reign,
As nothing could have quench'd but her disdain:
Ah what to prove it could I more have done,

Than for thy sake to kill my only Son.
Seize on the Queen, and let her then be led
To my Apartment, there to lose her Head.







Yes, the Queen; Didst thou not hear,
Or is that Question ask'd me by thy fear?



How should I touch the Partner of your Bed?



Her Death delay'd, shall forfeit thy own Head.



Madam, Thus at your Feet my self I lay,
To beg your Pardon, that I dare obey.



You have it, Sir, why should you troubled be,
At once obeying him, You pleasure me.





Now let her to her Death be sed away.



'Tis your first Order, I with Joy obey.






Heavens; with what Tortures is my Bosom torn,
I neither can Revenge, nor bear her scorn.
My Soul was rack'd till I her Death decreed,
And now the Doom is given, my Heart doth bleed.

How dar'st thou on my Queen thus lay thy hands?



The Sin I do, is, Sir, by your Commands.



To wait on Kings thy Judgment is too weak,
Thou knowst not when, Justice, or Rage does speak.
If Passion hurls us out of Reasons way,
'Tis the best Duty then, to Disobey.



If you Reprieve me from the wish'd for Blow,
You'll grieve at it e're long, as I shall now.



Your Hate, and your Disdain, I will outbrave,
Love has reverst the Doom which Anger gave.
You with the Guards have leave now to retire,





Death is deny'd, because I Death desire.



Madam, retire, and do not by your stay,
Augment that Storm which Love strives to allay.



Heaven knows I go from hence with greater grief
Condemn'd to Live, than now to lose my Life.




How great a Soul does this Asmonean show,
Her generous Heart will rather break, than bow.


While I, who have Battles and Kingdoms won,
Yield to her Pride, and blush for it when done.






What fitter time to tell it him than now,
When Grief and Rage sit mingl'd on his Brow.
All Passions must in him at once combine,
To make him act those mischiefs I design,
I met the Queen as she from hence did go,


She scarce would look on me 



It may be so 



Your Sister with respect should treated be



Respect for you? Why she hath none for me.



How can one Woman's Pride keep you in awe,
Whose word alone gives to two Kingdoms Law.



Ah, 'tis by much an easier task to guide
Two mighty Kingdoms, than one Womans Pride.



Your Fame is lost if aw'd thus by your Wife,
You ought to take away her Pride or Life.



To one who begs, I death to her would give,
'Tis the worst Punishment to let her live.



If Death she does desire, why should she strive
For that from you she to her self can give.



Perhaps she would have me her-Murth'rer prove.



Life, Sir, is sweet, to one that is in Love.







Yes, Sir, in Love, I say.




Hold I would think your malice speaks, not You.



No, 'tis my Love, and Duty, makes me tell
A Truth, which 'twere a Sin should I conceal:
Nor could they both more generously appear
Than now in telling, what you dare not hear.



No more Why should I let into my Breast,
What would for ever rob me of my Rest!

A thousand horrors in that narrow Room
Have found their Cradle, and may find their Tomb.
This fatal Subject do not then pursue,


But pity both your King and Brother too:
Who to the other Torments of his Life,
Knows he should hate, but cannot hate his Wife.








Hircanus and Aristobulus's Ghosts enter, attended by several other Ghosts, in white, having great stains of blood over all their Garments. They dance Antick Dances, with black Iavelins in their hands. The Dances ended they fall all in into one Rank, and march up to Herod, brandishing the Points of their Weapons towards him. Herod wakes of a sudden, starts up, and draws his Sword, at which all the Ghosts vanish. He stares about him a while, and then sayes:


VAnisht! Well have they manag'd their Escapes,
They owe their Safeties to their airy shapes:
Their flesh did with such fear their Souls subdue,
That after Death, their Ghosts turn'd Cowards too.
Poor senseless Devils! that could themselves perswade
To frighten him, by whom they Ghosts were made.
I blush that I the honour did afford,
Of scaring them, by drawing of my Sword.







Your Brother, Sir, has been
Above an hour attending.





That Brother is my Brother but in name,
He does by Honesty aspire at Fame.
By Virtues Charms, to Glory he pretends,
And scruples by bold Crimes to reach great ends.





Sir, by those Spies which are employ'd by me
To watch the Jews, I find they all agree:
And to your Palace Gates great numbers crowd,
And without fear, their Anger tell aloud.



Those who by talk do give their anger vent,
To great and bold Revenges are not bent;
I'd more suspect them if they did not so.



Yet winds will murmure ere the storm does blow.
In Policy when you strict Justice do
Seem to lament, at what they force you to.
This may the Jews from their despair withhold.



A King who fears does make his Subjects bold.
Monarchs by solid Rules should Vassals steer,
Dissembling is too near ally'd to fear.
Who to please Subjects some degrees shall fall,
Does give them hopes he may descend from all.
Do not a talking Conquer'd People fear,
They cannot raise such Storms as I feel here.




I cannot guess from whence this Storm should rise,
Since you have vanquish'd all your Enemies.
Winning Agrippa, you Octavius win.



The worst of Storms are those which are within.
O Heavens,
If to wear Crowns to which I was not born
Is Sin Why do you thus my Head adorn?


But if in that I did your will pursue,
Why do you punish what you made mé do?



How should I see till you unseal my Eyes,
Whence this Internal Tempest, Sir, does rise.



My Sister in her Rage such things exprest,
As ever since have stole away my rest:
The fatal words through my Ears pierc'd my Heart,
And are above the Cure of Time or Art.



'Tis strange her talk takes such deep root in you.



I dare not think her words are false or true.



Can you but in suspence such Torments find.



Suspence, 'tis the worst torture of the Mind.
Our Reason and our Valour it controuls,
'Tis in one word, the Chaos of our Souls.
From one Resolve I to another run,
I know not what to meet, or what to shun.



Then, Sir, to my suspence pray give an end,
Trust with your Griefs, your Brother, and your Friend.




Solome in her truth, or by her Art,
Would make me think Another has her Heart?



What Her d' you mean?



What Her else can it be,
But my Proud Queen which could so torture me?
If to my Love another she prefers,
I'll tear out both her Lovers Heart and Hers.
Then I'll in Flames reduce them both to Dust,
Flames, which shall be as burning as their Lust:
And when those Thrones of Love to Ashes turn,
I'll mix their guilty Ashes in one Urn:
There we shall see what Charming Fires are bred
In Hearts united, when those Hearts are dead.
This Brother's an Experiment may be,
Worthy an Injur'd King's Philosophy.



Give not your Anger, Sir, such guilty vent,
A Sin you Fancy, then a Punishment.
Is this the weight which made your Soul to bow.



You talk as if a heavier I could know.



If Vertue did not the Queens Actions guide,
Her Honour would be guarded by her Pride.



Honour o'r Love, rarely the Field does win,
When Pride does keep the Gate, Love will get in.



But Love an Entrance always is deny'd
Where Womans Vertue heighten'd is to Pride.



To such extreams it is unsafe to trust,
Where Vertue turns to Pride, Love may to Lust.
Sin will from Sin but too ill guarded be,
Nor durst my Sister trifle thus with me.



Believe me, Sir, Our Sister has mistook,
She has not prov'd it on the Queen, but look
Falshood and Lust which so deform'd appear,
Durst not approach, much less reside in Her.
In her, where Virtue to such height does rise,
It shines both in her Actions and her Eyes.





Sister I to Pheroras did declare,
That you, of the Queens Virtue, Jealous are.
If ought but Truth leads you to what you do,
The Death I meant for her, shall fall on you.


Methinks at this your Colour comes and goes,
Does it your Anger, or your Guilt disclose.



'Tis a just Anger does my Face infect,
Oh Heavens! Can Herod Solome suspect?
And can he of that Friendship have a doubt,
Which all the actions of her Life make out?
Dismiss Pheroras, and you soon shall see
With what Injustice you suspected me.



Brother, leave Solome with me alone.



Since you Command me, Sir, I must be gone.





Before the fatal Secret I declare,
Which will with Horror bristle ev'ry Hair;
And make you summon all your Fortitude,
To help you to support a shock so rude.
Tell me without Reserve Have you not seen,
Since your Return, a Coldness in the Queen,
Greater by much than you observ'd before?



May be I have Proceed but ask no more.



What did you think in her this Change had wrought?



Tell what you know, and ask not what I thought.



Then know yet stay for I begin to fear
Truths against Her would but offend your Ear.



Play not thus with my Anger 'tis not good,
The Storm you rais'd, must be supprest by Blood.
It wounds my Soul as long as it endures,
'Tis the Queens Death shall end it or else Yours.



Alas, I would not live one moment more,
If, Sir, my Death your Honour could restore.



My Honour Speak I'm rackt by this delay.



'Twill rack you worse to hear what I can say.



Rack me then higher yet, if it can be,
That I may others Rack as you do me.
Tell me, oh tell me, of that Man the Name,
Who durst presume to rob me of my Fame.
He might all other Crimes have safer done,
Than only to have wish'd for but this One.




Sohemus is the Person who I dread
Has more than offer'd to have wrong'd your Bed:
For when alas we of your Death did hear,
(The thought of which makes me yet shake with fear)
And that I prest him those Commands t' Obey,
Which you on him for the Queens Death did lay.
He said, forbid it Heaven that I the Sin should do,
Which words he spoke blushing and trembling too:
By which it was too evidently seen,
He had a guilty Passion for the Queen;
For whom so warmly he did then appear,
That he told me you an Usurper were.



At this I feel such Rage as Man ne'er knew,
Which seems to tell me, what you speak is true.



Your Orders which to him intrusted were
For the Queens Death, he did to her declare.



I thought my Uncle's Death enough had been
To fright all else from acting of his Sin.
 Have you a proof of this, the Charge is high?



Ask him your Self, if he the truth deny,
It shall be prov'd by those you cannot doubt.



'Tis only Love could rack that secret out.





Admire not if those Charms which Conquer'd you,
Had the like Power to Conquer others too.



My fury in untrodden Paths shall walk,
But why do I mispend my time in talk.
If he confess, or faintly but deny,
By my own hand, the Queen and He shall dy,



Ah for the Queen, Sir, give me leave to sue.



Of all the World 'tis most unfit in you.



Perhaps she did not of his Love admit.



She is too guilty in Concealing it.
To me immediately Sohemus send,
And at my Chamber let some Guards attend.



From this design I would your wrath disswade.



My anger cannot be by talk allay'd.





My fierce Revenge has now begun her flight,
To hurl my Rival into endless night;
And her proud Servant to his Cost shall prove,
There's no Revenge like that of slighted Love.









Yes, I met Tamar there.



And did you find
Her Friendship firm in all you have design'd.



Yes, yes, this night I to the Queen shall go,
And there, whate'er my Fate is, I shall know.



I hope you have her leave to wait on her.



She must not know of it till I am there:
Since to such Rules of Honour she is ty'd,
That to ask leave were but to be deny'd.





Oh, Sir, from whence we came such grief we saw,
As far transcends the skill of Art to draw.
Observing as we past along the street,
At Abner's Palace Gate much People meet:
We through it at length did make our way,
Where on a Herse his Headless Father Iay.
About it stood his Friends and Kindred all,
Whose griefs did more than fill the spacious Hall;
And seem'd to put a Voice into the Stones,
By making them to Echo back their Groans.



But all their Sorrows scarce deserv'd that name,
Compar'd to Abner's when he thither came;
At his dead Father's Feet himself he threw,
Where for a while he lay as Speechless too.
Nothing in all his griefs did mean appear,
He neither breath'd one sigh, nor shed one Tear;
But did convince all who were in the Room,
That Grief is still when it is highest dumb;
His Eyes did on the pale Corps so fix'd stay,
As if through them he'd look his Life away.



At last to Heaven he such a look did throw,
As threatned more than all his words could do.



A look, which Herod, if he had been there,
Could not have seen but must have shook with fear.



Your Father who for Abner then did send,
To this great Scene of Sorrow gave an end.


He at the Message cheerfully did rise,
And such Contentment sparkl'd in his Eyes;
As if by it he to the World would say,
I go to meet the Fate of Barzillai.




I almost envy Abner, I confess,
Who did his grief so generously express.



Not knowing why Herod for Abner sent,
And thinking you would long for the event;

Pollio, who we in a disguise met there,
We sent to learn it, and then meet us here.



I for the News impatient am, and wait,


But he is come already Pray relate
What 'tis my Father hath with Abner done.



When he came in, the King sate on his Throne;
Inviron'd by his Court, and Guards, and all
That Curiosity did thither call.
To whom the noble Youth did boldly say,
Sir, though you sent for me from Barzillai,

Yet I with Joy to wait on you am come,
That I from you too may receive my doom.
For sure I'm Summon'd for no other Cause,
Yes to excuse the Justice of the Laws.

Herod at length did with a sigh reply,
'Tis they that took your Father's Life; not I.
Any less Crime than what my Crown would take,
I would have Pardon'd for my Abner's sake;
But he who into that great Sin could run,
Cannot deserve the Tears of such a Son.
Too many for him are already spilt.
But Worth to cherish, while I punish guilt;
Thy Father's, and the forfeitures of those
Who for their Crimes with him their heads did lose,
With Iewry's Government to thee I give.

Abner with sighs did the great gifts receive:
And Herod then made him the Throne ascend,
Where he embrac'd him, and did call him Friend.



This Action his past Fame for ever wounds,
He in it for his Father's Blood compounds.
All the great things which by him have been done,
Cannot wash off the meanness of this One.



But, Sir, as through the Palace Court I past,
I saw the Guards run to their Arms in hast;
And though I ask'd the Cause I could not know,
Something Important Herod means to do.
For Courtiers run about from place to place,
And much of Fear is seen in every Face.



What do you think the Cause of this may be?



We are as Ignorant of that as he.



But such Alarms from nothing cannot grow,
'Tis therefore fit we to the Court should go,
And learn from whence this trouble does begin.



Till your Return, I'll stay for you within.









'Tis from Pheroras I attend you now,
Who has commanded me to let you know,
That you over your self should watchful be,
For Solome who is your Enemy,
Does your Dishonour with much art pursue,
And fills the King with Jealousies of you.



I am indebted to Pheroras Care,
Did he name nothing in particular.



No; for when he but spoke in your Defence,

Herod in Anger did command him thence.
What is it, Madam, that provokes her thus?



Her nature makes her still malicious.
Besides, her Brother's Will she aims to sway,
And thinks that I sometimes obstruct her way.
Another Cause may have her hate begot,
Yet since 'tis but my thought, I name it not.





My hast has made me almost out of breath,

Herod, I fear, designs your Brother's Death;
And all the Guards are running to their Arms,
As they are us'd to do in fierce Alarms.
While Herod in Impatience till he comes,
Walks stern and silent in his private Rooms.



Pardon those fears which in my Face you see,
That Brother is more than the World to me.
Pardon me too if I go seek him now,
And, Madam, if I humbly beg of you,
That you Pheroras warmly will engage,
To use his Power to lessen Herod's rage.
My Brother's guiltless, Madam, but you know,
The King thinks no one, who he hates, is so.



May Heaven direct you in the Happiest way,
While, I, what you desire of me, obey.









The Princess, Sir, bad me here wait on you.



Now Guards perform that which I bad you do.




Thy guilt, without my telling, lets thee know,
For what Crime 'tis, that I have us'd thee so.



Though I must judge your usage, Sir, severe,
Yet I with Joy would this Oppression bear,
Were I the only guiltless you pursue.



That name of all belongs the least to you.
To thee, whose Lust has to my Queen confest,
That Secret I intrusted to, thy Breast:
Which She of all the World should not have known,
Traytor; in vain thou wilt thy Guilt disown.


My Sister who reveal'd will prove thy Sin.
Heaven's! How I fear'd that it had been the Queen.





His lifting up to Heaven his Hands and Eyes,
Does Evidence his Crime, by his Surprize.
This Storm which thou hast rais'd, dost thou not dread?
Look on me Look Have I not star'd thee dead?



Looks cannot make one of my Courage fall.



What my Looks cannot do, my Dagger shall.





By my Compliance I thy Throne have built,
My Death's the Justice due to that base guilt;
Which by my Hand I had aton'd on thee,
Had not thy bloody hand prevented me.
Thunder, the Sword of Heaven, does sure design
That Death for thee which it deny'd to mine.
Tyrant; receive this Truth from my last Breath,
If Man has an Existence after Death;
My Ghost shall haunt thhee out in every place,
My gaping Wounds shall stare thee in the Face;
Till thou thy Life a burthen shalt esteem,
Great as thy Subjects found it was to them.





Would every Foe of mine all hope had lost,
But that of frighting of me with his Ghost.
Guards, to his Grave bear that perfidious Man,
There let him tell my Secrets if he can.








The Queen Seated, Tamar and Dina stand on each hand of her.


'TWas Mariana's sad and fatal Chance,
To meet the Body as they bore it thence:
As soon as she beheld her Brother dead,
From her fair Face the bright Vermilion fled;
And in an instant in her Charming Eyes,
We saw a Cloud blacker than Night arise:
Her Limbs seem'd by their trembling to declare,
Her Sorrow was too great a weight to bear.
Then on his bloody Corps her Self she threw,
Whilst from her Breast extorted Curses flew.



She his pale Cheeks a thousand times did kiss,
Till her red Lips infected were with his:
And to the Wound which through his Breast had made
A passage to his Heart, her Heart she laid;
In hope, which was the end she did pursue,
By the like Sympathy, 'twould kill her too.
Then with a look in which Death Printed was,
Through her cold Lips these moving words did pass:

Herod, Thy Steel my Friendships Truth has Crown'd,
Since to kill both, thou didst but give one Wound:
Then in a Groan she gave her Sorrows vent,
A Groan so vast, her Breath at once it spent;


Which to her Soul to Heaven a passage gave,
The only brighter dwelling it could have.



To such a Death our stock of Tears was due,
And Sorrow after so contagious grew;
As those who bore them to one Grave to rest,
Seem'd by their Looks of more than Life divest.



She in that Fate which you deplore is blest,
Her storms of Life are past, and she at Rest;
And to her Death this envy'd Praise is due,
She taught such Friendship as the World ne'er knew.
Yet for my Loss in her these Tears I owe,
And truer Tears no Friend did e'er bestow.

Leave me; for my Disorders such are grown,
As I am only fit to be alone.











Yes, Madam, it is he.



At such a guilty hour to visit me!
Prince, 'tis your first offence, but 'tis too vast 



I come to beg that it may be my last.
Since without seeing you I cannot live,
And since that leave your Virtue will not give;
Thus prostrate, Madam, at your Feet I lye,

And humbly beg, you'll give me leave to dye.



What brought you hither, and who hid you there?



The highest Love, and most undone Despair.



Ah Prince! What is it that you now have done?



That which I had, nor Power, nor Will to shun:
But as I paid what to my Flame is due;
So, Madam, I will be as just to you.
Justice would lose her Name could she deny,
That who offends you, merits not to dye.
And since my Love into this Crime has run,
This hand shall punish what my Love has done.




Oh Heavens! What was it that you meant to do?



To end my Torments, and be just to you.



Though I your guilty visit much deplore,
To kill your Self, I should lament much more.



You cannot to my Death such Sorrows give
As I shall feel, if doom'd by you to live.



How ill those words do with your Love agree,
Is Life a Curse, while you can live with me?
Oh Antipater, this is too severe,
I have my share in all those griefs you bear.
And nothing can, alas! my Sorrows heal,
Unless kind Heaven would Iudah's Laws repeal.
Which were a Sin to wish, or to implore.



Then, Madam, let's resolve to live no more:
If th' other Life be what is taught us here,
Such Loves as ours must needs be happy there.



Those who the Blessings of that Life would win,
Must not leave this by any Act of Sin.
Did not the dread of that our Journey stay,
I would not hinder you, but lead the way.







Madam, forgive the rudeness of my fear.
 Oh Heavens! the Prince alas! how came he here?

Herod with Abner through the Gallery comes,
And all his Guards have seiz'd the Passage-Rooms:
Sure he has learnt Antipater's here.





Now, Madam, Fate does on my side appear,
For Herod, or else you, and I, must fall,
Our Safeties for my ready Arm do call.
And to that Sword no Sin ascrib'd can be,
Who takes his Life, that first took you from me.
Hee'll think you guilty if he 'scape the blow.



I'd rather be thought guilty than be so.



Presumptions on his side will seem too strong.



'Tis Juster yet to bear than do the wrong.



Madam, You should resolve, the King's at hand.



Right, Right; Prince 'tis my positive Command,
That you on your Revenge now think no more,
But hide your Self where you were hid before.



Hide? and when you into great Danger go.



I run more Danger if you do not so.



Madam, he comes all Night with you to stay.



My Usage soon shall hasten him away.



Can the worst Usage which you have design'd,
Drive him from all the Joys of Womankind?



Will you then ruin me by your delay?



Ah, Since you will Command, I must obey.






Tamar retire, but keep within my Call,


What Sins of mine can make such Curses fall?





Since I have sent Sohemus to his Tomb,
Madam, I now am come to sill his Room.
Whoe'er offends me, I'll my Victim make.



You might have spar'd him for his Sister's Sake.
Her you Ador'd, your Pity ought to move.



Revenge a nobler Passion is than Love.
You seem unmov'd that I his Blood have spilt.



No, I am mov'd; but 'tis at your new guilt.



Madam, What you call guilt, I Justice call,
His Crime deserv'd he by my hand should fall.



What Provocation could he cast on you,
To make you both Condemn and kill him too?



Sure you would have me think you do not know.



I'm not concern'd whether you do or no.



You ought to know the Crimes you made him act,
Your fatal Beauties did his Death contract:
Those Secrets I committed to his Trust,
His Love reveal'd to you, or else his Lust.

Abner, retire here, I will stay this Night.





Just heaven assist me as my Cause is right.



Or else your Lover's Death you so resent,
As you for it on me your Spleen would vent.






Tyrant, prepare thy s•••, for thou shalt dye.


My Father's Blood for my Revenge doth cry.





Treason My Guards Must I his Victim fall?



Thy Guards, by my Command, are out of call.
No Humane Power shall hinder me to pay
The Righteous Debt I owe to Barzillai.




He was a Traytor, and was false to me.



He's more a Traytor that is true to thee.
To Thee, who hast done Crimes t'usurp a Throne,
Which till thou taughtst them, were to Man unknown.
To Thee, who all thy bloody ends to gain,
Hast broke all Bonds both Sacred and Prophane:
That Head thou mad'st thy Murthring Axe invade,
Old Age to all but thee had Reverend made.
His Restless Ghost bids me revenge the Crime,
And right at once the injur'd World and him.



Never did Man into like madness run,
To kill the Father, and then trust the Son!
This to my Cost should let all Monarchs see,
That they by halves must never Bloody be.



Since the short time I gave thee to repent
Of thy old Sins, in teaching new is spent;
To cut thee off no longer I'll deferr,
The Ghost of Barzillai thus greets you, Sir.





I'll now forget, since he assaults his Life,
All wrongs, and but remember I'm his Wife.
You through my Heart your way to his must force.



Ah let not Innocence stop Justice Course.
He kill'd my Father, he Usurp'd your Throne;
Your Wrongs I come to punish, and my Own.
He ows to both of us his hated Life.



But I owe him the duty of a Wife.
You of a Subject; Abner, then repent,
Kings faults we should not punish, but lament.
In this brave Act I will your Pattern be.



Oh Heavens! then she's in earnest kind to me.
O happy danger which to light has brought
A Truth, which I would by my Death have bought:
Desist, young Man, and I'll thy Pardon give;
I owe thee now, what makes me wish to live.



Hadst thou no Crime but this, yet thou from me
Dost merit Death, thinking so mean I'd be,
Accept a Pardon from a Tyrant's breath,
Now when I'm to revenge a Father's Death.
Heaven would not me, if I did thee, forgive.



Hold I command you, Abner, let him live.
You to your Queen should your Obedience yield.



Ah! You are not my Queen till he is kill'd:
You but a Subject are while he does Reign;
While you are so, I your Commands disdain.
But when my Sword our Debts to him has paid,
Whatever you command shall be obey'd.



Can you then think 'cause he usurp'd my due,
That I have therefore lost my Right ore you.
This misbelief involves you in his Crime,
You'll act your Self, what you'd revenge on him.



If in my hand he but a Sword did see,
Your Mediations soon should needless be.


That Death he means for me on him I'd fling,
No Subject can in Fight resist his King.



Tyrant, not King; know, guilt is such a Charm,
As would a stronger hand than thine disarm.



'Twere brave wouldst thou but try what thou dost say.



I would, if 'twould not my Revenge delay.



Since my Command so useless now appears,
I'll try if I can move you by my Tears.




Ah would the Ghosts of all your Murther'd Line,
Stalk'd in your Sight as Barzillai's in mine.
The Ghastly Visions could not be withstood,
You weep but Tears of Water, they of Blood.



To lose my Life more sit for me appears,
Than to preserve it, Madam, by your Tears.

Such precious Showrs a Traytor should not have,
Reserve them, Madam, to adorn my Grave.
I would with Pleasure have my Life resign'd,
But to have thought you, what I find you, kind.
Now nothing grieves me in my Fate but this,
That it is sent by hands so vile as his.



Since by my hand to dy does grieve thee so,
The knowing it shall hasten on the blow.







The Queens high Vertue does my Soul amaze,
Since She's in Danger, I the Court will raise.




How Love and Duty does my Breast divide.



Heaven to thy Heart at last my hand will guide.


Oh Madam, Pardon th' unintended Guilt.



I will, if nothing but my Blood be spilt.



How dar'st thou think that Heaven thy hand would steer,
Since Sacrilegiously it wounded her.



Against my will Heaven did this Crime decree,
To punish her so long defending Thee.
I'll kill him yet though th' Altar he embrac'd.



And I'll defend him while my Life does last.





To save her I her Orders disobey,


Hold, Abner, Hold, and turn thy Sword this way:
Since the Queens Sacred Blood by thee is spilt,
Not to Revenge it were as black a Guilt.



Ha! Antipater; how am I amaz'd,
Hell has the dead to help the Tyrant rais'd.



No, 'tis by Heaven that I preserv'd have been,
That in thy Blood, I might revenge the Queen.
Yet I must grieve I can but strike thee dead,
For all the Tears, and Blood, thou mad'st her shed.





Sure Antipater once his Head had lost,

Herod has conjur'd, and has rais'd his Ghost.



That I'm no Ghost thy Death shall soon make known.



Art thou no Ghost? Why then I'll make thee one.
〈1 page duplicate〉  28〈1 page duplicate〉  29
  30
That which the Tyrant to my House has done,
Calls me to kill theFather and the Son.




That Death which thou deserv'dst thou now hast got.



I merit it, because I kill'd him not.
Th' Attempt was noble, though it did not thrive,
'Tis well I do not the disgrace outlive.



Antipater to the Queen.
Accept this little Service I have done,
And let me now proceed as I begun,
A thousand Storms the Tyrants brows display,
Which his Death only, Madam, can allay.



Prince, you were order'd, where you were, to stay.



Your danger, Madam, made me disobey.



How many ills on your Discovery wait?



By acting his let us prevent our Fate.
'Tis Heaven has sent us this propitious time.



I will not owe Our Safeties to a Crime.
His Kindness I command you to implore,
If this you Disobey, ne'er see me more.



Madam, I'm All Obedience, you shall see,
When to obey is but to ruin me.





Is this a Dream which does my Eyes abuse,
If they see right, would I had lost their use:
How is my Reason by my Passions tost,
Tell me; Art thou my Son or else his Ghost?




I am that Son you thought was in his Grave,
Rescu'd by Heaven that I your Life might save.



Who from my Doom did save thy guilty Head?
And who conceal'd thee now behind her Bed?
All thy Dissembling's vain; It was my Wife.



'Twas your good Genius to preserve your Life.



To find thee here, and to be sav'd by thee,
Makes Life a worser Doom than Death could be.






Run, run, seek Samias out and bid him fly,
Till we have learnt the Prince's Destiny.



Permit me first, Madam, to dress your Wound.



'Tis but a scratch, and 'tis already bound.





Never was Man with such misfortune Crost,

I am preserv'd to see my Honour Lost.
Fool that I was to think that Son, that Wife,
For any other end, would save my Life.



Whoe'er a doubt of the Queens Vertue shows,
Sins worse in that, than he can think she does.
Is this all the Return to her you give,
Who made you by her Blood and Kindness live?
Can you suspect who did so much for you,
To her own Fame, and yours, can prove untrue?



Ah Prince, why do you thus mispend your Breath,
'Tis a much milder Fate to suffer Death:
Than live to see him our bright Vertues blot,
Since Merit cannot change him, words will not.


In his ungrateful guilt still let him lye,
But let us in our Innocency dye.



How can you think, Sir, that your Son and Wife,
Had they your Honour wrong'd, would save your Life?
And that their Innocence might more be shown,
They for your Safety did expose their own.



Brother, 'twere sit you these great Doubts would clear,
What brought him hither, who conceal'd him here?
But 'tis the Queen must Answer them, not you.



She does despise your Arts and Malice too.



Madam, I wish your Actions may not show,
That you as much despise your Honour too.



Kill her for what she said, or else kill me,
For tamely hearing such a Blasphemy.



What does my Wife but touch, I find wounds you.



She had been mine, had you not took my due;
Which I'd Revenge, but that the Queen does tye
My Arm; and therefore I but seek to dye.





O Heavens, what is it that I live to hear?
Th' affront I merit, if th' affront I bear:
Thy Death is from my hand too justly due,
Both for thy old Offences and thy new.




O hold; though I condemn what he has done,
Yet let not, Sir, your Passion kill your Son.
The Justice of your Laws that Right will do,
Which all will blame, if 'tis impos'd by you.



Justice and Laws They're too Pedantick things,
To act the vengeance of offended Kings.
Since thou my hand in paying mine has staid,
Guards, let him be to Massada convey'd.
On your Lives instantly convey him hence,
Justice, and Laws, in time, may bring him thence.





To Prison, nay to Death, I'll rather go,
Than see those Crimes, which here you mean to do.











Now act what you design'd,
'Tis in that only, I shall think you kind.



Dost thou first wrong me, then outbrave me so?






If you will kill him, you shall kill me too.



Ha; will She of her Crimes convince me more?



Honour does now, what Duty did before.



That Fire of Lust which in their Bosoms burns,
Makes them each others Champion, now, by turns.
I am convinc'd of what I did but doubt,
My Infamy so grosly they make out;
That a swift Death my Justice does esteem
Too great a Mercy, to be shew'd to them.
Thou, Asdrubal, here with the Queen shalt stay;
If she escape, thy Life for it shall pay.





that Traytor's Son to David's Tower
With Guards convey, where you are Governour.
I'll have him Chain'd, and in the Dungeon too.




What you have order'd I'll exactly do.



'Tis time to dy, when you'll my Jaylor be.



Phalt. whispers to Antip.

I play this part, to save both you, and me.



Antip. whispers to Phalt.

No more admire not, I suspected thee.
For the Queens Sufferings have distracted me.





Madam, until we meet in Heaven, Farewel.




You ne'er shall meet again, unless in Hell.
Ye Sacred Powers above whom I adore,

This only Blessing I from you implore;
Teach me on them so well my Self to right,
That to express Revenge in all its height;
Men shall, in future times, need but to say,
That it has been perform'd, in Herod's way.












THough you Cossabanes's Subject are,
Yet I of you have took the greatest Care,
And to my Favour only, 'tis you owe
Tho•e high Employments, you are rais'd to now.



Nothing with greater Joy I can admit,
Than owning of the Debt, but paying it.



I'll try you then Know Herod does repent,
That he to Massada Pheroras sent:
That Brother still has my designs withstood.
His Puling Vitrue does disgrace our Blood.
If he return, his Interest such will grow,
That all my Plots, now ripe, he will o'erthrow.
To hinder this is only in your Power,
For you of Massada are Governour.



But Madam, if the King sends a Command
To free him, who those Orders dare withstand?



Those Orders while I can, I will delay,
But In obeying you may disobey.



I understand you not.



Do you not think
That a few subtle drops, mixt in his drink,
May in a Moment send Pheroras where
He aims to be and where I wish he were.
Such Death as this, would make all Israel say,
'Twas his grief only took his Life away.
Methinks at this you should not scrupulous be,
'Twixt Statesmen, 'tis a common Courtesy.



Sins by their Commonness the worse are made.



You, who I need to my Revenge perswade,


Are too unfit my deep designs to wed,
But on your Life keep Secret all I said.
Be gone 





If I refuse to do the Crime,
Shee'll by some others Poison me and him.

But on his Death doth your designs depend?



Without it all my hopes are at an end.



Then, Madam, there's no duty you shall know
Greater than that which to your will I owe.



When this deed is perform'd, every degree
That I ascend, you shall ascend with me.
Consider too were but Pheroras gone,
There is between the Crown, and me, but One
Who while he lives my Councils still will sway,
And when hee's dead But I too much do say.
 It must be done with Secrecy and speed.



You may already reckon he is dead.





Retire; for Herod comes to visit me,


What strange Disorders in his looks I see.



Ah would my Stars had then my Death design'd,
When I so easily believ'd her kind.
By her appearing in my Lifes defence,
I had gone happy, though deluded hence.
For such a Death, though scarce a worse could be,
Were better than that Life reserv'd for me.
Alas, Herod's Ambition was not Great,
That would have dy'd content, though by a Cheat.
O Solome 



What, Sir, distracts you now.



Those Loads I bear, would make ev'n Atlas bow.
What I, and all my Court, nay Guards have seen,
Makes me resolve to kill my Son and Queen:
But then when I reflect on what was done,
To save my Life, both by my Queen and Son:
Which if of my disgrace they guilty were,
Was what they ought to end, and not to spare:
When too they might my Death to Abner owe,
It so distracts me, that I do not know
Which of the Sins I greater should esteem,
Or that of killing, or not killing them.
Some Power, which Justice knows, instruct me now,
What I am not, or what I am to do.



You wonder why they of your Life took Care,
But I admire, why the Queen hid him there:
Her Love to him you once did so much dread,
As you Decreed, that he should lose his Head.
Think you by chance he to her Bed did stray,
Or came he there, but to talk time away?
Did he at all in your Defence appear,
Till Abner's Sword, by Chance, had wounded her:
But then with Rage he on the Traytor flew,
Which proves it was to rescue her, not you.
That he your danger saw, you cannot doubt,
But till her danger call'd he stir'd not out.



I like these Observations well Proceed,
My Justice has that Traytor's Death decreed:
Ah for the Queen would you the like could find,
'Tis she alone which now distracts my Mind.
〈1 page duplicate〉  32〈1 page duplicate〉  33
  34
It was her Kindness sure made her appear
In my defence.



No, 'twas her Interest, Sir.
She fear'd that thousands would revenge her Sin,
If in her Chamber you had murther'd been:
For no one could, though Abner did the Crime,
He being kill'd, attribute it to him:
But had the truth it self been brought to light,
Her hiding there, that guilty hour of night,
Him, who for Loving her, to Death you sent,
Would make all judge she was not Innocent;
Which shews her Safety only made her do
What you but dream'd her Kindness led her too.



Speak on Speak on 'tis Musick to my Ears,
My mist of Doubts thy Conquering Reason clears.



Nor could they scape the Vengeance of their Sin,
Though by your Death your Son our King had been.
Since had that Sacred Title aw'd them all,
Yet I, on both, would have reveng'd your Fall.
Brother there's no such despicable thing
In all the World, as a tame Cuckold King.


Yet your ill Fate in that has all outdone,
For you alas are made one, by your Son:
If you can live under that Infamy,
Then Pardon both if not then both must dye.
'Tis but their Crime if they your Honour blot,
But it is yours, if you Revenge it not.



I will no longer then thus trifling stand,
This Night the Queen shall dy and by my hand:
Since she has been the Partner of my Bed,
'Tis only I that ought to strike her dead.
O Heavens forgive my Criminal Debate,

Her Doom is Seal'd, past the Reverse of Fate.
That Traytor Samias from the Court is fled,
But I'll at leisure take his guilty head.



Since you are forc'd your Son and Wife to kill,
You ought no more of your own Blood to spill.
Your Pardon for Pheroras, Sir, I crave,
Grief else, I fear, will send him to his Grave;
And when he has been Pris'ner one day more,
Be pleas'd his freedom to him to restore.
He'll tread no more in such a dangerous path.



He is too mean an Object for my wrath;
And does on whining Vertue set such price,
As makes it much more troublesome than Vice.
Let all my Guards in Arms e'er Midnight be,
'Tis the last hour the Queen shall ever see:
Those Stains which on my Honour she does lay,
Shall then, in her own blood, be wash'd away.










Discovering of your Self has ruin'd all.



Talk not of that which now is past recal.



What you resolve must be immediately,
Since Herod doubts not whether you should dy;


But studies for that Death may be to you
Most full of pain, and Ignominy too.



The Queen her self to such strict Virtue ties,
That 'tis from thence my greatest troubles rise.





A Lady that is Veil'd and in a Mask,
With pressingness to speak with you does ask:
Her business, Sir, admits not of delay.



See who she is, and hear what she will say.





Such Labyrinths involve you, that I doubt
'Tis only Miracles can bring you out.



So bright and great her Vertues still appear,
That we may hope for Miracles for her.
Howe'er our Duties let us not decline,
And trust the Issue to the Powers Divine.





Oh if to save the Queen be in your Power,
You ought not to delay it, Sir, one hour.
From Herod's Palace I in hast am come,
His Guards begin to seize on every Room:
And one of them did tell me in a fright,
That Herod means to kill the Queen this Night;
They all hang down their Heads, and sigh and weep,
And e'er she's dead her Funeral Rites they keep:
While she (had she the means) does scorn to fly,
And full of Joy, as Innocence, would dye.



O Friends; hearing what Tamar tells us now,
Can you refuse to join in this just Vow,
That whosoever the Queen's Murtherer is,
I'll lose my Life, or give an end to his:
We must to Arms, my Friends, the furious Jews
Will join with us, hearing the fatal news.
Then let us Storm the Court immediately;
Thus, we shall save the Queen, or bravely dy.



Consider, Sir, the Queen's in Herod's Power,
This will but hasten on her fatal hour;
For if Success should on our side appear,
You cannot doubt but he will murther her.



He dare not if our Arms Victorious grow.



What wickedness is that he dare not do.
I thought you better understood the Man,
He'll with his ruin ruin All he can.



This way with too much Reason, Sir, I fear,
You'll lose your Self instead of saving her.



Oh Friend, to lose my Self if she be lost,
Is of all Blessings what I covet most.
If we prevent it not, the Queen must dy,
This way may save her, and this way I'll try.





Stay, Sir; I call to my Remembrance now,
What in this strait may be of use to you.
The Queen now-lies where Alexandra lay,
Who from that Chamber made a Vaulted way,
Through which she might pass to the Garden-House:
She did this when she fear'd Antigonus.


Herod himself does not this Passage know,
Safely that way you to the Queen may go.


Whence you as safely may convey her too,
If you can win her to escape with you:
For at the Garden-House no Guards I saw.



There, without noise, I may some Souldiers draw:
That if the Queen you from the Palace get,
We safely by their help may here retreat.



This, Sir, is the most hopeful way I see.




Samias, it does appear the same to me.
For by it either I shall rescue her,
Or else dy fighting with her Murtherer.



Mean while I'll try the chiefest Jews to win.



Oh how I fear the Scruples of the Queen.



Since Herod has resolv'd the Queen to kill,
You ought to save her, Sir, against her will.
Once you to do it disobedient grew.



Heaven knows nought else could make me do it now.
Come, let's away the time too fast does slide.



Follow me, Sir, for I must be your Guide.








As through the Streets I past the news was spread,
That Prince Pheroras struck with Grief was dead.
The People did his Death with horrour bear.



I doubt of greater Deaths we soon shall hear.
Carry that News to Solome from me,
Let all while I am absent watchful be.





The Queen appears asleep on her Bed, Herod comes in with a Taper in one hand, and a drawn Dagger in the other, as soon as he enters, he stops on a sudden.


What Horror's this which does my heart o'ercome,
As soon as I but enter in this Room:
I who in Breaches Storm'd have often stood,
And flaming Cities quench'd with humane Blood:
Nay swom t' Usurp a Throne through Royal Gore,
Yet never felt what trembling was before.

Can guilt so calmly sleep when Death is near,
While I, who but Revenge it, shake for fear.
What art thou Whispers, While she sleeps 'tis best,
To send her Soul to its Eternal Rest?
Lest her bright Eyes which have such Power to Charm,
Were they awake, might my fierce hand disarm.
Whate'er thou art darst whisper to me so,
Be gone Else If I can I'll kill the too.
For thou would'st rob me by such guilty fears,
Of what in my Revenge most great appears.
Yes I will wake her e'er I give the blow,
That She, and I, and the whole World may know;


While all her Beauties in full Lustre shone,
To my wrong'd Honour, I have Justice done.
But though this brave Revenge I will enjoy,
Yet I must sigh, for what I will destroy.





Who's that who wak'd me with a sigh?




But 'tis to make thee sleep Eternally.




Ha, in his hand an unsheath'd Dagger too!



Thy guilt does make thee such amazement show.



If an amazement on my Face does seize,
'Tis that my Tyrant comes to give me ease:
Nought from thy bloody hand could welcome be,
Unless as now, when it brings Death to me.



Wer't thou not ripe for what I now will do,
Thou couldst not merit Death, and wish it too:
But thy dire guilt all others has outdone,
For thou hast wrong d my Bed, and by my Son.



I wrong thy Bed! I scorn to undeceive
Him, who of me dare such vile Crimes believe.




Thus of that scorn I my revenge begin,
And thus pursue it.




Heaven forgive his Sin.
Oh let my Guiltless Blood thy Rage atone,
And turn thy heart from murthring of thy Son.




Unheard of Crime! She begs with her last Breath,
That her Adulterer may not suffer Death.
But he shall dy; and in those Tortures too,
Which to his Crimes, and her last Prayers are due.


Thus Night's dark Veils the Face of Heaven o'erspread,
When to th'other World the Sun is fled;
No Kings Revenge like mine the Glory had,
To make at once so many Beauties fade.




Sure all the Ominous Screech-Owls, and the Toads,
Have in this horrid Vault fixt their abodes:
Under my Feet these croak'd at every pace,
And those were still a fluttring in my Face.
Through Deaths obscurest Regions I have past,
But I am come to Paradise at last.




Whose Voice is that? A Man and muffl'd too,
And comes to her through ways I never knew.
I'll undiscover'd learn what brings him here.





in the Vault. Since I am within Call you should not fear.



Yet, Sir, to your Return a short space give,
For here, methinks, I'm bury'd, while I live.





How quietly she sleeps she does not know,
How near she is to Herod's guilty blow.
Yes I must wake her; for by time I'm prest,

Sure I was born still to disturb her Rest.


Madam, to save you, I from Heaven am sent.
How sound they sleep, whose Lives are Innocent.
Madam 'tis Antipater that does speak.


My Son? How did he from his Prison break?





Either my trembling sight abuses me,
Or else O Heavens, why must I live to see
What more than I millions of dyings dread,
In Streams of her own Blood, the Queen lies dead!
Though fate to lose her Life, this Trick has shown,
I come not yet too late, to end my own.

Yet hold for while her Murtherer does live,
I must to my own self grant a Reprieve,
Till I have kill'd him, though he Herod be;
For this dire Crime none durst perform but He.
Thou injur'd Ghost, who ought to hover here,

Till I have Sacrific'd thy Murtherer;
Listen to this Irrevocable Vow;
My Tyrant Father I'll to Death pursue.
Through all his Guards I will a passage make,
And by the loss of mine, his Life I'll take.





Traytor, such horrid Guilt thou dost commit,
That none but I to punish it am fit.



To mention horrid Guilt dost thou not dread,
Being within the prospect of that Bed?

Heaven may to thee perhaps some mercy show,
For off'ring up thy Self, her Victim now.



This Hand which on my Wife has Justice done,
Shall do the like now, on a Rebel Son.
Yes; thou shalt feel, that 'tis a fatal thing,
To dare offend thy Father and thy King.



Those Sacred names were Cancell'd both by thee,
That moment thou didst force the Queen from me.
But wer't thou Mankind's Father, and their King,
Yet killing thee is but too mean a thing
To Expiate thy Sin in murthering Her.



'Tis greater Sin, my Vengeance to defer.





'Tis Chance alone which the whole World does guide,
Or now Success had waited on my side:
Nor could I else have thus been strucken dead,
And by a Traytor which defil'd my Bed.



Defil'd thy Bed? By all that is divine,
A brighter Vertue never yet did shine,
Than that with which Heav'n thy great Queen did bless.
To raise thy horrour, I this truth confess.





My Joy it raises, for I make thee dy,
And make thee do it, telling of a Lye.
My Destiny had been tyrannical,
Had I not e'er my Death, beheld thy Fall.


But now I care not what becomes of me,
Since with my hand I have kill'd Her and thee.







What noise was this, Ha! the Prince murther'd lies,
 And the Queen too Weep out your Selves, my Eyes;
Though for that Loss the payment is too low.




I amar, raise all the Court, and let them know,
The Queen has by the Tyrant murther'd been,
And I too meanly did revenge the Sin,
By only making of the Monster fall:
Then carry these Commands to Asdrubal,

That he from Massada Pheroras bring,
And now it is his Right, Proclaim him King.





I feel a Coldness like the hand of Death,
Which by degrees does steal away my Breath:
Against the wish'd Assault I will not strive,
Since all is done for which I'd wish to live:
These double Blessings in my Fate I meet,
To kill her Murtherer then dy, at her Feet.







O Dismal Night, the dismal'st e'er has been.



'Tis here my grief should first of all begin.

Ah who can doubt Vertue is Crown'd above,
Since Men to hers did still so Cruel prove.






There's none which has such Cause to mourn as I,
But 'tis below true grief to sigh and Cry;
And too much Sorrow ought not to be given,
To what appears is the Decree of Heaven:
Bear the dead Bodies from the Gazers sights,
Till all is ready for the Funeral Rites.



Fortune above my Hopes has smil'd on me,
Where I but beg'd two Deaths, she gave me three.


If to your Promise you have faithful been,
'Tis I who am, by right of Blood, your Queen:
When I, by you, am Seated in the Throne,
Ask whatsoe'er you will, and 'tis your own.



Sure, Madam, you must know your Brother's dead,
The news of it through all the Court is spread.



Why do you not your duty then begin,
And make all others own me for their Queen?



This Throne which the late Queen was us'd to fill,
Madam, ascend, You'll not become it Ill.
Fair Mariamne in it still did sit,
When Foreign Embassies she did admit.


Take it as earnest of a greater far,
And while your Right to these you do declare,
All the Arabian Guards in Arms I'll draw,
The stronger to the weaker gives the Law.
You must expect a Storm from David's Tower,
While it remains in the fierce Phaltiel's Power.




Fate never did to one a Throne assign,
Who did ascend it in such griefs as mine.





Since the Male Race of all the Royal Line
Is now extinct, the Crown by Right is mine:
That I should Raign, Heaven does concern'd appear,
Taking so many Lives, to place me here:
Owing this Blessing to Celestial aid,
With Fear and Reverence I must be Obey'd.
I will with Glory fill great Herod's Room.





Descend, vile Woman, and receive thy Doom.
Though in such Sins thou hast consum'd thy time,
As there's no Judgment equal to thy Crime.


Are these the Guards which he went out to call?
My Crimes I'll expiate by a glorious fall.



To thy wrong'd Lord, to send thee, I design;
And if his Justice does agree with mine,
In wild Arabian Desarts thou shalt be
Confin'd, until Death's hand doth set thee free:
May'st thou a Life of Sorrow there begin,
And be as great in Penitence as Sin.
Seize on her, Guards, and let her be by you
Lead to indure what's less than is her due.
By Poison too, thou didst design my fall,
But I am sav'd by Heaven and Asdrubal.




I laugh at all you dare design, or do,
For though by Men betray'd and Fortune too:
And though to live in Thrones my Stars deny,
Yet spight of all I in a Throne will die.




Her thirst of human Blood so great was grown,
Rather than shed no more, she shed her own:
She ne'er shew'd Mercy, or did Mercy crave,
For her Birth's sake, yet, bear her to her Grave.

Phaltiel and Samias when they see I'm King,
I know their Fort they'll to Obedience bring.
'Tis, Sir, but part of what I owe, I pay,


Making you Ruler of Samaria.



Though many Pretious Lives at once are lost,
Yet Mariamne's Death afflicts me most:
Her Beauties, and her Virtues were so great,
As for her loss, grief cannot pay the Debt.
A Loss so vast, that Mourning is due
Not only from the Jews, but Nature too.
The Curtain falls.



