





NO more! I'le hear no more; begone and leave.



Not hear me! by my sufferings but you shall!
My Lord, my Lord, I'm not that 〈◊〉 wretch
You think me• Patience• where is the distance (throws
Me back so far, but I may boldly speak
In right, though proud oppression will not hear mee!



Have you not wrong'd me?



Could my Nature 〈◊〉

Have brook'd Injustice or the doing wrongs,
I need not now thus •ow have bent my self,
To gain a Hearing from a Cruel father!
Wrong'd you?



Yes! wrong'd me, in the nicest point:
The Honour of my House; you have done me wrong;
You may remember (For I now will speak,
And urge its baseness:) When you first came home
From Travell, with such hopes, as made you look• on
By all men's Eyes, a Youth of expectation;
Pleas'd with your growing Virtue, I receiu'd you;
Courted, and sought to raise you to your Merits:
My House, my Table, nay my Fortune too,
My very self, was yours; you might have us'd me

〈◊〉 To your best service; like an open friend,

  I treated, trusted you, and thought you mine;
When in 〈◊〉 of my best Endeavours,
You treacherously practis'd to undo the,
Seduc'd the weakness of my Age's Darling,
My only Child, and stole her from my bosome:
Oh Belvidera!




'Tis to me you owe her,
Childless you had been else, and in the Grave,
Your name E•tinct, nor no more Priuli heard of.
You may remember, scarce five years are past,
Since in your Brigandine you sail'd to see
The Adriatick wedded by our Duke,
And I was with you: Your unskilfull Pilot
Dash't us upon a Rock; when to your Boat
You made for safety; entred first your self;
The affrighted Belvidera following next,
As she stood trembling on the Vessel side,
War by a Wave 〈◊〉 off into the Deep,
When instantly I plung'd into the Sea,
And Bu•ing the Billows to her rescue,
Redeem'd 〈◊〉 Life with half 〈◊◊〉 of mine,
Like a rich Conquest in one hand I bore her,
And with the other 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 Waves,
That throng'd and prest to rob me of my prize:
I brought her, gave her to your despairing Arms:
Indeed you thank't me; but a nobler gratitude
Rose in her soul: for from that hour she lov'd me,
Till for her Life she paid me with her self.



You stole her from me, like a Theif you stole her,
At dead os night; that cursed hour you chose
To rifle me of all my Heart hold dear.
May all your Joys in her prove false like mine;
A steril Fortune, and a barren Bed,
Attend you both: Continual discord make
Your Days and Nights bitter and grievous: Still
May the hard hand of a vexatious Need
Oppress, and grind you; till at last you find
The Curse of Disobedience all your Portion.



Half of your Curse you have bestow'd in vain,
Heav'n has already crown'd our faithfull Loves

  3With a young Boy, sweet as his mothers Beauty:
May he live to prove mere Gentle than his 〈◊〉,
And happier than his Father!




To bait thee for his bread, and din your ears
With hungry Cries: Whilst his unhappy Mother
Sits down and weeps in bitterness of want.



You talk as if it would please you.



'T would by Heav'n.
Once she was dear indeed; the Drops that fell
From my sad heart, when she forgot her Duty,
The fountain of my Life was not so pretious:
But she is gone, and if I am a man
I will forget her.



Would I were in my Grave.



And she too with thee;
For, living here, you're but my curs'd Remembran•rs
I once was happy.



You use me thus, because you know my soul
Is fond of Belvidera: You perceive
My Life feeds on her, therefor• thus you treat me;
Oh! could my Soul ever have known satiety:
Were I that Theif, the doer of such wrongs
As you upbraid me with, what hinders me,
But I might send her back to you with 〈◊〉,
And court my fortune where she wou'd be kinder!



You dare not do't.  



Indeed, my Lord, I dare not.
My heart that awes me is too much my Master:
Three years are past since first our Vows were plighted,
During which time, the World must bear me witness,
I have treated Belvidera like your Daughter,
The Daughter of a Senator of Venice;

Distinction, Place, Attendance and Observance,
Due to her Birth, she always has commanded;
Out of my little Fortune I have done this;
Because (though hopeless e're to win your Nature)
The World might see, I lov'd her for her self,
Not as the Heiress of the great Priuli.  







Yes! all, and then adieu for ever.
There's not a Wretch that lives on common Charity
But's happier than me: for I have known
The Luscious Sweets of Plenty; every night
Have slept with soft content about my head,
And never waked but to a joyfull morning.
Yet now must fall like a full Ear of Corn,
Whose blossom scap'd, yet's ••••••hed in the ripening.



Home and be humble, study to •etrench;
Discharge the lazy Vermin of thy Hall,
Those Pageants of thy Folly,
Reduce the glittering Trappings of thy Wife
To humble Weeds, fit for thy little state;
Then to some suburb Cottage both retire;
Drudge, to feed loathsome life: Get Brats, and Starve  
Home, home, I say.  





Yes, if my heart would let me  
This proud, this swelling heart: Home I would go,
But that my 〈◊〉 are hatefull to my eyes,
Fill'd and damm'd up with gaping Creditors,
Watchfull as Fowlers when their Game will spring;
I have now not 50 Ducats in the World,
Yet still I am in love, and pleas'd with Ruin.
Oh Belvidera! oh she's my Wife  
And we will be •• our way ward Fate together,
But ne're know Comfort more.





My Friend good morrow!
How fares the honest Partner of my Heart?
What, melancholy! not a word to spare me?



I'm thinking Pierrè, how that damn'd starving Quality
Call'd Honesty, got footing in the World.



Why, pow'rfull Villainy first set it up,
For its own ease and safety: Honest men
Are the soft easy Cushions on which Knaves
Repose and satten: Were all mankind Villains,
They'd starve each other, Lawyers wou'd want practice,
Cut-Throats Rewards: Each man would kill his Brother
Himself, none would be paid or hang'd for Murder:

  5Honesty was a Cheat invented first
To bind the Hands of bold deserving Rogues,
That Fools and Cowards might sit safe in Power,
And lord it uncontroul'd above their Betters.



Then Honesty is but a Notion.




Like wit, much talkt of, not to be defin'd:
He that pretends to most too, has least share in't;
'Tis a ragged Virtue: Honesty! no more on't.



Sure thou art Honest?



So indeed men think me?
But they're mistaken Jaffeir: I am a Rogue
As well as they;
A fine gay bold fac'd Villain, as thou seest me;
'Tis true, I pay my debts when they'r contracted;
I steal from no man; would not cut a Throat
To gain admission to a great man's purse,
Or a Whores bed; I'de not betray my Friend,
To get his Place or Fortune: I scorn to flatter
A Blown-up Fool above me, or Crush the wretch beneath me,
Yet, Jaffeir; for all this, I am a Villain!



A Villain  



Yes a most notorious Villain:
To see the suffring's of my fellow Creatures,
And own my self a Man: To see our Senators
Cheat the deluded people with a shew
Of Liberty, which yet they ne'r must taste of;
They say, by them our hands are free from Fetters,
Yet whom they please they lay in basest bonds;
Bring whom they please to Infamy and Sorrow;
Drive us like Wracks down the rough Tide of Power,
Whilst no hold's left to save us from Destruction;
All that bear this are Villains; and I one,
Not to rouse up at the great Call of Nature,
And check the Growth of these Domestick spoilers,
That makes us slaves and tells us 'tis our Charter.



Oh Aquilina! Friend, to lose such Beauty;
The Dearest Purchase of thy noble Labours;
She was thy Right by Conquest, as by Love.



Oh Jaffeir! I'de so fixt my heart upon her,

  6That wheresoe're I sram'd a Scheme of Life
For time to come, she was my only Joy
With which I wish't to sweeten future Cares;
I fancy'd pleasures, none but one that loves
And dotes as I did can Imagine like 'em:
When in the Extremity of all these Hopes,
In the most Charming hour of Expectation,
Then when our Eager Wishes soar the highest,
Ready to stoop and grasp the lovely Game,
A Haggard Owl, a Worthless Kite of Prey,
With his foul wings sayl'd in and spoyl'd my Quarry.



I know the Wretch, and scorn him as thou hat'st him.



Curse on the Common Good that's so protected,
Where every slave that 〈◊〉 up wealth enough
To do much Wrong, becomes a Lord of Right:
I, who beleiv'd no Ill could e're come near me,
Found in the Embraces of my Aquilina

A Wretched old but itching Senator;
A wealthy Fool, that had bought out my Title.
A Rogue, that uses Beauty like a Lamb•kin,
Barely to keep him warm: That filthy Cuckoo too
Was in my absence crept into my Nest,
And spoyling all my Brood of noble Pleasure.



Didst thou not chace him thence?



I did, and drove
The rank old bearded Hirco stinking home:
The matter was complain'd of in the Senate,
I summon'd to appear, and 〈◊◊〉,
For violating something they call priviledge  
This was the Recompence of my service:
Would l'd been rather beaten by a Coward!
A Souldier's Mistress 〈◊〉 his Religion,
When that's prophan'd, all other Tyes are broken,
That even dissolves all former bonds of service,
And from that hour I think my self as free
To be the Foe as e're the Friend of Venice  
Nay, Dear Revenge, when e're thou call'st I am ready.



I think no safety can be here for Virtue,
And grieve my friend as much as thou to live
In such a wretched State as this of Venice;


  7Where all agree to spoil the Publick Good,
And Villains fatten with the brave man's Labours.



We have neither safety, Unity, nor Peace,
For the foundation's lost of Common Good;
Justice is lame as well as blind amongst us;
The Laws (corrupted to their ends that make 'em)
Serve but for Instruments of some new Tyranny,
That every day starts up to enslave us deeper:
Now could this glorious Cause but find out friends
To do it right! oh 〈◊〉! then might'st thou
Not wear these seals of Woe upon thy Face,
The proud Priuli should be taught humanity,
And learn to value such a son as thou art.
I dare not speak! But my heart bleeds this moment!



Curst be the Cause, though I thy friend be part on't:
Let me partake the troubles of thy bosom,
For I am us'd to misety, and perhaps
May find a way to sweeten't to thy spirit.



Too soon it will reach thy knowledg  




Let it proceed. There's Virtue in thy Friendship
Would make the saddest T•le of sorrow pleasing,
Strengthen my Const•ncy, and welcome Ruin.



Then thou art ruin'd!



That I long finee knew,
I and ill Fortune have been long Acquaintance.



I past this very moment by thy dores,
And found them guarded by a Troop of Villains;
The sons of public Rapine were destroying:
They told me, by the sentence of the Law
They had Commission to seize all thy fortune,
Nay more, Priuli's cruel hand hath sign'd it.
Here stood a Ruffian with a horrid face
Lording it o're a pile of ma•y Plate,
Tumbled into a heap for publick sale:
There was another making villainous jests
At thy undoing; he had ta'ne possession
Of all thy antient most domestick Ornaments,
Rich hangings, intermixt and wrought with gold;
The very bed, which on thy wedding night
Receiv'd thee to the Arms of Belvidera,


  8The scene of all thy Joys, was violated
By the course hands of filthy Dungeon Villains,
And thrown amongst the common Lumber.



Now thanks Heav'n  



Thank Heav'n! for what?



That I am not worth a Ducat.



Curse thy dull Stars, and the worse Fate of Venice,

Where Brothers, Friends, and Fathers, all are false;
Where there's no trust, no truth; where Innocence
Stoop's under vile Oppression; and Vice lords it:
Hadst thou but seen, as I did, how at last
Thy Beauteous Belvidera, like a Wretch
That's doom'd to Banishment, came weeping forth,
Shining through Tears, like April Sun's in showers
That labour to orecome the Cloud that loads •m,
Whilst two young Virgins, on whose Arms she lean'd,
Kindly lookt up, and at her Grief grew sad,
As if they catch't the Sorrows that fell from her:
Even the lewd Rabble that were gather'd round
To see the sight, stood mute when they beheld her;
Govern'd their roaring throats and grumbled pity:
I cou'd have hugg'd the greazy Rogues: They pleas'd me.



I thank thee for this story from my soul,
Since now I know the worst that can befall me:
Ah Pierre! I have a Heart, that could have born
The roughest Wrong my Fortune could have done me:
But when I think what Belvidera feels,
The bitterness her tender spirit tasts of,
I own my self a Coward: Bear my weakness,
If throwing thus my Arms about thy Neck,
I play the Boy, and blubber in thy bosome.
Oh! I shall drown thee with my Sorrows!




Fi•st burn, and Level Venice to thy Ruin,
What starve like Beggars Brats in frosty weather,
Under a Hedge, and whine our selves to Death!
Thou, or thy Cause, shall never want assistance,
Whilst I have blood or Fortune fit to serve thee;
Command my heart: Thou art every way its master.



No: there's a secret Pride in bravely dying.



Rats die in Holes and Corners, Dogs run mad;
Man knows a braver Remedy for sorrow:
Revenge! the Attribute of Gods, they stampt it
With their great Image on our Natures; dye!
Consider well the Cause that calls upon thee:
And if thou art base enough, dye then: Remember
Thy Belvidera suffers: Belvidera!

Dye   Damn first   what be decently interr'd
In a Church-yard, and mingle thy brave du•t
With stinking Rogues that rot in dirty winding sheets,
Surfeit-slain Fools, the common Dung o'th Soyl.







Well said, out with't, Swear a little  




By Sea and Air! by Earth, by Heaven and Hell,
I will revenge my Belvidera's Tears!
Heark thee my Friend   Priuli   is   a Senator!















With all my heart.
No more: Where shall we meet at Night?




On the Ryalto every Night at Twelve
I take my Evening's walk of Meditation,
There we two will meet, and talk of pretious
Mischief  











At any hour, my plagues
Will keep me waking. Ex. Pierr.


Tell me why, good Heav'n,
Thou mad'st me what I am, with all the Spirit,
Aspiring thoughts and Elegant desires
That fill the happiest Man? Ah! rather why
Did'st thou not form me fordid as my Fate,
Base minded, dull, and fit to carry Burdens?
Why have I sence to know the Curse that's on me?
Is this just dealing, Nature? Belvidera!
Enter Belvidera.






Lead me, lead 〈◊〉 my Virgins!
To that kind Voice. My Lord, my Love, my Refuge!
Happy my Eyes, when they behold thy 〈◊〉:
My heavy heart will leave its doleful beating
At sight of thee, and bound with sprightful joys.
Oh smile, as when our Loves were in their Spring,
And cheer my 〈◊〉 Soul.



As when our Loves
Were in their Spring 〈◊〉 had then my Fortune chang'd?
Art thou not 〈◊〉,〈◊〉 the same,
Kind, good, and tender, as my Arms first found thee
If thou art alter'd, 〈◊◊〉 I have harbour 〈◊〉

Where ease my loaded Heart? Oh! where complain?



Does this appear like Change, or Love 〈◊〉

When thus I throw my self into thy bosom,
With all the 〈◊〉 of a strong Truth:
Beat's not my heart, as 〈◊◊◊〉

To a new Change of bliss; 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉,
Than did thy Mother when she hugg'd thee 〈◊〉,
And bless'd the Gods for all her Travel past.



Can there in Woman be such glorious Faith?
Sure all ill stories of thy Sex are false•

Oh Woman! lovely 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉

To temper Man: We had been Brutes without you,
Angels are Painted fair, to look like 〈◊〉;
There's in you all that we believe of Heav'n,
Amazing 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 and Truth,
Eternal Joy, and everlasting Love.



If Love be Treasure, wee'l be 〈◊〉 rich:
I have so much, my heart will surely break with't;
Vow's cannot express it, 〈◊◊◊〉 declare
How great is my Joy, I am dumb with 〈◊◊〉 thought;
I swell, and figh, and labour with 〈◊◊〉.
Oh lead me to 〈◊◊〉 wide 〈◊◊〉,
Barren as our Misfortunes, where 〈◊〉 Soul
May have its 〈◊〉, Where I may 〈◊〉 aloud
To the high Heaven's, 〈◊〉 every 〈◊◊〉 Planet,
With what a boundless stock my bosom's fraught,
Where I may throw my 〈◊〉 Arms about thee,
Give 〈◊〉 to Love with 〈◊〉, kindling Joy,
And let off all the Fire that's in my Heart.



Oh Belvidera! double I am a Begger,
Undone by Fortune, and in debt to thee;
Want! worldly Want! that hungry sneager Fiend
Is at my heels, and chaces me in view;
Can'st thou bear Cold and Hunger? Can these Limbs,
Fram'd for the tender Offices of Love,
Endure the bitter Gripes of smarting Poverty?
When 〈◊〉 by our miseries abroad,
(As suddenly we shall be) to seek out
(In some far Climate where our Names are strange•)
For charitable 〈◊〉: 〈◊◊◊〉,
When in a Bed of straw we 〈◊◊〉,
And the bleak winds shall whistle 〈◊◊◊〉;
Wilt thou then talk thus to me? 〈◊〉 thou then
Hush my 〈◊〉 thus, and shelter me with Love?



Oh I will love thee, even in Madness love thee:
Tho my distracted Senses should 〈◊◊〉,
I'd find some intervals, when 〈◊◊◊〉

Should swage it self and be let loose to 〈◊〉

Though the bare Earth be all our Resting place,
It's Root's our food, some 〈◊◊〉, 〈◊〉,
I'l make this Arm a Pillow for thy Head;
As thou sighing ly'st, and swell'd with 〈◊〉,
Creep to thy Bosom, 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 of Love
Into thy Soul, and 〈◊〉 thee to thy 〈◊〉;
Then praise our God, and watch thee •till the 〈◊〉.



Hear this you Heaven's, and wonder how you made her!
Reign, reign ye Mon• that d•vide the World,
Busy Rebellion 〈◊〉 will let you kn•w
Tranquility and Happiness like 〈◊〉,
Like gawdy Ships, th' 〈◊〉 Billows fall
And rise again, to lift you in your Pride;
They wait but for a 〈◊〉 and then 〈◊〉 you:
I, in my private Bark, already 〈◊〉,
Like a poor Merchant driven on unknown Land,
That had by chance packt up his 〈◊〉 Treasure
In one dear Casket, and sav'd only 〈◊〉:
Since I must 〈◊〉 further on 〈◊◊〉,
Thus hug my little, but my 〈◊◊〉,
Resolv'd to 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉Ex•.










BY all thy Wrongs, thou art de• to my Arms
Than all the Wealth of 〈◊〉: Prithee stay,
And let us love to night.




There's Fool about thee: When a Woman sell•

Her Flesh to Fools, her Beauty's lost to me;
They leave a Taint, 〈◊◊〉 where th'ave past,
There's such a baneful Quality about'em,
Even spo•ls Complexions with their own Nauseousness,
They infect all they touch, I cannot think
Of tasting any thing a Fool has p•ll'd.



I loath and 〈◊〉 that Fool thou mean'st, as much
Or more than thou 〈◊〉 But the Beast has Gold
That makes him necessary: Power too,
To qualifie my Character, and poise me
Equal with peevish Virtue, that beholds
My Liberty with 〈◊◊〉 In their Hearts
Are loose as I am, 〈◊◊〉 Power
Sits in their Faces, and 〈◊〉 Pleasures from'em.



Much good may't do you, Madam, with your Senator.



My Senator! why, can'st thou think that Wretch
E're fill'd thy 〈◊〉 Arms with Pleasure 〈◊〉

Think'st thou, because I sometimes give him leave
To foyle himself at what 〈◊◊◊〉 for;
Because I force my self to endure and suffer him,
Think'st thou I love him? No, by all the Joys
Thou ever gav'st me, his Presence is my Pennance;
The worst thing an old Man can be's a Lover,
A meer 〈◊〉 Mori to poor woman.
I never lay by his decrepit side,
But all that night I ponder'd on my Grave.



Would he 〈◊〉 well sent 〈◊〉





For then, my 〈◊〉 I. 〈◊◊◊〉 with pleasure

  13To play the Hypocrite: Oh! how I could weep
Over the dying Dotard, and kiss him too,
In hopes to smother him quite; then, when the time
Was come to pay my Sorrows at his Funeral,
For he has already made me Heir to Treasures,
Would make me out-acta real Widows whining:
How could I frame my face to fit my mourning!
With wringing hands attend him to his Grave,
Fall swooning on his 〈◊〉: Take mad possession,
Even of the Dismal Vault, where he lay bury'd,
There like the Ephesian Matron dwell, till Thou,
My lovely Soldier, comest to my Deliverance;
Then throwing up my Veil, with open Armes
And laughing Eyes, run to new dawning Joy.



No more! I have Friends to meet me here to night,
And must be private. As you prize my Friendship
Keep up your Coxcomb: Let him not pry nor listen,
Nor fisk about the House as I have seen him,
Like a tame mumping Squirrel with a bell on;
Currs will be abroad to bite him, if you do.



What Friends to meet? may I not be of your Council•



How! a Woman ask Questions out of Bed?
Go to your Senator, ask him what passes
Amongst his Brethren, hee'l hide nothing from you;
But pump not me for Politicks. No more!
Give order that whoever in my name
Comes here, receive Admittance: so good night.



Must we ne're meet again! Embrace no more!
Is Love so soon and ulterly forgotten!



As you hence-forward treat your Fool, 〈◊〉 think on't.



Curst be all Fools, and doubly curst my self,
The worst of Fools   I die if he forsakes me;
And now to keep him, Heav'n or Hell instruct me. Exeunt.









I am here, and thus, the Shades of Night around me,
I look as if all Hell were in my Heart,

  14And I in Hell. Nay, surely 'tis so with me;
For every step I tread, methinks some 〈◊〉

Knocks at my Breast, and bids it not be quiet,
I've heard, how desperate Wretches, like my self,
Have wander'd out at this dead time of Night
To meet the Foe of Mankind in his wall•:
Sure I am so Curst, that, tho' of Heav'n forsaken,
No Minister of Darkness cares to Tempt me.
Hell! Hell! why sleepest thou?




Sure I have stay'd too long:
The Clock has struck, and I may lose my Proselyt•.
Speak, who goes there?



A Dog. that comes to howl
At yonder Moon: What's he that asks the Question?



A Friend to Dogs, for they are honest Creatures,
And ne're betray their Masters; never Fawn
On any that they love not: Well met, Friend:
Jaffeir!



The same. Oh Peirre! Thou art come in season,
I was just going to Pray.




Priests make a Trade on't, and yet starve by it too:
No Praying, it spoils Business, and time's 〈◊〉:
Where's Belvidera?




For a Day or two
I've lodg'd her privately, 'till I see farther
What Fortune will do with me? Prithee, Friend,
If thou would'st have me fit to hear good Council,
Speak not of Beldivera  



Speak not of her.







Nor name her. May be I wish her well.







Thy Wife, thy lovely Belvidera,

I hope a man may wish his Friends Wife well,
And no harm done!








Thou shalt smile too, and Belvidera smile;
We'll all rejoy•, here's something to buy Pins,
Marriage is Chargeable.



I but half wisht
To see the Devil, and he's here already.
Well!
What must this buy, Rebellion, Murder, Treason?
Tell me which way I must be damn'd for this.



When last we parted, we had no qualms like these,
But entertain'd each others thoughts like Men,
Whose Souls were well acquainted. Is the World
Reform'd since our last meeting? What new miracles
Have happen'd? Has Priuli's heart relented?
Can he be honest?



Kind Heav'n! let heavy Curses
Gall his old Age; Cramps, Aches, rack his Bones;
And bitterest disquiet wring his Heart;
Oh let him live 'till Life become his burden!
Let him groan under't long, linger an Age
In the worst Agonies and Pangs of Death;
And find its ease, but late.



Nay, could'st thou not
As well, my Friend, have stretcht the Curse to all
The Senate round, as to one single Villain?



But Curses stiek not: Could I kill with Cursing,
By Heav'n I know not thirty Heads in Venice

Should not be blasted; Senators should not
Like Dogs on Dunghills; but their Wives and Daughters
Dye of their own diseases. Oh for a Curse
To kill with!



Daggers, Daggers, are much better!











But where are they?




May be dispos'd in honest hands in Venice.




Thou talk'st in Clouds.



But yet a Heart half wrong'd
As thine has bin, would find the meaning, Jafferr.




A thousand Daggers, all in honest hands;
And have not I a Friend will stick one here?



Yes, if I thought thou wert not to be cherisht
To a nobler purpose, l'd be that Friend.
But thou hast better Friends, Friends, whom thy Wrong,
Have made thy Friends; Friends, worthy to be call'd so;
I'l trust thee with a secret: There are Spirits
This hour at work. But as thou art a Man,
Whom I have pickt and chosen from the World,
Swear, that thou wilt be true to what I utter,
And when I have told thee, that which only Gods
And Men like Gods are privy to, then swear,
No Chance or Change shall wrest it from thy Bosom.



When thou would'st bind me, is there need of Oaths?
(Green-sickness Girls lose Maiden-heads with such Counters)
For thou art so near my heart, that thou may'st see
Its bottom, sound its strength, and firmness to thee:
Is Coward, Fool, or Villian, in my face?
If I seem none of these, I dare believe
Thou would'st not use me in a little Cause,
For I am fit for Honour's toughest task;
Nor ever yet found fooling was my Province;
And for a villainous inglorious enterprize,
I know thy heart so well, I dare lay mine
Before thee, set it to what Point thou wilt.



Nay, It's a Cause thou wilt be fond of Jaffeir.

For it is founded on the noblest Basis,
Our Liberties, our natural Inheritance;
There's no Religion, no Hypocrisie in't;
Wee'l do the Business, and ne'r fast and pray for't:
Openly act a deed, the World shall gaze
With wonder at, and envy when it is done.







For Liberty my Friend:
Thou shalt be freed from base Priuli's Tyranny,
And thy sequestred Fortunes heal'd again.
I shall be freed from opprobrious Wrongs,
That press me now, and bend my Spirit downward:
All Venice free, and every growing Merit
Succe•d toits just Right: Fools shall be pull'd

  17From Wisdoms Seat; those baleful unclean Birds,
Those Lazy-Wols, who (〈◊〉 near Fortunes Top)
Sit only watchful with their heavy Wings
To cuff down new fledg'd Virtues, that would rise
To nobler heights, and make the Grove harmonious,



What can I do?



Cans't thou not kill a Senator?



Were there one wise or honest, I could kill him
For herding with that nest of Fools and Knaves;
By all my Wrongs, thou talk'st as if revenge
Were to be had, and the brave Story warms me.







I do, by all those glittering Stars,
And yond great Ruling Planet of the Night!
By all good Pow'rs above, and ill below!
By Love and Friendship, dearer than my Life!
No Pow'r or Death shall make me false to thee.



Here we embrance, and I'l unlock my Heart.
A Councel's held hard by, where the destruction
Of this great Empire's hatching: There I'l lead thee!
But be a Man, for thou art to mix with Men
Fit to disturb the Peace of all the World,
And rule it when it's wildest  



I give thee thanks
For this kind warning: Yes, I will be a Man,
And charge thee, Pierre, when er'e thou see'st my fears
Betry me less, to rip this Heart of mine
Out of my Breast, and shew it for a Cowards.
Come, let's begone, for from this hour I chase
All little thoughts, all tender humane Follies
Out of my bosom: Vengeance shall have room:
Revenge!







Revenge! Revenge  









Why was my choice Ambition, the first ground
A Wretch can build on• it's indeed at distance

  18A good Prospect, 〈◊〉 to the View,
The Height delights as, and the Mountain Top
Looks beautiful, because it's 〈◊〉 to Heav'n,
But we ne're think how sandy's the Foundation,
What Storm will better, and what Tempest shake us!
Who's there?






Renault, good morrow! for by this time
I think the Scale of Night has turn'd the ballance,
And weighs up Morning: Has the Clock struck Twelve?



Yes, Clocks will go as they are set: But Man,
Irregular Man's ne're constant, never certain:
I've spent at least three pr•tious hours of darkness
In waiting dull attendance; 'tis the Curse
Of diligent Virtue to be mixt like mine,
With giddy Tempers, Souls but half resolv'd.



Hell 〈◊〉 but Soul amongst us, it can frighten.



What's then the cause that I am here alone?
Why are we not together 〈◊〉




You are an Englishman: When Treason's hatching
One might have thought you'd not have been behind hand.
In what Whore's lap have you been lolling?
Give but an Englishman his Whore and ease,
Beef and a Sea-coal fire, he's yours for ever.



Frenchman, you are 〈◊〉.











Is this a time for quarrels? Thieves and Rogues
Fall out and brawl: Should Men of your high calling,
Men separated by the Choice of Providence,
From the gross heap of Mankind, and set here
In this great assembly as in one great Jewel,

  19T'adorn the bravest purpose it 〈◊◊〉 on;
Should you like Boys wrangle for trifles?











I thought I'd given my Heart
Long since to every Man that mingles here;
But grieve to find it trusted with such Tempers,
That can't forgive my froward Age its weakness.




Eliot, thou once had'st Vertne, I have seen
Thy stubborn Temper bend with godlike Goodness,
Not half thus courted: 'Tis thy Nations Glory,
To hugg the Foe that offers brave 〈◊〉.
Once more embrace, my Friends   〈◊〉 all embrace  
United thus, we are the mighty Engin
Must twist this rooted Empire from its Basis!
Totters it not already?



Would it were tumbling.



Nay it shall down: This Night we Seal its ruine.


Oh Pierre! thou art welcome!
Come to my breast, for by its hopes thou look'st
Lovelily dreadful, and the Fate of Venice

Seems on thy Sword already. Oh my Mars!

The Poets that fust 〈◊〉 a God of War
Sure prophesy'd of thee.



Friends! was not Brutus,

(I mean that Brutus, who in open Senate
Stabb'd the first Caesar that usurp'd the World)
A Gallant Man?



Yes, and Cat• too;
Tho story wrong his Fame: for he conspir'd
To prop the reeling Glory of his Country:
His Cause was good.



And ours as much above it,
As Renault thou art Superior to Cethegus,

Or Pierre to Cassius.




Then to what we aim at
When do we start? or must we talk for ever?



No Pierre, the Deed's near Birth: Fate seems to have set
The Business up, and given it to our care,
I hope there's not a heart nor hand amongst us
But is firm and ready.




Wee'l die with Bedamor•.





Matchless, as wi• your Glory be hereafter.
The Game is for a Matchless Prize, if won;
If lost, disgraceful Ruine.



What can lose it 〈◊〉

The publick Stock's a Beggar; one 〈◊〉

Trusts not another: Look into their Stores
Of general safety; Empty Magazines,
A tatter'd Flee•, a murmuring unpaid Army,
Bankrupt Nobility, a harrast Commonalty,
A Factious, giddy, and divided Senate,
Is all the strength of Venice: Let's destroy it;
Let's fill their Magazines with Arms to awe them,
Man out their Fleet, and make their Trade maintain it;
Let loose the murmuring Army on their Masters,
To pay themselves with plunder, Lop their Nobles
To the base Roots, whence most of 'em first sprung;
Enslave the Rowt, whom smarting will make humble,
Turn out their droning Senate, and possess
That Seat of Empire which our Souls were fram'd for.



Ten thousand men are Armed at your Nod,
Commanded all by Leaders fit to guide
A Battle for the freedom of the World;
This wretched State has starv'd them in its service,
And by your bounty quicken'd, they 're resolv'd
To serve your Glory, and revenge their own!
Th' have all their different Quarters in this City,
Watch for th' Alarm, and grumble 'tis so tardy.



I doubt not Friend, but thy unweary'd diligence
Has still kept waking, and it shall have ease;
After this Night it is resolv'd we meet
Nomore, '•ll Venice own us for her Lords.



How lovely the Adriatique Whore,
Drest in her Flames, will shine! devouring Flames!

  21Such as shall burn her to the watery bottm
And hiss in her Foundation.




Amongst us that owns this glorious Cause,
Have friends or Interest, hee'd wish to save,
Let it be •old, the general Doom is Seal'd;
But I'de forgo the Hopes of a Worlds Empire,
Rather than wound the Bowels of my Friend.



I must confess you there have toucht my weakness,
I have a Friend; hear it, such a Friend!
My heart was ner'e shut to him: Nay, I'l tell you,
He knows the very Business of this Hour;
But he rejoyces in the Cause, and loves it,
W' have chang'd a Vow to live and die together,
And He's at hand to ratify it here.







No   I've dealt nobly with you;
I've brought my All into the publick Stock;
I had but one Friend, and him I'l share amongst you;
Receive and Cherish him: Or if, when seen
And searcht, you find him worthless, as my Tongue
Has lodg'd this Secret in his faithful Breast,
To ease your fears I wear a Dagger here
Shall rip it out again, and give you rest.
Come forth, thou only Good I er'e could boast of.






His Presence bears the show of Manly Vertue.



I know you'• wonder all, that thus uncall'd,
I dare approach this place of fatal Councels;
But I am amongst you, and by Heav'n it glads me,
To see so many Vertues thus united,
To restore Justice and dethrown Oppression.
Command this Sword, if you would have it quiet,
Into this Breast; but if you think it worthy
To cut the Throats of reverend Rogues in Robes,
Send me into the curs'd assembl'd Senate;
It shrinks not, tho I meet a Father there;
Would you behold this City Flaming? Here's

  22A hand shall bear a lighted Torch at noon
To the Arsenal, and set its Ga•es on fire.



You talk this well, Sir.



Nay   by Heav'n I'l do this.
Come, come, I read distrust in all your faces,
You fear me a Villain, and indeed it's odd
To hear a stranger talk thus at first meeting,
Of matters, that have been so well debated;
But I come ripe with Wrongs as you with Councels;
I hate this Senate, am a Foe to Venice;

A Friend to none, but Men resolv'd like me,
To push on Mischief: Oh did you but know me,
I need not talk thus!




Pierre! I must embrace him,
My heart beats to this Man as if it knew him.



I never lov'd these huggers:




The cause delights me not. Your Friends survey me,
As I were dang'rous   but I come Arm'd
Against all doubts, and to your trust will give
A Pledge, worth more than all the World can pay for.
My Belvidera! Ho! my Belvidera!








Let me entreat you,
As I have henceforth hopes to call ye friends,
That all but the Ambassador, this
Grave Guide of Councels, with my friend that owns me,
Withdraw a while to spare a Womans blushes.


Ex. all but Bed. Rena. Jaff. Pierr.


Pierre, whither will this Ceremony lead us?










Who calls so lowd at this late peacefull hour?
That Voice was wont to come in gentler whispers,
And fill my Ears with the soft breath of Love:
Thou hourly Image of my Thoughts, where art thou?







Oh! I have slept, and dreamt,
And dreamt again: Where hast thou been thou Loyterer?
Tho my Eyes clos'd, my Arms have still been open'd;
Stretch every way betwixt my broken slumbers,

  23To search if thou 〈◊〉 come to crown my Rest;
There's no repose without thee: Oh the day,
Too soon will break, and wake us to our sorrow;
Come, come to bed, and bid thy Cares good Night.



Oh Belvidera! we must change the Scene
In which the past Delights of Life were tasted:
The poor sleep little, we must learn to watch
Our labours late, and early every Morning,
Mid'st winter Frosts, then clad and fed with sparing,
Rise to our toils, and drudge away the day.



Alas! where am I! whither is't you lead me!
Methinks I read distraction in your face!
Something less gentle than the Fate you tell me:
You shake and tremble too! your blood runs cold!
Heaven's guard my Love, and bless his heart with Patience.



That I have Patience, let our Fate bear witness,
Who has ordain'd it so, that thou and I
(Thou the divinest Good man e're possest,
And I the wretched'st of the Race of Man)
This very hour, without one tear, must part.



Part! must we part? Oh! am I then forsaken?
Will my Love cast me off? have my misfortunes
Offended him so highly, that hee'l leave me?
Why dragg you from me? whither are you going?
My Dear! my Life! my Love!











Take her from my heart,
Shee'l gain such hold else, I shall ner'e get loose.
I charge thee take her, but with tender'st care,
Relieve her Troubles and asswage her sorrows.



Rise, Madam! and Command amongst your Servants!



To you, Sirs, and your Honours, I bequeath her,
And with her this, when I prove unworthy   Gives a dagger.

You know the rest:   Then strike it to her heart;
And tell her, he, who three whole happy years
Lay in her Arms, and each kind Night repeated
The passionate Vows of still encreasing Love,
Sent that Reward for all her Truth and Sufferings.



Nay, take my Life, since he has sold it cheaply;

  24Or send me to some distant Clime your slave,
But let it be far off, least my complainings
Should reach his guilty Bars, and •••ke his peace.



No Belvidera, I've contriv'd thy honour,
Trust to my Faith, and be but Fortune kind
To me, as I'l preserve that faith unbroken,
When next we meet, I'l lift thee to a height,
Shall gather all the gazing VVorld about thee,
To wonder what strange Virtue plac'd thee there.
But if we ner'e meet more  



Oh thou unkind one,
Never meet more! have I deserv'd this from you?
Look on me, tell me; tell me, speak thou dear deceiver,
VVhy am I separated from thy Love?
If I am false, accuse me; but if true,
Don't, prithee don't in poverty forsake me.
But pitty the sad heart, that's torn with parting.
Yet hear me! yet recall me  


Ex. Ren. Bed. and Belv.



Look not that way, but turn your selves a while
Into my heart, and be wean'd all together.
My Friend, where art thou?



Here, my Honour's Brother.








Renault has lead her
Back to her own Apartment: but, by Heav'n!
Thou must not see her more till our work's over.







Not for your life.



Oh Pierre, wert thou but she,
How I could pull thee down into my heart,
Gaze on thee till my Eye-strings cra•kt with Love,
Till all my sinews with its fire extended,
Fixt me upon the Rack of ardent longing;
Then swelling, sighing, raging to be blest,
Come like a panting Turtle to thy Breast,
On thy soft Bosom, hovering, 〈◊〉 and play,
Confess the cause why last I fled away;
'Own 'twas a fault, but swear to give it or'e,
And never follow false Ambition more. Ex. Ambo.










TEll him I am gone to bed: Tell him I am not 〈◊〉 home; tell him I've better Company with me, or anything; tell him in short I will not 〈◊◊〉 the 〈◊〉 trouble∣s• vexatious Fool: He's worse Company th•n 〈◊〉 igno•nt Phy•an   I'l not be disturb'd at these unseasonable hours.



But Madam! He's hore already, just enter'd the doors.



Turn him out 〈◊〉, you 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉, giddy• brain'd Asse! if he will not begone, 〈◊〉 the 〈◊◊〉 fire and burn us both: I had rather meet a Toad 〈◊〉 my 〈◊〉 th•〈◊〉 old hideous Animal in my Chamber to Night. 〈◊〉 Antonio.




Nacky, Nacky, 〈◊〉   how 〈◊〉 do 〈◊◊◊〉. I am come little Nacky• past 〈◊〉 Clock, a 〈◊〉 hour; time in all Conscience 〈◊〉 go to 〈◊◊〉   〈◊〉〈◊〉 I 〈◊〉? Ay Nacky;〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉 Aq•llna Naquilina, Naquilina, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉Nacky   come let's to bed   you 〈◊〉 you Pugg you   you little Pu•   〈◊◊〉   I am a 〈◊〉.



You are Fool, I am sure.




May be so too sweet-heart. 〈◊〉 the 〈◊◊〉 for all that. 〈◊〉〈◊◊〉,〈◊◊◊◊◊〉




You would do well 〈◊〉 to be 〈◊◊〉 no longer, but leave me to my self, be 〈◊◊〉 go home, Sir.







Ay home, S• Who am I?



Mado•〈◊◊◊◊〉 you are my   you are   thou art my little N•cky 〈◊〉   that's all.



I find you are 〈◊〉 to be trouble•〈◊〉 so 〈◊〉 make short of the matter in 〈◊〉 words. I 〈◊〉 you, 〈◊〉 you, loath you, 〈◊〉 am 〈◊〉 of 〈◊◊〉 of you   〈◊〉 you•, you •re 〈◊〉 Old, 〈◊◊◊◊〉   〈◊〉〈1 line〉 medling, with every thing, and if you had not Money 〈◊〉 you are good for nothing.



Good for nothi• Hurry 〈◊〉 I'l 〈◊〉 th•〈◊〉 sently. Sixty one years 〈◊〉, and good 〈◊◊〉, that's brave.
To the Maid.
〈◊◊◊◊◊〉 turn you out for a season; go turn out I say, it is our will and
  26
pleasure to be private some 〈◊〉   out, out when you are bid too  


Good for nothing you say.



Why what are you good for?



In the first place, Madam, I am Old, and consequently very wise, very wise, Madona,〈◊〉 mark that: in the second place take notice, if you please, that I am a S•ator, and when 〈◊〉 think 〈◊◊〉 make Speeches Madona. Hurry durry, I can make a Speech in the Senate-house now and then   wou'd make your hair stand an end, Ma•na.



What 〈◊〉 I for your Speeches in the Senate-house, if you wou'd be 〈◊〉 here, I should thank you.



Why, I can make Speeches to thee too, my lovely 〈◊〉; for Example   my cruel 〈◊〉 one,

〈◊◊◊◊〉 of Gold, and at every 〈◊〉 shakes it.
Since it is my 〈◊〉, that you should with your Servant angry prove; tho late at Night   I hope 〈◊〉 not 〈◊〉 late with this to gain reception for my Love   there's for 〈◊〉 my little Nicky Nacky   take it, 〈◊◊〉 it   I say take it, or 〈◊〉 throw it 〈◊〉 your head   how now, 〈◊〉



Truly, my Illu• Senator, I must confess your Honour is at present most profoundly 〈◊〉 indeed.



Very well: Come, now let's sit down and think upon't a little   come 〈◊◊◊〉   sit down by me a little my Nicky 〈◊〉,〈◊〉  
〈◊◊〉
〈◊〉 durry   good for nothing  



No Sir, if you please I can know my distance and stand.




Stand• How•Nacky, up and I down! Nay then let me exclaim with the Poet.
Shew me a 〈◊◊◊◊〉, A 〈◊◊〉, 〈◊◊◊◊〉.
Hurry durry   not sit down   〈◊◊◊◊〉  
You won't sit down?








Then look you now, suppose me 〈◊〉 Bull; a 〈◊〉 Bull, the Bull of Bulls, or any 〈◊◊〉 up I get 〈◊〉 with my brows th•s 〈◊〉   〈◊◊〉 I say 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉, 〈◊◊〉. You won't 〈◊◊〉 will you•   I broo  


〈◊〉 like a 〈◊〉, and drives her about.


Well, Sir, I must 〈◊◊〉. Now your honour has been a Bull, pray what Beast will your Worship please to 〈◊◊〉




Now I'l be 〈◊◊◊〉, and thy Lover little Nicky 〈◊〉
He 〈◊◊◊〉

〈◊◊〉, 〈◊〉, toad, toad! spit
  27
in my Face a little, Nacky   spit in my Face prithee, spit in my Face, never so little: spit but a little bit   spit, spit, spit, spit, when you are bid I say; do, prithee spit   now, now, now, spit: what you won't spit, will you? Then I'l be a Dog.



A Dog my Lord?



Ay a Dog   and I'l give thee this to'ther purse to let me be a Dog   and to use me like a Dog a little. Hurry durry   I will   here 'tis.  




Well, with all my heart. But let me beseech your Dogship to play your trick's over as fast as you can, that you may come to stinking the sooner, and be turn'd out of dores as you deserve.



Ay, ay   no matter for that   that shan't move me   Now, bough waugh waugh, bough waugh  

He gets 〈◊〉 the Table.
Barks like a Dog.


Hold, hold, hold Sir, I 〈◊〉 you: what is't you do? If Curs 〈◊〉, they must 〈◊◊〉, Sir. Do you see, 〈◊◊〉.



Ay with all my heart: do kick, kick on, now I am under the Table, kick 〈◊〉   kick harder   harder yet, bough waugh waugh, waugh, bough   •odd, 〈◊〉 have a 〈◊〉 at thy shins   bough waugh wough, waugh, bough   'odd she kicks 〈◊〉.  



Nay then I'l go another way to work with you: and I think here's an 〈◊◊〉 for the purpose
〈◊◊◊◊◊〉
What bite your Mistress, 〈◊〉! out, out of 〈◊〉, you Dog, to kennel and behang'd   bite your Mistress by the Legs, you rogue.  




Nay pri•〈◊〉,•ow thou art too loving: Hurry durry, 'odd I'l be a Dog no longer.



Nay none of your •ing and 〈◊〉: But be gone, or here's the 〈◊〉: What 〈◊〉 your Mistress by the Legs you mungril? out of dores   〈◊◊〉, to kennel 〈◊◊〉 go.



This is very 〈◊◊〉: Nacky very 〈◊〉 look you, I will not go   I will not stir 〈◊〉 the dore, that I resolve   hurry durry, what 〈◊〉 me out•

She 〈◊〉 him out.


Ay, and if you come here any more to night I'l have my Foot-men lug you, you 〈◊〉: What 〈◊〉 your poor Mistre•Nacky, sirrah!






Heav'ns Madam! 〈◊〉 the matter?

He 〈◊〉 at the 〈◊〉 like a 〈◊〉.


Call my Foot-men hither •tly.



They are here 〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉 all 〈◊〉 with a strange •olse, that 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉 of.



Go all of you and tu• that 〈◊◊〉 in 〈◊〉 next room out of my house   If I 〈◊〉 s• him within these w•lls again, without my leave for his Admitta•ce, you s•king Rogues   I'l have you •oison'd all, poison'd, like R•: every Corner of the house shall stink of one of you: 〈◊〉, and l• hereafter to •now my pleasure. So now 〈◊〉 my •tre:
Thus when Godlike 〈◊◊〉,
We Sacrufuc•〈◊〉 Fool 〈◊◊〉.










I'm 〈◊〉 I am •old! betray'd to 〈◊〉!

〈◊〉 Ruin has inclos'd me!
No soone• was I to my bed re•d,
To weigh, and (w•ing) 〈◊◊◊〉,
But the old ho•〈◊〉 to 〈◊◊◊〉

My Peace and Honou•〈◊◊〉, c•

(Like Tarq•in) gastely with 〈◊〉 Lust.
Oh thou Ro•〈◊〉 thou could'st find friends to vindica• thy Wrong;
I never had but one, and he's prov'd false;
He that should g•d 〈◊◊〉, 〈◊◊◊〉,

〈◊〉 me! undone me! Oh t• I 〈◊◊〉 him!
Where shall I go! Oh 〈◊〉 whither 〈◊〉?






Can, •lvidera want a resting place
When these poor 〈◊〉 are 〈◊◊◊◊〉?
Oh 'tis in vain to struggle with D•

Strong as my Love to thee, 〈◊◊〉 moment
I am from thy sight, the H•rt 〈◊〉 my 〈◊〉

Moans like a tender In•t i• i•〈◊〉

Whose Nurse had l• it: 〈◊〉, and w• the Songs
Of gentle Love perswade i• to 〈◊◊〉




I fear the stubborn 〈◊〉 will not own me,
'Tis grown a Rebel to be 〈◊〉 do long•,
Scor•ns the Indulge• Bo• that 〈◊〉•ll'd it,
And like a Disobedie• Child •dains
The soft Authority of 〈◊〉.









Yes, yes, th• was• time,

  29When 〈◊〉's tears, her crys, and sorrows
Were not de•; when if the chanc'd to 〈◊〉,
Or look but •d; there was indeed a time
When 〈◊〉 would have 〈◊◊〉 in his Arms,
Eas'd her declining Head upon his Breast,
And never left her 'till he found the Cause,
But let her now w•〈◊〉,
Cry, 'till she rend the Earth; sigh 'till she burst
Her heart asunder; still he bears it all;
Deaf as the Wind, and as the Rocks unshaken.



Have I been deaf? am I that Rock unmov'd?
Against whose root, T•s beat and sighes a•e 〈◊〉

In vain have I 〈◊〉 thy Sorrows 〈◊〉!
Witness against me Heav'•s, have I done this•

Then bear me in a Whirl wind back agen,
And let that angry dear one ne're forgive me!
Oh thou too rashly 〈◊〉 of my Love!
Could'st thou but 〈◊〉•ow I have 〈◊〉 this night,
Dark and alone, no p•ow to my He•d,
Rest in my Eyes, nor quiet in my Heart,
Thou would'st not Belvidera, sure thou would•〈◊〉

Talk to me thus, but like a p•tying Angel
Spreading thy 〈◊〉 come settle on my breast,
And hatch warm comfort there e•re sorrows freeze it.



Why, then poor 〈◊〉, in what baleful Cor•

Hast thou been talking with that Witch the Night?
On what cold stone hast 〈◊〉 been stretcht along,
Gathering the grumbling •ds about thy Head,
To mix with theirs the Accents, of thy Woes!
Oh now I •d the Cause my Love forsakes me!
I am no longer fit to bear a share
In his Concernments: My weak female Vi•ue
Must not be trusted; 'Tis too •ail and tend•r.



Oh 〈◊〉! Porcia! What a Soul was thine?



That 〈◊〉 was a Woman, and when 〈◊〉

Big with the fate of 〈◊〉, (Heav'n guard thy safety!)
Conceal'd from her the Labours of his Mind,
She let him see, h• Blood was great as his,
Flow'd from a Spring as noble, and a Heart
Fit to partake his Troubles, as his L•ve:

〈◊〉, fetch that D•gger back, the 〈◊〉 dower

  30Thou gav'st last night in parting with me, stril• it
Here to my heart, and as the Blood flows from i•,
Judge if it run not 〈◊〉 as 〈◊〉 Da•ghter's.



Thou •rt too good, and I indeed unworthy,
Unworthy so much 〈◊〉! Teach me how
I may deserve such matc•less Love as thine,
And see with what attention I'l obey thee.



Do not despise me: that's the All I ask.



Despise thee! Hear me  



Oh thy charming Tongue
Is but too well acquainted with my weakness,
Knows, let it name but Love, my melting heart
Dissolves within my Bre•st, 'till with 〈◊〉 Eyes
I reel into thy Arms, and all's forgotten.



What shall I do?



Tell me! be just, and tell me
Why dwells that busy Cloud upon thy face?
Why am I made a 〈◊〉 why that 〈◊〉,
And I not know the Cau•? Why when the World
Is wrapt in Rest, why chooses then my Love
To wander up and down in horrid darkness,
Loathing his bed, and these desiring Arms?
Why are those Ey• Blood shot, with tedious watching?
Why starts 〈◊〉 now? and looks as if he 〈◊〉

His Fate were 〈◊〉? 'Tell me, ease my 〈◊〉!
Least when we next time meet, I want the power
To search into the sickness of thy Mind,
But talk as wildly then as thou look'st now.








Why was I last night deliver'd to a Villain?







Yes! to a Villain! Why at such an hour
Meets that assembly all made up of Wretches
That look as Hel•ad had drawn 'em into League?
Why, I in this hand, and in 〈◊◊〉 Dagger,
Was I deliver'd with such dre• Ceremonies?
``To you, Sirs, and to your Honour I be •th •er,

``And with her this: When e're I prove •worthy,

``You know the rest, then strike it to her Heart?

Oh! why's that rest conceal'd from me? must I
Be made the hostage o• a 〈◊◊〉?

  31For such I know I am; that's all my value!
But by the Love and Loyalty I owe thee,
I'l free thee from the Bondage of these Slaves,
Strait to the Senate, tell'em all I know,
All that I think, all that my fears inform me!



Is this the Roman Virtue! this the Blood,
That boasts its purity with Cato's Daughter!
Would she have e're betray'd her Brutus?





For Brutus trusted her: Wer't thou so kind,
What would not Belvidera suffer for thee?



I shall undo my self, and •ell thee all.



Look not upon me, as I am a Woman,
But as a Bone, thy Wife, thy Friend; who long
Has had admission to thy heart, and there
Study'd the Virtues of thy gallant Nature;
Thy Constancy; thy Courage and thy Truth,
Have been my daily •esson! I have learnt them,
Am bold as thou, can suffer or despise
The worst of Fates for thee; and with thee share them.



Oh you divinest Powers! look down and hear
My Prayers! instruct me to reward this Virtue!
Yet think a litt•, 〈◊〉 thou tempt me further:
Think I have a Tale to tell, will shake thy Nature,
Melt all this boasted Constancy thou talk'st o•

Into vile tears and despicable sorrows:
Then if thou should'st betray me!







No: do not swear: I would not violate
Thy tender Nature with so rude a Bond:
But as thou hop'st to see me live my days,
And love thee long, lock this within thy Breast;
I've bound my self by all the strictest Sacraments,
Divine and humane  







To kill thy Father  







Nay the Throats of the whole Senate
Shall bleed my Be•videra: He amongst 〈◊〉

That spares his Father, Brother, or his •riend,
Is Damn'd: How rich and beauteous will the face
Of Ruin look, when these wide street• run blood;
I and the glorious Partner's of my Fortune

  32Shouting, and striding o're the prostrate Dead:
Still to new waste; whilst thou, far off in safety
Smiling, shalt see the wonders of our daring;
And when night comes, with Praise and Love rec•ive me.







Have a care, and shrink not even in thought!
For if thou do 〈◊〉  



I know it, thou wilt kill me.
Do, strike thy Sword into this bosom: Lay me
Dead on the Earth, and then thou wilt be safe:
Murder my Father! tho his Cruel Nature
Has persecuted me to my undoing,
Driven me to basest wants; Can I behold him
With smiles of Vengeance, butcher'd in his Age?
The sacred •ountain of my life destroy'd?
And canst thou shed the blood •hat gave me being?
Nay, be a Traitor too, and sell th• Count•;
Can thy great Heart de•cend so 〈◊〉 low,
Mix with hired Slaves, •ravoes and Common stabbers,
Nose-slitters, Ally-lurking Villians joyn
With such a Crew, and take a 〈◊〉 Wages,
To cut the Thro• of 〈◊〉 as they 〈◊〉




Thou wrong 〈◊〉 me, 〈◊〉〈◊〉, 〈◊〉

With Men of Souls: 〈◊〉 to reform the ills
Of all Mankind: There's not a Heart 〈◊〉 them,
But's as stout as Death, yet honest as the Nature
Of Man first made, e're Fraud, and Vice were fashions.



What's he, to whose curst hands last night thou 〈◊〉 me?
Was that well done? Oh! I could tell a story
Would rowse thy Lyon Heart out of its Den,
And make it rage with terrifying fury.



Speak on I 〈◊〉 t•ee!





Thy Belvidera's Peace 〈◊〉 thy Care,
Remove me from this place: Last nigh•, last night



Distract me not, but give me all the Truth.



No sooner wer't thou 〈◊〉, and I alone,
Left in the pow'r 〈◊〉 that old Son of Mischief;
No sooner was I 〈◊〉 on my sad Bed,
But that vile Wretch approacht me; loose, unbutton'd,
Read for violation, 〈◊◊〉 Heart

  33Throbb'd with its •ears: Oh how I wept and 〈◊〉,
And shrunk and trembled; 〈◊〉 in 〈◊〉 for him
That should protect me. Thou alas! were gone!



Patience! sweet Heav'n, 'till I make vengeance sure.



He drew the hideous Dagger forth thou gav'st him,
And with upbra•ding smiles he said, behold it;

This is the pledge of a false Husbands love:
And in my Arms then prest, and wou'd have clasp'd me;
But with my Cries I scar'd his Coward heart,
'Till he withdrew, and mutter'd vows to Hell.
These are thy Friends! with these thy Life, thy Honour,
Thy Love, all's stak't, and all will go to ruine.



No more: I charge thee keep this secret close;
Clear up thy sorrows, look as if thy wrongs
Were all forgot, and treat him like a Friend,
As no complaint were made. No more, retire,
Retire my Life, and doubt not of my Honour;
I'l heal its failings, and deserve thy Love.



Oh should I part with thee, I fear thou wilt
In Anger leave me, and return no more:



Return no more! I would not live without thee
Another Night to purchase the Creation.



When shall we meet again?




I'l steal my self to thy expecting Arms,
Come like a Travell'd Dove and bring thee Peace.







By all our loves!



'Tis hard to part:
But sure no falsehood e're lookt so fairly.
Farewell   Remember Twelve.





Let Heav'n forget me
When I remember not thy Truth, thy Love.
How curst is my Condition, toss'd and justl'd
From every Corner; Fortune's Common Fool
The jest of Rogues, an Instrumental Ass
For Villains to lay loads of Shame upon,
And drive about just for their ease and scorn.













A Friend, that could have wisht

  34T'have found thee otherwise imploy'd: what, hunt
A Wife on the dull •oil! sure a stanch Husband
Of all Hounds is the dullest? wilt thou never,
Never be wean'd from C••dles and Confections?
What feminine Tale hast thou been listening to,
Of unayr'd shirts; Catharrs and Tooth Ash got
By thin-sol'd shoos? Damnation! that a Fellow
Chosen to be a Sharer in the Destruction
Of a whole People, should sneak thus in Corners
To ease his fulsom Lusts, and Fool his Mind.



May not a Man then trifle out an hour
With a kind Woman and not wrong his calling?



Not in a Cause like ours.



Then Friend our Cause
Is in a damn'd condition: for I'l tell thee,
That Canker-worm call'd Letchery has toucht it,
'Tis tainted vilely: would'st thou think it Renault,

(That mortify'd old wither'd Winter Rogue)
Loves simple Fornication like a Priest,
I found him out for watering at my Wife:
He visited her last night like a kind Guardian:
Faith she has some Temptations, that's the truth on't.



He durst not wrong his Trust!



'Twas something late tho
To take the freedome of a Ladies Chamber.



Was she in bed?



Yes faith in Virgin sheets
White as her bosom, Pierre, disht neatly up,
Might tempt a weaker appetite to taste.
Oh how the old Fox stunk I warrant thee
When the rank fit was on him.




He us'd no Violence?



No, no! out on't, violence!
Play'd with her neck; brusht her with his Gray-beard,
Struggl'd and towz'd, tickl'd her 'till she squeak'd a little
May be, or so   but not a jot of Violence  







Ay, so say I: but hush, no more on't;
All hitherto is well, and I believe
My self no Monster yet: Tho no Man knows

  35What Fate he's born to? sure 'tis near the hour
We all should meet for our concluding 〈◊〉

Will the Ambassador be here in person?



No: he has sent Commission to that Villain, 〈◊〉,

To give the 〈◊〉 Charge;
I'd have thee be a Man if 〈◊〉

And keep thy temper; 〈◊〉 a brave 〈◊〉

Ne're comes too late.



Fear not, I am cool as Patience:
Had he compleated my dishonour, rather
Then hazard the 〈◊〉 our hopes are ripe for,
I'd bear it all 〈◊◊◊〉.



He's 〈◊〉 coming this way through the 〈◊〉;





Prithee retire, and leave me
With him alone: I'l put him to some tryal,
See how his rotten part will bear the 〈◊〉.









Nay never doubt, but trust me.
What, be a Devil! take a Damning Oath
For shedding 〈◊◊〉! can there be a 〈◊〉

In merciful repentance? 〈◊〉 this 〈◊〉.






〈◊〉! and 〈◊〉! what a slave is Man!
To let his itching flesh thus get the better of him!
Dispatch the Tool her Husband   that we're well.
Who's there?








My Friend, my near Ally!
The hostage of your faith, my beauteous Charge, is very well.



Sir, are you sure of that?
Stands she in perfect health? beats her pulse even?
Neither too hot nor cold?



What means that question?



Oh Women have fanta stick Constitutions,
Inconstant as their Wishes, always wavering,
And ne're fixt; was it not boldly done
Even at first sight to trust the Thing I lov'd
(A 〈◊〉 Treasure too!) with Youth so fierce
And vigorous as thine? but thou art honest.



Who dares accuse me?



Curst be him that doubts

  36Thy virtue, I have try'd it and declare
Were I to choose a Guardian of my Honour
I'd put it into thy kee•ing: for I •now the•.







Ay know thee: There's no falsehood in thee.
Thou look'st just as thou 〈◊〉: Let us embrace.
Now would'st thou cut my Throat 〈◊〉 I cut thine?



You dare not do't.













'Tis a ba•e World, and must reform, that's all.



















You are 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉



'Tis a cold Night indeed, I am Aged,
Full of decay and natural infirmities, 
〈◊〉〈◊〉


We shall be 〈◊◊〉 Friend, I 〈◊◊◊〉.




'Twas not well done, thou 〈◊◊〉 have 〈◊〉 him and not have gall'd him.



Damn him, let him 〈◊◊〉.
Heav'n! where am I? 〈◊〉 with 〈◊〉 Fiends.
That wait to Damn me. What Devil's 〈◊〉

When he forgets his 〈◊〉   〈◊〉 my heart.



My Friends, 'tis late: are we assembled all.
Where's Theodore?































We are both prepar'd!





〈◊〉 Retrosi; Oh you are Men I find

〈◊〉 to behold your Fate, and meet her Summons,
To morrow's rising Sun must see you all
Deckt in your honours are the Souldiers ready?







You, Durand, with your thousand must possess
St. Marks; You, Captain, know your charge already;
'Tis to secure the Ducal Palace: you

Brabe with a hundred more 〈◊〉 gain the 〈◊〉.


  37With the like number Brainveil to the Procuralle.

'Be all this done with the least tumult possible,
'Till in each place you post sufficient guards:
Then sheath your Swords in every breast you meet.



Oh reverend Cruelty: Damn'd bloody Villain!



During this Execution, Durand, you
Must in the mid'st keep your Battalia fast,
And •heodore be sure to plant the Canon
That may Command the streets; whilst Revellido,


M•zzana, Ternon and Retrosi, Guard you.
(This done!) weel give the General Alarm,
App•y Petards, and force the 〈◊〉 Gates;
Then fire the City round in several places,
Or with our Canon (if it dare resist)
Batte•'t to Ruin. But above all I charge you
Shed blood enough, spare neither Sex nor Age,
Name nor Condition; if there live a Senator
After to morrow, tho the dullest Rogue
That er'e sa•d nothing, we have lost our ends;
If possible, lets kill the very Name
Of Senator, and bury it in blood.



Merciless, 〈◊〉 slave!   Ay, blood enough!
Shed blood enough, old Renault: how thou charm'st me!



But one thing more, and then farewell till Fate
Join us again, or separate us ever:
First, let's embrace, Heav'n knows who next shall thus
Wi•g ye together: But let's all remember
We •ear no common Cause upon our Swords,
Let ea•h Man think that on his single Virtue
Dep•ds the Good and Fame of all the rest;
Eter•l Honour or perpetual Infamy.
Let's rem•mber, through what dreadful hazards
Propitious Fortune hitherto has led us,
How •ft•n on the brink of some discovery
have we stood tottering, and yet still kept our ground
So w•ll, the busiest searchers ne'r could follow
T•ose subtle Tracks which puzzled all suspition:
You droop Sir.



No: with a most profound attention
I've hard it all, and wonder at thy vertue.



Though there be yet few hours twi•t them and Ruin,
Are not the Senate lull'd in full security,
Quiet and satisfy'd, as Fools are always!
Never did so profound repose foretun
Calamity so great: Nay our good Fortune
Has blinded the most piercing of Mankind:
Strengthen'd the fearfull'st, charm'd the most suspectful,
Confounded the most subtle: for we live,
We live my Friends, and quickly shall our Life
Prove fatal to these Tyrants: Let's consider
That we destroy Oppression, Avarice,
A People nurst up equally with 〈◊〉

And loathsome Lusts, which Nature most abhors,
And such as without shame she cannot suffer.



Oh Belvidera, take me to thy Arms
And shew me where's my Peace, for I've lost it.




Without the least remorse then let's resolve
With Fire and Sword 〈◊〉 these Tyrants,
And when we shall behold those 〈◊〉 Tribunals,
Stain'd by the Tears and 〈◊〉 of the Innocent,
Burning with flames rather from Heav'n than ours,
The raging furious and unpitying Souldier
Pulling his reeking Dagger from the 〈◊〉

Of gasping Wretches; Death in every 〈◊〉,
With all that sad disorder can produce,
To make a Spectacle of horror: Then,
Then let's call to mind, my dearest Friends,
That there's nothing pure upon the Earth,
That the most valu'd things have most allays,
And that in change of all those vile Enormities,
Under whose weight this wretched Country labours,
The Means are only in our hands to Crown them.



And may those Powers above that are propitious
To gallant minds record this Cause, and bless it.



Thus happy, thus secure of all we wish for,
Should there my Friends be found amongst us one
False to this glorious Enterpr•e, what Fate,
What Vengeance were enough for such a Villian?



Death here without repentance, Hell hereafter.



Let that be my lott, if as here I stand
Listed by Fate amongst her darling Sons,

  39Tho I had one only •rother, dear by all
The strictest ties of Nature; tho one hour
Had given us birth, one Fortune fed our wants,
One only love, and that but of each other,
Still fill'd our minds: Could I have such a Friend
Joyn'd in this Cause, and had but ground to fear
Meant fowl play; may this right hand drop from me,
If I'd not hazard all my future peace,
And stabb him to the heart before you: who
Would not do less? Would'st not thou Pierre the same?



You have singled me, Sir, out for this hard question,
As if 'twere started only for my sake!
Am I the thing you fear? Here, here's my bosom,
Search it with all your Swords! am I a Traytor?



No: but I fear your late commended Friend
Is little less: Come Sirs, 'tis now no time
To trifle with our safety. Where's this Jaffeir?




He 〈◊〉 the room just now in strange disorder.



Nay, there is danger in him: I observ'd him,
During the time I took for Explanation,
He was transported from most deep attention
To a confusion which he could not smother.
His looks grew full of s•dness and surprize,
All which betray'd a wavering Spirit in him,
That labour'd with reluctancy and sorrow;
What's requisite for safety must be done
With speedy Execution: he remains
Yet in our power: I for my own part wear
A Dagger.







And I could wish it!







Bury'd in his heart.



Away! w'are yet all friends;
No more of this, 'twill Breed ill blood amongst us.



Let us all draw our Swords, and search the house,
Pull him from the dark hole where he sits brooding
O're his cold fears, and each man kill his share of him.



Who talks of killing? who's he'll shed the blood
That's dear to me? is't you? or you? or you Sir?

  40What not one speak 〈◊〉 how you stand 〈◊〉 all
On your grave Oracle, your wooden God there,
Yet not a word: Then Sir I'l tell you a secret,
Suspition's but at best a Cowards Virtue!





A Coward  




Put, put up thy Sword, old Man,
Thy hand shakes at it; come let's heal this breach,
I am too hot: we yet may live Friends.



'Till we are safe, our Friendship cannot be so.























Who are on my side?




Let's die like men and not be sold like Slaves.



One such word more, by Heav'n I'l to the Senate
And hang ye all, like Dogs in Clusters,
Why peep your Coward Swords half out their shells?
Why do you not all brandish them like min•?
You fear to die, and yet dare talk of Killing?



Go to the Senate and betray us, haster,
Secure thy wretched life, we fear to die
Less than thou dar'st be honest.




Fear'st not thou death? fy, there's a knavish itch
In that salt blood, an utter foe to smarting.
Had Jaffeir's Wife prov'd kind, he had still been true.
Foh   how that stinks?
Thou dy! thou kill my Friend! or thou, or thou,
Or thou, with that lean wither'd wretched Face!
Away! disperse all to your several Charges;
And meet to morrow where your honour calls you,
I'l bring that man, whose blood you so much thirst f•r,
And you shall see him venture for you fairly  
Hence, hence, I say.






I fear we have been too blame,
And done too much.



'T was too farr urg'd against the man you lov'd.



Here, take our Swords and 〈◊〉 'em with your feet.



Forgive us, g•liant Friend.



Nay, now y'have found
The way to melt and cast me as you will:
I'll fetch this Friend and give him to your mercy:
Nay he shall dye if you will take him from me,
For your repose I'll quit my hearts Jewel;
But would not have him torn away by Villains
And spitefull villany.



No; may you both
For•ver live and fill the world with fame!



Now you are too kind. Whence rose all this discord?
Oh what a dangerou•〈◊〉 have we 〈◊〉!
How near a fall was all we had long been building!
What an eternal blot had stain'd our glories,
If one the bravest and the best of men.
Had fallen a Sacrifice to rash suspicion!
Butcher'd by those whose Cause he came to cherish:
Oh could you know him all 〈◊〉 I have known him,
How good he is, how just, how true, how brave,
You wou'd not leave this place till you had seen him;
Humbled your selves before him, kiss'd his feet,
And gain'd remission for the worst of follies;
Come but to morrow all your doubts shall end,
And to your Loves me better recommend,
That I've preserv'd your Fame, and, sav'd my Friend.



The end of the third Act.








WHere dost thou lead me? Every step I move,
Methinks I tread upon some mangled Limb
Of a rack'd Friend: Oh my dear charming ruine!
Where are we wandring?





  42To doe a deed shall Chronicle thy name,
Among the glorious Legends of those few
That have sav'd sinking Nations: thy Renown
Shall be the future Song of all the Virgins,
Who by thy piety have been preserv'd
From horrid violation: Every 〈◊〉

Shall be adorn'd with Statues to thy honour,
And at thy feet this great Inscription written,

Remember him that prop'd the fall of Venice.



Rather, Remember him, who after all
The sacred Bonds of Oaths and holyer Friendship
In fond compassion to a Womans team
Forgot his Manhood, Vertue, truth and Honour,
To sacrifice the Bosom that reliev'd him.
Why wilt thou damn me?





How will you promise? how will you deceive?
Do, return back, re-place me in my Bondage,
Tell all thy Friends how dangerously thou lovst me;
And let thy Dagger doe its •loudy office.
Oh that kind Dagger, Jaffeir, how •will look
Stuck through my heart, drench'd in my bloud to th'hilts!
Whilst these poor dying eyes shall with their tears
No more tormen• thee, then thou wilt be free:
Or if thou think'st it nobler, Let me live
Till I am a Victim to the hatefull lust
Of that In•ernal Devil, that old Fiend
That's Damn'd himself and wou'd undoe Mankind:
Last night, my Love!



Name, name it not again.
It shews a beastly Image to my fancy;
Will wake me into mad•ess. Oh the 〈◊〉!
That durst approach such purity as thine
On terms so vile: 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 destruction
Fall on my Coward-head, and make my Name
The common 〈◊〉 of Fools if I 〈◊〉 him,
If I forgiv• him, if I not 〈◊〉

With utmost 〈◊〉, and most 〈◊◊〉,
Thy sufferings thou dear darling of my life 〈◊〉.



Delay no longer then, but to the Senate;

  43And tell the 〈◊〉 story e'r was utter'd,
Tell 'em what bloodshed, 〈◊〉, desolations,
Have been prepar'd, how near's the fatal hour!
Save thy poor Country, save the Reverend bloud.
Of all its Nobles, which to morrows Dawn
Must else see sh•d: Save the poor tender lives
Of all those little Infants which the Swords
Of 〈◊〉 are whetting for this moment;
Think thou already hearst their dying 〈◊〉,
Think that thou seest their sad distracted Mothers
Kneeling before thy feet, and begging pity
With torn dishevel'd hair and streaming eyes,
Their naked mangled 〈◊〉 besmeard with bloud,
And even the Milk with which their fondled Babes,
Softly they hush'd, dropping in anguish from 'em.
Think thou seest this, and then consult thy heart.







Think too, If thou lose this present minute,
What miseries the next day bring upon thee.
Imagine all the horrours of that night
Murther and Rapine, Waste and Desolation,
Confusedly ranging. Think what then may prove
My Lot! the Ravisher may then come safe,
And midst the terrour of the publick ruine
Doe a damn'd deed; perhaps to lay a Train
May catch thy life; then where will be revenge,
The dear revenge that's due to such a wrong?



By all Heavens powers Prophetick truth dwells in thee,
For every word thou speak'st strikes through my heart
Like a new light, and shows it how't has wander'd;
Just what th'hast made me, take me, Belvidera,

And lead me to the place where I'm to say.
This bitter Lesson, where I must betray
My truth, my vertue, constancy and friends:
Must I betray my friends? Ah take me quickly,
Secure me well before that thought's renew'd;
If I relapse once more, all's •ost for ever.



Hast thou a friend more dear than 〈◊〉?



No, th'art my Soul it self, wealth, friendship, honour,
All present joys, and earnest of all future,

  44Are summ'd in thee: 〈◊〉 when in thy 〈◊〉

Thus leaning on thy breast, one minute's 〈◊〉

Than a long thousand years of vulgar hours.
Why was such happiness not given me pure?
Why dash'd with cruel wrongs, and bitter wantings?
Come, lead me forward now like a tame Lamb
To Sacrifice, thus in his fatal Garlands,
Deck'd fine and pleas'd, The wanton skips and plays,
Trots by the enticing flattering Priestess side,
And much transported with his little pride,
Forgets his dear Companions of the 〈◊〉
Till by Her, bound, Hee's on the Altar 〈◊〉
Yet then too hardly bleats, such pleasure's in the pain.





Stand who goes there?







Friends, Belvidera! hide me from my Friends,
By Heaven I'd rather see the face of Hell,
Than meet the man I love.



But what friends are you?



Friends to the Senate and the State of 〈◊〉.



My orders are to seize on all I find
At this late hour, and bring 'em to the Council,
Who now are sitting.



Sir, you shall be obey'd.
Hold, Brutes, stand off, none of your paws upon me.
Now the Lot's cast, and Fate doe what thou wilt.






Where appear sitting, the Duke of Venice, Prinli, Antonio, And Eight other Senators.




Antony, Prinli, Senators of Venice,

Speak; why are we assembled here this night?
What have you to inform us of, concerns
The State of Venice, honour, or its safety?



Could words express the story I have to tell you,
Fathers, these tears were useless, these sad tears

  45That fall from my old 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊◊◊〉.
We all should weep; tear off these 〈◊◊〉,
And wrap our selves in Sack-cloth, sitting down
On the sad Earth, and cry aloud to Heaven.
Heaven knows if yet there be an hour to come
E'r Venice be no more!








Upon the Very brink of gaping ruine,
Within this City's form'd a dark Conspiracy,
To massacre us all, our 〈◊〉 and Children,
Kindred and Friends, our 〈◊〉 and Temples
To lay in Ashes: nay the hour too, fixt;
The Swords, for ought I know, drawn even this moment,
And the wild Waste begun: from unknown hands
I had this warning: but if we are men
Let's not be tamely butcher'd, but doe something
That may inform the world in after Ages,
Our Virtue was not ruin'd though we were. A 〈◊〉 without.

Room, room, make room for some Prisoners  
2 Senat. Let's raise the City.





Speak there, what diurbance?



Two Prisoners have the Guard seiz'd in the Streets,
Who say they come to inform this Reverend Senate
About the present danger.






Give 'em entrance  
Well, who are you?








The man speaks well.



Would every man that hears me
Would deal so honestly, and own his title.



'Tis rumour'd that a Plot ha• been contriv'd
Against this State; that you have a 〈◊〉 in't too.
If you are a Villain, to redeem your honour,
Unfold the truth and be restor'd with Mercy.



Think not that I to save my life come hither,
I know its value better; but in pity

  46To all those 〈◊◊◊〉, 〈◊〉

Are fix'd and 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉 before you
The sworn and 〈◊〉 foe of 〈◊〉.
But use me as my 〈◊〉 may deserve
And I may prove a friend.




Give him the Tortures.



That you dare not doe,
Your fears won't let you, 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 Itch
To hear a story which you 〈◊◊◊〉 of.
Truth with the fear 〈◊◊〉 shall 〈◊◊〉 from me.
Cowards are scar'd with 〈◊〉 Boys are 〈◊〉

Into consessions: but a Steady mind
Acts of its self, ne'r 〈◊〉 the body Counsell.
Give him the Tortures. Name but such a thing
Again; by Heaven I'll 〈◊〉 these lips for ever,
Not all your Racks, your Engines or your Wheels
Shall force a groan away   that you may guess at.



A bloudy 〈◊〉 fellow I'll warrant;
A damn'd bloudy minded fellow.







For my self full 〈◊〉.
Besides the lives of two and twenty friends Delivers a list.

Whose names are here 〈◊〉: Nay, let their Crimes
Be ner so monstrous, I must have the Oaths
And sacred promise of this Reverend Council,
That in a full Assembly of the Senate
The thing I ask be 〈◊〉. Swear this.
And I'll unfold the secrets of your danger.











By all the hopes
Ye have of Peace and Happiness hereafter,
Swear.







To grant me what I've ask'd,
Ye swear.







And as ye keep the Oath,
May you and your posterity be blest

  47Or curst for ever.



Else be curst for ever.



  Then here's the list, and with't the Delivers ano∣ther paper.

full disclose of all that threatens you.
Now Fate thou hast caught me.



Why what a dreadfull Cata•ogue of Cut-throats is here! I'll warrant you not one of these fellows but has a face like a Lion. I dare not so much as reade their names over.



Give orders that all diligent search be made
To seize these men, their characters are publick,
The paper intimates their Rendevouz
To be at the house of a fam'd 〈◊〉 Curtezan
Call'd Aquilina; see that place secur'd.



What my Nicky Nacky, Hurry Durry, Nicky Nacky in the Plot   I'll make a Speech. Most noble Senators,
What headlong apprehension drives you on,
Right noble, wise and truly solid Senators,
To violate the Laws and •ight of 〈◊〉?
The Lady is a Lady of renown.
'Tis true, she holds a house of fair Reception,
And though I say't my self, as many more
Can say as well as I.
2 Senat. My Lord, Iong Speeches
Are frivolous here, when dangers are so near us;
We all well know your Interest in that Lady,
The world talks loud on't.



Verily I have done,
I say no more.



But since he has declar'd
Himself concern'd, Pray, Captain, take great caution
To treat the fair one, as becomes her Character,
And let her Bed-chamber be search'd with dece•cy
You, Jaffeir, must with patience bear till mornin• to be our Prisoner.



Would the Chains of death
Had bound me fast e'r I had known this m•nute,
I've done a deed will make my Story hereafter
Quoted in competition with all ill ones:
The History of my wick•ness shall run
Down through the low traditions of the vulgar,

  48And Boy• be thought to tell the tale of Jaffeir.




Captain, withdraw your Prisoner.




Lead me where my own thoughts themselves may lose me,
Where I may doze out what I've left of life,
Forget my self and this days guilt and falsehood.
Cruel remembrance how shall 〈◊〉 appea•e thee!
Ex. guarded.
Noise without.
More Traitors; room, room, make room there.




Where are our Guards? shut up the Gates, the Treason's alrea∣dy at our Dores.





My Lords, more 〈◊〉:
Seiz'd in the very act of Confultation;
Furnish'd with Arms and Instruments of mischief,
Bring in the prisoners.






You, my Lords and Fathers,
(As you are pleas'd to call your selves) of Venice;

If you sit here to guide the course of Justice,
Why these disgracefull chains upon the limbs
That have so often labour'd in your service?
Are these the wreaths of 〈◊〉 ye bestow
On those that bring you Conquests home and Honours?



Go on, you shall be heard, Sir.



And be hang'd too, I hope.



Are these the Trophies I've deserv'd for fighting
Your Battels with confederated Powers,
When winds and Seas 〈◊〉 to overthrow you?
And brought the Fleets of Spain to your own Harbours,
When you, great Duke, 〈◊〉 t•mbling in your Palace,
And saw your Wi•e, 〈◊◊〉, plough'd
Like a lew'd Whore by bolder Prows than yours
Stept not I forth, and taught your loose Venetians.
The task of honour and the way to greatness,
Rais'd you from your capitulating 〈◊〉

To stipulate the terms of 〈◊〉 for peace,
And this my recompence? 〈◊〉 I am a Traitor

  49Produce my charge; or shew the wretch that's base enough
And brave enough to tell me I am a Traitor.



Know you one Jaffeir?

All the conspirators murmur.


Yes, and know his Vertue.
His Justice, Truth, his general Worth and Sufferings
From a hard father taught me first to love him.






See him brought forth.



My friend too bound? nay then
Our Fate has conquer'd us, and we must fall,
Why droops the man whose welfare's so much mi•e
They're but one thing? these Reverend Tyrants, Jaffeir,

Call us all Traitors, art thou one, my Brother?



To thee I am the falsest, veryest slave
That e'r betray'd a generous trusting friend,
And gave up honour to be sure of ruine.
All our fair hopes which morning was to have crown'd
Has this curst tongue •rthrown.



So, then all's over:

Venice has lost her freedom; I my life;
No more, farewell.



Say; will you make confession
Of your vile deeds and trust the Senates mercy?



Curst be your Sen•: Curst your Constitution:
The Curse of growing factions and division
Still vex your Councils, shake your publick sasety,
And make the Robes of Government, you wear,
Hatefull to you, as these base Chains to me.












Death's the best thing we ask or you can give.



No shamefull bonds, but honourable death.



Break up the Council: Captain, guard your prisoners.

Jaffeir, y'are free, but these must wait for judgment.

Ex. all the Senators.


Come, where's my Dungeon? lead me to my straw:
It will not be the first time I've lodg'd hard
To doe your Senate service.







Who's he disputes the Judgment of the Senate?

  50Presumptuous Rebel   on  





By Heaven you stir not.
I must be heard, I must have leave to speak:
Thou hast disgrac'd me, Peirre, by a vile blow:
Had not a dagger done thee nobler justice?
But use me as thou wilt, thou canst not wrong me,
For I am fallen beneath the basest injur•s;
Yet look upon me with an eye of mercy,
With pity and with charity behold me;
Shut not thy heart against a friend's repentance,
But as there dwells a God-like nature in thee
Listen with mildness to my 〈◊〉.



What whining Monk 〈◊〉 thou? what holy cheat
That wou'dst encroach upon my credulous ears
And cant'st thus vilely? hence. I know thee not,
Dissemble and be nasty? leave me, Hippo•.



Not know 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉



No, know the not: what art 〈◊〉?




Jaffeir, thy friend, thy once lov'd, valu'd friend,
Though now deservedly scorn'd, and 〈◊〉 most hardly.



Thou Jaffeir! Thou my once lov'd, valu'd friend!
By Heavens thou ly'st; 〈◊〉 man, 〈◊〉 call'd, my friend,
Was generous, honest, 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊◊◊〉,
Noble in mind, and in his person 〈◊〉,
Dear to my eyes and 〈◊〉 to my 〈◊〉:
But thou a wretched base, false, worthless Coward,
Poor even in Soul, and 〈◊〉 in thy 〈◊〉,
All eyes must shun th•, and all 〈◊◊〉 thee.
Prithee avoid, nor longer cling thus 〈◊◊〉,
Like something banefull, that my nature's chill'd at.



I have not wrong'd thee, by these 〈◊〉 I have not.
But still am honest, true, and hope too, valiant;
My mind still full of thee: therefore 〈◊〉 noble,
Let not thy eyes then shun me, nor 〈◊〉 heart
Detest me utterly: Oh look upon me
Look back and fee my sad 〈◊〉 sub•on!
How my heart swells, as even 'twould burst my bosom;
Fond of its Gaol, and labouring to be at thee!
What shall I doe? what say to make thee hear me?



Hast thou not wrong'd me? dar'st thou call thy self

  51Jaffeir, that once lov'd, valued friend of mine,
And swear thou hast not wrong'd me? whence these chains?
Whence the vile death, which I may meet this moment?
Whence this dishonour, but from thee; thou false one?



  All's true, yet grant one thing, and I've done asking.







To take thy life on such conditions
The Council have propos'd: Thou and thy friends
May yet live long, and to be better treated.



Life! ask my life! confess! record my self
A villain for the privilege to breath,
And carry up and down this cursed City
A discontented and repining spirit,
Burthensome to it self a few years longer,
To lose, it may be, at last in a lewd quarrel
For some new friend, treacherous and false as thou art!
No, this vile world and I have long been jangling,
And cannot 〈◊◊〉 better terms than now,
When onely men like thee are fit to live in't.



By all that's just  



Swear by some other powers,
For thou hast broke that sacred Oath too lately.



Then by that hell I merit, I'll not leave thee,
Till to thy self at least, thou'rt reconcil'd,
However thy resentments deal with me.







No, thou shalt not force me from thee,
Use me reproachfully, and like a slave,
Tread on me, buffet me, heap wrongs on wrongs
On my poor head; I'll bear it all with patience,
Shall weary out thy most unfriendly cruelty,
Ly at thy feet and kiss'em though they spurn me,
Till, wounded by my sufferings, thou relent,
And raise me to thy armes with dear forgiveness.



Art thou not  























A Coward, a most scandalous Coward,
Spiritless, void of honour, one who has sold
Thy everlasting Fame, for shameless life?



All, all, and more, much more: my faults are Numberless.



And wouldst thou have me live on terms like thine?
Base as thou art false  



No, 'tis to me that's granted,
The safety of thy life was all I aim'd at,
In recompence for faith, and trust so broken.



I scorn it more because preserv'd by thee,
And as when first my foolish heart took pity
On thy misfortunes, sought thee in thy miseries,
Reliev'd thy wants, and rais'd thee from thy State
Of wretchedness in which thy fate had plung'd thee,
To rank thee in my list of noble friends;
All I receiv'd in surety for thy truth,
Were unregarded oaths; and this, this dagger,
Given with a worthless pledge, thou since hast stoln,
So I restore it back to thee again,
Swearing by all those powers which thou hast violated,
Never from this curs'd hour to hold communion,
Friendship or interest with thee, though our years
Were to exceed those limited the world.
Take it   farewell   for now I owe thee nothing.



Say thou wilt live then.



For my life, dispose it
Just as thou wilt, because tis what I'm tir'd with.











My eyes won't lose the sight of thee,
But languish after thine, and ake with gazing.



Leave me   Nay, then thus, thus, I throw thee from me.
And curses, great as is thy falsehood, catch thee.




He's gone, my father, friend, preserver,
And here's the portion he has left me. Holds the dagger up.

This dagger, well remembred, with this dagger
I gave a solemn vow of dire importance,
Parted with this and Belvidera together;

  53Have a care, Mem'ry, drive that thought no farther;
No, I'll esteem it as a friend's last legacy,
Treasure it up in this wretched bosom,
Where it may grow acquainted with my heart,
That when they meet, they start not from each other;
So; now for thinking: A blow, call'd Traitor, Villain,
Coward, dishonourable coward, fogh!
Oh for a long sound sleep, and so forget it!
Down, busie Devil  .





Whither shall I fly?
Where hide me and my miseries together?
Where's now the Roman Constancy I boasted?
Sunk into trembling fears and desperation!
Not daring now to look up to that dear face
Which us'd to smile even on my faults, but down
Bending these miserable eyes to earth,
Must move in penance, and implore much Mercy.



Mercy, kind Heaven has surely endless stores
Hoarded for thee of blessings yet untasted;
Let wretches loaded hard with guilt as I am,
Bow the weight and groan beneath the burthen,
Creep with a remnant of that strength th'have left,
Before the footstool of that Heaven th'have injur'd.
Oh Belvidera! I'm the wretchedst creature
E'r crawl'd on earth; now if thou hast Vertue help me,
Take me into thy Armes, and speak the words of peace
To my divided Soul, that wars within me,
And raises every Sense to my confusion;
By Heav'n I am tottering on the very brink
Of Peace; and thou art all the hold I've left.



Alass! I know thy sorrows are most mighty;
I know th'hast cause to mourn; to mourn, my Jaffeir,

With endless cries, and never ceasing wailings,
Th'hast lost  



Oh I have lost what can't be counted;
My friend too, Belvidera, that dear friend,
Who, next to thee, was all my health rejoyc'd in,
Has us'd me like a slave; shamefully us'd me;
'T would break thy pitying heart to hear the story,

  54What shall I doe? resentment, indignation,
Love, pity, fear and mem'ry, how I've wrong'd him,
Distract my quiet with the very thought on't,
And tear my heart to pieces in my bosome.



What has he done?



Thou'dst hate me, should I tell thee.







Oh he has us'd me! yet by Heaven I bear it;
He has us'd me, Belvidera, but first swear
That when I've told thee, thou'lt not loath me utterly,
Though vilest blots and stains appear upon me;
But still at least with charitable goodness,
Be near me in the pangs of my a•iction,
Not scorn me, Belvidera, as he has done.



Have I then e'r been false that now I am doubted?
Speak, whats the cause I am grown into distrust,
Why thought unfit to hear my Love's complainings?











Bear my failings, for they are many,
Oh my dear Angel! in that friend I've lost
All my Soul's peace; for every thought of him
Strikes my Sense hard, and deads it in my brains;
Wouldst thou believe it?








E'r yet his Guards had led him to his prison,
Full of severest sorrows for his suff'rings,
With eyes o'rflowing and a bleeding heart,
Humbling my self almost beneath my nature;
As at his feet I kneel'd, and fu'd for mercy,
Forgetting all our friendship, all the dearness,
In which w'have liv'd so many years together,
With a reproachfull hand, he dash'd a blow,
He struck me, Belvidera, by Heaven, he struck me,
Buffeted, call'd me Traitor, Villain, Coward;
Am I a Coward? am I a Villain? tell me:
Th'art the best Judge, and mad'st me, if I am so.
Damnation; Coward!



Oh! forgive him, Jaffeir.


  55And if his sufferings wound thy heart already,
What will they doe to morrow?








When thou shalt see him stretch'd in all the Agonies
Of a tormenting and a shamefull death,
His bleeding bowels, and his broken limbs,
Insulted or by a vile butchering villain;
What will thy heart doe then? Oh sure 't will stream
Like my eyes now.



What means thy dreadfull story?
Death, and to morrow? broken limbs and bowels?
Insulted o'r by a vile butchering Villain?
By all my fears I shall start out to madness,
With barely guessing if the truth's hid longer.



The 〈◊〉 Senators, 'tis they've decree'd it:
They say according to our friends request,
They shall have death, and not ignoble bondage:
Declare their promis'd mercy all as forfeited,
False to their oaths, and deaf to intercession;
Warrants are pass'd for publick death to morrow.



Death! doom'd to die! condemn'd unheard! unpleaded!



Nay, cruel'st racks and torments are preparing,
To force confessions from their dying pangs;
Oh do not look so terribly upon me,
How your lips shake, and all your face disorderd!
What means my Love?



Leave me, I charge thee leave me   strong temptation•

Wake in my heart.







No more, but leave me.







Oh! by Heaven I love thee with that fondness
I would not have thee stay a moment longer,
Near these curst hands: are they not cold upon thee?



No, everlasting comfort's in thy armes,
To lean thus on thy breast is softer ease
Than downy pillows deck'd with leaves of roses.

Pulls the dagger∣half out of his bo∣• and 〈◊〉 it 〈◊◊〉



Alas thou thinkest not of the thorns 'tis fill'd with,
Fly e'r they call thee: there's a lurking serpent

  56Ready to leap and sting thee to thy heart:
Art thou not terrifi'd?








What thou hast done, and whither thou hast brought me.







Where's my friend? my friend, thou smiling mischief?
Nay. shrink not, now 'tis too late, thou shouldst have fled
When thy Guilt first had cause, for dire revenge,
Is up and raging for my friend. He groans,
Hark how he groans, his screams are in my ears
Already; see, th'have fixt him on the wheel,
And now they tear him   Murther! perjur'd Senate!
Murther   Oh!   hark thee, Traitress, thou hast done this;
Thanks to thy tears and false perswading love,
How her eyes speak! Oh thou bewitching creature! Fumbling for his Dagger.

Madness cannot hurt thee: Come, thou little trembler,
Creep, even into my heart, and there lie safe;
Tis thy own Cittadel   hah   yet stand off,
Heaven must have Justice, and my broken vows
Will sink me else beneath its reaching mercy;
I'll wink and then 'tis done  .



What means the Lord
Of me, my life and love, what's in thy bosom,
Thou graspst at so? nay, why am I thus treated?
What wilt thou doe? Ah, do not kill me, Jaffeir,Draws the dagger, offers to stab her.

Pity these panting breasts, and trembling limbs,
That •'d to clas• thee when thy looks were milder,
That yet hang heavy on my unpurg'd Soul,
And plunge it not into eternal darkness.



No, Belvidera, when we parted last
I gave this dagger with thee as in trust
To be thy portion, If I e'r prov'd false.
On such condition was my truth believ'd:
But now 'tis forfeited and must be paid for. Offers to stab her again.













Now then kill me. Leaps upon his neck and kisses him.

While thus I cling about thy cruel neck,
Kiss thy revengefull lips and die in joys

  57Greater than any I can guess hereafter.



I am, I am a Coward; witness't, Heaven,
Witness it, Earth, and every being Witness;
'Tis but one blow yet: by immortal Love,
I cannot longer bear a thought to harm thee,
The Seal of providence is sure upon thee. He throws away the dag∣ger and embraces her.

And thou wert born for yet unheard of wonders:
Oh thou wert either born to save or damn me!
By all the power that's given thee o'r my soul,
By thy resistless tears and conquering smiles,
By the victorious love that still waits on thee;
Fly to thy cruel Father: save my friend,
Or all our future Quiet's lost for ever:
Fall at his feet, cling round his reverend knees;
Speak to him with thy Eyes, and with thy tears,
Melt thy hard heart, and wake dead nature in him,
Crush him in th'Arms, and torture him with thy softness:
Nor, till thy Prayers are granted, set him free,

But conquer him, as thou hast vanquish'd me.Ex. ambo.












WHY, cruel Heaven, have my unhappy days
Been lengthen'd to this sad one? Oh! dishonour
And deathless infamy is fall'n upon me.
Was it my fault? Am I a traitour? No.
But then, my onely child, my daughter, wedded;
There my best bloud runs foul, and a disease
Incurable has seiz'd upon my memory,
To make it rot and stink to after ages.
Curst be the fatal minute when I got her;
Or woud that I'd been any thing but man,
And rais'd an issue which wou'd ne'r have wrong'd me.
The miserablest Creatures (man excepted)
Are not the less esteem'd, though their posterity
Degenerate from the vertues of their fathers;

  58The vilest Beasts are happy in their off-springs,
While onely man gets traitours, whores and villains.
Curst be the names, and some swift blow from Fate
Lay his head deep, where mine may be forgotten.






He's there, my father, my inhumane father,
That, for three years, has left an onely child
Expos'd to all the outrages of Fate,
And cruel ruine   oh!  



What child of sorrow
Art thou that com'st thus wrapt in weeds of sadness,
And mov'st as if thy steps were towards a grave?



A w•tch, who from the very top of happiness
Am fallen into the lowest depths of misery,
And want your pitying hand to raise me up again.



Indeed thou talk'st as thou hadst tasted sorrows;
Would I could help thee.



'Tis greatly in your power,
The world too, speaks you charitable, and I,
Who ne'r ask'd almes before, in that dear hope
Am come a begging to you, Sir.







Oh, well regard me, is this voice a strange one?
Consider too, when beggars once pretend
A case like mine, no little will content 'em.



What wouldst thou beg for?



Pity and forgiveness; Throws up •er Veil.

By the kind tender names of child and father,
Hear my complaints and take me to your love.







Yes, your daughter, by a mother
Vertuous and noble, faithfull to your honour,
Obedient to your will, kind to your wishes,
Dear to your armes; by all the joys she gave you,
When in her blooming years she was your treasure,
Look kindly on me; in my face b•hold
The lineaments of hers y'have kiss'd so often,
Pleading the cause of your poor cast off Child.



Thou art my daughter.



Yes   And y'have oft told me

  59With smiles of love and chaste paternal kisses,
I'd much resemblance of my mother.




Hadst thou inherited her matchless vertues
I'd been too bless'd.



Nay, do not call to memory
My disobedience, but le• pity enter
Into your heart, and quite deface the impression;
For could you think how mine's perplext, what sadness
Fears and despairs distract the peace within me,
Oh, you woud take me in your dear, dear Armes,
Hover with strong compassion o'r your young one,
To shelter me with a protecting wing,
From the black gather'd storm, that's just, just breaking.







Yes, I must, and you must hear too.
I have a husband.







Oh, do not curse him!
He would not speak so hard a word towards you
On any terms, oh! e'r he deal with me.



Hah! what means my child?



Oh there's but this short moment
'Twixt me and Fate, yet send me not with curses
Down to my grave, afford me one kind blessing
Before we part: just take me in your armes
And recommend me with a prayer to Heaven,
That I may dye in peace, and when I'm dead  



How my Soul's catcht?



Lay me, I beg you, lay me
By the dear ashes of my tender mother.
She would have pitied me, had fate yet spared her.



By Heaven, my aking heart forebodes much mischief,
Tell me thy story, for I'm still thy father.
















By you, blest Heaven, my heart runs o'r with fondness.











Oh my husband, my dear husband
Carries a dagger in his once kind boso•e
To peirce the heart of your poor Belvidera.








Yes, kill me, when he pass'd his faith
And covenant, against your State and Senate,
He gave me up as hostage for his truth,
With me a dagger and a dire commission.
When e'r he fail'd to plunge it through this bosome,
I learnt the danger, chose the hour of love
T'attempt his heart, and bring it back to honour,
Great love prevail'd and bless'd me with success,
He came, confest, betray'd his dearest friends
For promi•'d mercy; now they're doom'd to suffer,
Gall'd with remembrance of what then was sworn,
If they are lost, he vows t'appease the Gods
With this poor life, and make my bloud th' attonement.







Think you saw what pass'd at our last parting;
Think you beheld him like a raging lion,
Pacing the earth and tearing up his step•,
Fate in his eyes, and roaring with the pain
Of burning fury; think you saw his one hand
Fix't on my throat, while the extended other
Grasp'd a keen threatning dagger, oh 'twas thus,
We last embrac'd, when, trembling with revenge,
He dragg'd me to the ground, and at my bosome
Presented horrid death, cried out, my friends,
Where are my friends? swore, wept, rag'd, 'threaten'd, lov'd,
For he yet lov'd, and that dear love preserv'd me,
To this last tryal of a father's pity.
I fear, not death, but cannot bear a thought
That that dear hand should do th' unfriendly office;
If I was ever then your care, now hear me;
Fly to the Senate, save the promis'd lives
Of his dear friends, e'r mine be made the sacrifice.



Oh, my hearts comfort!



Will you not, my father?
Weep not but answer me.



By Heaven, I will.

  61Not one of 'em but what shall be immortal.
C•st thou forgive me all my •ollies past,
I'll henceforth be indeed a father; never,
Never more thus expose, but cherish thee,
Dear as the vital warmth that feeds my life,
Dear as these eyes that weep in fondness o'r thee,
Peace to thy heart. Farewel.




'Tis Belvidera's life her father pleads for.
Ex. severally.



Seignior Prinli, my Lord Prinli, my Lord, my Lord, my Lord: Now, we Lords love to call one another by our Titles. My Lord, my Lord, my Lord   Pox on him, I am a Lord as well as he, And so let him fiddle   I'll warrant him he's gone to the Senate∣house, and I'll be there too, soon enough for somebody. Odd   here's a tickling speech about the Plot, I'll prove there's a Plot with a Vengeance   would I had it without book; let me see  
Most Reverend Senatours,
That there is a Plot, surely by this time, no man that hath eyes or understanding in his head will presume to doubt, 'tis as plain as the light in the Cowcumber   no   hold there   Cowcum∣ber does not come in yet   'tis as plain as the light in the Sun, or as the man in the Moon, even at noon day; It is indeed a Pumpkin-Plot, which, just as it was mellow, we have gathered, and now we have gathered it, prepar'd and dress'd it, shall we throw it like a pickled Cowcumber out at the window? no: that it is not onely a bloudy, horrid, execrable, damnable and au∣dacious Plot, but it is, as I may so say, a sawcy Plot: and we all know, most Reverend Fathers, that what is sawce for a Goose is sawce for a Gander: Therefore, I say, as those bloud-thirsty Ganders of the conspiracy would have destroyed us Geese of the Senate, let us make haste to destroy them, so I humbly move for hanging   hah, hurry durry   I think this will doe, thô I was some∣thing out, at first, about the Sun and the Cowcumber.









Nacky, my dear Nacky, morrow, Nacky, odd I am very brisk, very merry, very pert, very jovial   haaaaa   kiss me, Nacky; how dost thou doe, my little Tory, rory Strum∣pet, kiss me, I say, hussy, kiss me.



Kiss me, Nacky, hang you, Sir, Coxcomb, hang you, Sir.



Hayty tayty, is it so indeed, with all my heart, faith   Hey then up go we, faith   hey then up go we. dum dum derum dump.












Do you intend to die in your bed  ?



About threescore years hence, much may be done, my dear.



You'll be hang'd, Seignior.



Hang'd, sweet heart, prithee be quiet, hang'd quo h-a, that's a merry conceit, with all my heart, why thou jok'st, Nacky, thou art given to joking, I'll swear; well, I protest, Nacky, nay, I must protest, and will protest that I love joking dearly, man. And I love thee for joking, and I'll kiss thee for joking, and towse thee for joking, and odd, I have a devilish mind to take thee aside about that business for joking too, odd I have, and Hey then up go we, dum dum derum dump.




See you this, Sir?




O Laud, a dagger! Oh Laud! it is naturally my a version, I cannot endure the sight on't, hide it, for Heavens sake, I can∣not look that way till it be gone   hide it, hide it, oh, oh, hide it!



Yes, in your heart, I'll hide it.



My heart; what, hide a dagger in my heart's bloud!



Yes, in thy heart, thy throat, thou pamper'd Devil;
Thou hast help'd to spoil my peace, and I'll have vengeance
On thy cust life, for all the bloody Senate,
The perjur'd faithless Senate: Where's my Lord,
My happiness, my love, my God, my Hero,
Doom'd by thy accursed tongue, amongst the rest,
T' a shamefull wrack? By all the rage that's in me
I'll be whole years in murthering thee.




Wherefore so passionate? what have I done? what's the matter, my dear Nacky? am not I thy Love, thy Happin•ss, th• Lord, thy Hero, thy Senatour, and every thing in the wo•ld. Nacky?



Thou! thinkst thou, thou art fit to meet my joys;
To bear the eager clasps of my embraces?
Give me my Peirre, or  



Why, he's to be hang'd, little Nacky,
Trust up for Treason, and so forth, Child.



Thou ly'st, stop down thy throat that hellish sentence,
  63Or 'tis thy last: swear that my Love shall live,
Or thou art dead.



Ah h h h.



Swear to recall his doom,
Swear at my feet, and tremble at my fury.



I do, now if she would but kick a little bit, one kick now Ah h h h.



Swear, or  



I doe, by these dear fragrant foots
And little toes, sweet as, e e e e my Nacky Nacky Nacky.







Nothing but untie thy shoe-string a little faith and troth,
That's all, •hat's all, as I hope to live, Nacky, that's all.



Nay, then  



Hold, hold, thy Love, thy Lord, thy Hero
Shall be pr•serv'd and safe.



Or may this Poniard
Rust in thy heart.



With all my soul.









Adieu. Why what a bloudy-minded inveterate, termagant, Strumpet have I been plagu'd with! oh h h yet more! nay then I die, I die I am dead already.






Final destruction seize on all the world:
Bend down, ye Heavens, and shutting round this earth,
Crush the Vile Globe into its first confusion;
Scorch it, with Elemental fl•mes, to one curst Cindar,
And all us lit•le creepers in't, call'd men,
Burn, burn to nothing: but let Venice burn
Hotter than all the rest: Here kindle Hell
Ne'r to extinguish, and let souls hereafter
Groan here, in all those pains which mine feels now.





My Life  




My Plague  




Nay then I see my ruine,
If I must die!



No, Death's this day too busie,
Thy Father's ill time'd Mercy came too late,

  64I thank thee for thy labours thô and him too,
But all my poor betray'd unhappy friends
Have Summons to prepare for Fate's black hour;
And yet I live.



Then be the next my doom.
I see thou hast pass'd my sentence in thy heart,
And I'll no longer weep or plead against it,
But with the humblest, most obedient patience
Meet thy dear hands, and kiss 'em when they wound me;
Indeed I am willing, but I beg thee doe it
With some remorse, and where thou giv'st the blow,
View me with eyes of a relenting love,
And shew me pity, for 'twill sweeten Justice.



Shew pity to thee?



Yes, and when thy hands,
Charg'd with my fate, come trembling to the deed,
As thou hast done a thousand thousand dear times,
To this poor breast, when kinder rage has brought thee,
When our sting'd hearts have leap'd to meet each other,
And melting kisses seal'd our lips together,
When joyes have left me gasping in thy armes,
So let my death come now, and I'll not shrink from't.



Nay. Belvidera, do not fear my cruelty,
Nor let the thoughts of death perplex thy fancy,
But answer me to what I shall demand
With a firm temper and unshaken spirit.



I will when I've done weeping  



Fie, no more on't  
How long is't since the miserable day
We wedded first  







Nay, keep in thy tears,
Lest they un-man me too.



Heaven knows I cannot;
The words you utter sound so very sadly
These streams will follow 



Come, I'll kiss 'em dry then.



But, was't a miserable day?







I thought it otherwise, and you've oft sworn

  65In the transporting hours of warmest love
When sure you spoke the truth, you've sworn you bless'd it.



Twas a rash oath.



Then why am I not curss'd too?



No, Belvidera; by th' eternal truth,
I doat with too much fondness.




Still then do you you love me?



Nature, in her workings,
Inclines not with more ardour to Creation,
Than I doe now towards thee; man ne'r was bless'd,
Since the first pair first met, as I have been.



Then sure you will not curse me.



No, I'll bless thee.
I came on purpose, Belvidera, to bless thee.
'Tis now, I think, three years w'have liv'd together.



And may no fatal minute ever part us,
Till, reverend grown, for age and love, we go
Down to one Grave, as our last bed, together,
There sleep in peace till an eternal morning.



When will that be?




I hope long Ages hence.



Have I not hitherto (I beg thee tell me
Thy very fears) us'd thee with tender'st love?
Did e'r my Soul rise up in wrath against thee?
Did I e'r frown when Belvidera smil'd,
Or, by the least unfriendly word, betray
A bating passion? have I ever wrong'd thee?







Has my heart, or have my eyes e'r wandred
To any other woman?



Never, never   I were the worst of false ones should I accuse thee.
I own I've been too happy, bless'd above
My Sexes Charter.



Did I not say I came to bless thee?







Then hear me, bounteous Heaven,
Pour down your blessings on this beauteous head,
Where everlasting sweets are always springing.
With a continual giving hand, let peace,
Honour and safety always hover round her,

  66Feed her with plenty, let her eyes ne'r see
A sight of sorrow, nor her heart know mourning,
Crown all her days with joy, her nights with rest,
Harmless as her own thoughts, and prop her vertue,
To bear the loss of one that too much lov'd,
And comfort her with patience in our parting.







Yes, for ever parting,
I have sworn, Belvidera; by yon Heaven,
That best can tell how much I lose to leave thee,
We part this hour for ever.




Your cruel blessings, stay with me and curse me!







Then hear me too, just Heaven,
Pour down your curses on this wretched head
With never-ceasing Vengeance, let despair,
Danger or infamy, nay all 〈◊〉 me,
Starve me with wantings, let my eyes ne'r see
A sight of comfort, nor my hear• know peace,
But dash my days with sorrow, nights with horrours
Wild as my own thoughts now, and let loose fury
To make me mad enough for what I lose,
If I must lose him; if I must, I will not.
Oh turn and hear me!



Now hold, heart, or never.



By all the tender days we have liv'd together,
By all our charming nights, and joyes that crown'd 'em,
Pity my sad condition, speak, but speak.







By these armes that now cling round thy neck,
By this dear kiss and by ten thousand more,
By these poor streaming eyes  




By th'immortal destiny that doom'd me Draws his Dagger.

To this curs'd minute, I'll not live one longer,
Resolve to let me go or see me fall  



Hold, Sir, be patient.



Hark, the dismal Bell Passing. bell towles.

Towles out for death, I must attend its call too,
For my poor friend, my dying Peirre exp•cts me,

  67He sent a message to require I'd see him
Before he dy'd, and take his last forgiveness.
Farewell for ever.



Leave thy dagger with me.
Bequeath me something   Not one kiss at parting? Going out looks back at her.

Oh my poor heart, when wilt thou break?




We have a Child, as yet, a tender Infant.
Be a kind mother to him when I am gone,
Breed him in vertue and the paths of Honour,
But let him never know his father's story;
I charge thee guard him from the wrongs my Fate
May doe his future fortune or his name.
Now   nearer yet   Approaching each other.

Oh that my armes were rivetted
Thus round thee ever! But my friends, my oath!
This and no more.





For that poor little one you've ta'n care of,
I'll giv't him truly.











Heaven knows for ever; all good Angels guard thee.



All ill ones sure had charge of me this moment,
Curst be my days, and doubly curst my night•,
Which I must now mourn out in widdow'd tears;
Blasted be every herb and fruit and tree,
Curst be the rain that falls upon the earth,
And may the general Curse reach man and beast;
Oh give me daggers, fire or water,
How I could bleed, how burn, how drown the waves
Huzzing and booming round my sinking he•d,
Till I descended to the peacefull bottome!
Oh there's all quiet, here all rage and fury,
The Air's too thin, and pierces my weak brain,
I long for thick substantial sleep: Hell, Hell,
Burst from the Centre, rage and roar aloud,
If thou art half so hot, so mad 〈◊〉 I am.







Run, seize and bring her safely home,

  68Guard her as you would life: Alas poor creature!



What? to my husband then conduct me quickly,
Are all things ready? shall we dye most gloriously?
Say not a word of this to my old father,
Murmuring streams, soft shades, and springing flowers,
Lutes, Laurells, Seas of Milk, and ships of Amber.







Room room there   stand all by, make room for the Prisoner.



My friend not come ye•?



Why are you so obstinate?



Why you so troublesome, that a poor wretch cannot dye in peace?
But you, like Ravens will be croaking round him  



Yet, Heaven  



I tell thee Heaven and I are friends,
I ne'r broke Peace with't yet, by cruel murthers,
Rapine, or perjury, or vile deceiving,
But liv'd in moral Justice towards all men,
Nor am a foe to the most strong believers:
How e'r my own short-sighted Faith confine me.



But an all-seeing Judge  



You say my conscience
Must be mine accuser: I have search'd that Conscience,
And find no records there of crimes that sc•e me.



'Tis strange you should want faith.



You want to lead
My Reason blindfold, like a hamper'd Lion,
Check'd of its nobler vigour then, when baited,
Down to obedient tameness, make it couch,
And shew strange tricks which you call signs of Faith.
So silly Souls are gull'd and you get money.
Away, no more: Captain, I would hereafter
This fellow write no lyes of my conversion,
Because he has crept upon my troubled hours.





Hold: Eyes, be dry;
Heart, strengthen me to bear

  69This hideous sight, and humble me, take
The last forgiveness of a dying friend,
Betray'd by my vile falsehood, to his ruine.
Oh Peirre!








Crawling on my knees,
And prostrate on the earth, let me approach thee,
How shall I look up to thy injur'd face,
That always us'd to smile, with friendship, on me?
It darts an air of so much manly virtue,
That I, methinks, look little in thy sight,
And stripes are fitter for me than embraces.



Dear to my Armes, though thou hast undone my fame,
I cannot forget to love thee: prithee, Jaffeir,

Forgive that filthy blow my passion dealt thee;
I am now preparing for the land of peace,
And fain would have the charitable wishes
Of all good men, like thee, to bless my journy.



Good! I am the vilest creature, worse than e'r
Suffer'd the shamefull Fate thou art going to taste of,
Why was I sent for to be us'd thus kindly?
Call, call me villain, as I am, describe
The foul complexion of my hatefull deeds,
Lead 〈◊〉 to the Rack, and stretch me in thy stead,
I've crimes enough to give it its full load,
And doe it credit: Thou wilt but spoil the use on't,
And honest men hereafter bear its figure
About 'em, as a charm from treacherous friendship.



The time grows short, your •riends are dead already.







Yes, dead, Jaffeir, they've all dy'd like men too,
Worthy their Character.



And what must I doe?







Speak, aloud thy burthen'd Soul;
And tell thy troubles to thy tor•ur'd friend.



Friend! Could'st thou yet be a Friend, a generous friend,
I might hope Comfort from thy noble sorrows,
Heav'n knows I want a Friend.



And I a kind one,
That would not thus scor• my repenting Vertue.

  70Or think when he is to dye, my thoughts are idle.



No! live, I charge thee, Jaffeir.



Yes, I will live,
But it shall be to see thy fall reveng'd
At such a ra•e, as Venice long shall groan for.







I will, by Heav'n.



Then still thou'rt noble,
And I forgive thee, oh   yet   shall I trust thee?



No: I've been false already.



Dost thou love me?



Rip up my heart, and satisfie thy doubtings.



Curse on this weakness.





I never saw thee melted thus •efore;
And know there's something •'ring in thy bosom
That must have vent: Though I'm a Villain, tell me.



Seest thou that Engine?

Pointing to the Wheel.






Is't fit a Souldier, who h• liv'd with Honour,
Fought Nations Quarre•, and bin Crown'd with Conquest,
Be expos'd a common Ca• on a Wheel?



















What's to be done?



I'd have thee 〈◊〉

Something that's Noble, •o preserve my Memory
From the disgrace that's ready to attaint it.



The day grows late, Sir.



I'll make haste! oh Jaffeir,

Though thou'st betray'd me, doe me some way Justice.



No more of that: Thy wishes shall be •tisfi'd,
I have a Wife, and she shall bleed, my Child too
Yield up his little Throat, and all t'ap∣pea•〈◊〉  


Going away Peir. holds him.



No   this   no more!





Hah! is't then so?



















Come, now I'm ready. 
He and Jaf∣feir ascend the Sciffold.


Captain, you should be a Gentleman of honour,
Keep off the Rabble, that I may have room
To entertain my Fate, and dye with Decency.
Come!

Takes off his Gown. Executioner prepares to bind him.














I thank you, Sir,
You'll think on't.





'Twon't grow stale before to morrow.



Now, Jaffeir! now I am going, Now;  

Executioner •ving bound him.



Thou honest heart, then   here   S•bs him.

And this is well too.








Now thou hast indeed been faithful.
This was done Nobly   We have deceiv'd the Senate.







Ha ha ha   oh oh  




Now, ye curs'd Rulers,
Thus of the blood y'have shed I make Libation,
And sprinkl't mingling: May it rest upon you,
And all your Race: Be hence•orth Peace a 〈◊〉

Within your Walls; let Plagues and Famine waste
Your Generations   oh poor Belvidera!

Sir, I have a Wife, bear this in safety to her.
A Token that with my dying breath I blest her,
And the dear little Infant left behind me.
I am sick   I'm quiet  





Bear this news to the Senate,
And guard their Bodies till there's farther order:
Heav'n grant I dye so well  






Strengthen her heart with Patience, pitying Heav'n.



Come come come come come. Nay, come to bed!
Prithee my Love. The Winds! hark how they whistle!
And the Rain beats: oh how the weather shrinks me!

  72You are angry now, who cares? pish, no indeed.
Choose then, I say you shall not go, you shallnot;
Whip your ill nature; get you gone then! oh, Jaffeir'•Gho• rises.


Are you r•n'd? See, Father, here he's come agen,
Am I to blame to love him! oh thou dear one. Ghost sinks.

Why do you fly me? are you angry still then?

Jaf•eir! where art thou? Father, why do you doe thus?
Stand off, don't hide him from me. He's here somewhere.
Stand off I say! what gone? remember't, Tyrant!
I may revenge my self for this trick one day. Enter Officer and others.

I'll do't   I'll do't. Renaulis a nasty fellow.
Hang him, hang him, hang him.











Jaffeir upon the Scaffold, to prevent
A shamefull death, stab'd Peirre, and next himself:
Both fell together.






The Ghosts of Jaff. and Peir. rise together both bloody.



Hah, look there 〈◊〉

My Husband bloody, and his friend too! Murther!
Who has done this? speak to me thou sad Vision, Ghosts sink.

On these poor trembling Knees I beg it, Vanisht  
Here they went down; Oh I'll dig, dig the Den up.
You shan't delude me thus. 〈◊〉, Jaffeir, Jaffeir.

Peep up and give me but a look. I have him!
I've got him, Father: Oh now how I'll smuggle him!
My Love! my Dear! my Blessing! help me, help me!
They have hold on me, and drag me to the bottom.
Nay   now they pull so hard   farewell  









Then guard me from the sight on't:
Lead me into some place that's fit for mourning;
Where the free Air, Light and the chearfull Sun
May never enter: Hang it round with Black;
Set up one Taper that may last a day
As long as l've to live: And there all leave me.
Sparing no Tears when you this Tale relate,
But bid all Cruel Fathers dread my Fate.



