






THou my Arsaces art a Stranger here,
This is th' Apartment of the Charming Fair,
That Berenice, whom Titus so adores,
The Universe is his, and he is hers:
Here from the Court himself he of't conceals,
And in her Ears his charming story tells▪
Whilst I a Vassal for admittance wait,
And am at best but thought importunate.



You want admittance! who with generous care
Have follow'd all her Fortunes every-where,
Whose Fame throughout the World so loudly rings,
One of the greatest of our Eastern-Kings.
As on•e you seem'd the Monarch of her Breast,
Too firmly seated to be dispossest,
Nor can the pride she doth in Titus take,
Already so severe a distance make.



Yes! still that wretch Antiochus I am.
But Love! oh how I tremble at the name;
And my distracted Soul at that doth start▪
Which once was all the pleasure of my heart,

  Since Berenice has all my hopes destroid,
And an Eternal silence on me laid.



That you resent her pride, I see with Joy,
'Tis that which does her gratitude destroy;
But •riendship wrong'd should into hatred turn,
And you methinks might•learn her Art to scorn.




Arsaces, how false Measures dost thou take,
Remove the Poles, and bid the Sun go back:
Invert all Natures Orders, Fates Decrees,
Then bid me hate the Charming Bere••c•.




Well, love her still, but let her know your pain,
Resolve it you shall •ee, and speak again;
Urge to her face your rightful Claim aloud,
And court her haughtily, as she is proud.




Arsaces, No, she's gentle as a Dove,
Her Eyes are Tyrants, but her Soul's all Love,
And owes so little for the Vowes I've made,
That if she pity me, I'm more than paid.

But see the man I sent, at last returns;
Oh how my heart with Expectation burns.

Rutilius, have you Berenice seen?







Oh speak! what says the Charming Queen?



I prest with difficulty, through the Croud,
A throng of Court-Attendants round her stood.
The time now past of his servere retreat,

Titus laments no more his Fathers fate.
Love takes up all his thoughts, and all his cares,
Whilst he to meet these mighty Joys prepares:
Which may in Berenices arms be found,
For she this day will be Romes Empress crown'd.



What d• I hear? Confusion on thy tongue!
To tell me this, why was thy speech so long?
Why didst not Ruine with more speed afford?
Thou mightst have spoke and kill'd me in a word.
But may I not one Moment with her speak,
And my poor heart disclose before it break?



You shall; for when I told her what you design'd,
She sweetly smil'd, and her fair head inclin'd:

Titus ne'r from her had a look more kind.






At last from the rude Joy I'm freed,
Of those new Friends whom my new fortunes breed.
The tedious form of their respect I shun,
To find out him whose words and heart are one.

Antiochus, for I'll no flattery use
Since your neglect I justly may accuse,
How great your Cares for Berenice have been,
Ev'n all the East, and Rome it self have seen,
In my worst fate I did your friendship find,
But now I grow more Great, you grow less kind.



Now durst I hope, I would forget my smart,
So well she understands to sooth my heart.
But, Madam, its a truth by Rumour spread,
That Titus shall this night possess your bed.



Sir, All my Conflicts I'll to you reveal,
Though half the Fears I've had, I cannot tell;
So much did Titus for his Father mourn,
I almost doubted Love would ne'r return;
He had not for me that Assiduous heat
As when whole days fixt on my Eyes, he sate.
Grief in his Eyes, Cares on his Brows did dwell;
Oft came and lookt, said nothing but farewell.



But now his kindness he renews again,



Oh! he will doubly recompence his pain
For that, if any Faith may be allow'd,
Two thousand Oaths, two thousand times renew'd;
Or any Justice in the Powers Divine,

Antiochus, He'll be for ever mine.



How she insults and triumphs in my ill,
Sh'as with long practice learnt to smile and kill.
Oh Berenice, Eternally farewel.



Farewel! good Heav'n! what Language do I hear;
Stay! I conjure you Sir by all's that dear.

Antiochus, What is it I have done?
Why don't you speak?



Madam I must be gone.



How Cruelly you use me! I implore
The Reason 



I must never see you more.



For Heav'ns sake tell, you wound me with delay.



At least remember I your Laws obey.
Why should I here wretched and hopeless stay?
If the remembrance be'nt Extinguisht quite,
Of that blest place where first you saw the light;
'Twas there, oh there began my Endless smart,
When those dear Eyes prevail'd upon my heart,
Then Berenice too, my Vowes approv'd,
Till happy Titus came and was belov'd.
He did with Triumph and with Terror come,
And in his hands bore the Revenge of Rome.


Iudea trembled, but 'twas I alone
First felt his weight, and found my self undone.







You too, then t'encrease the pains▪ I bore,
Commanded me to speak of Love no more.
So on your hand I swore at last t'obey;
And for that taste of Bliss gave all away.



Why do you study ways t'afflict my mind,
You believe Sir, I am not unkind.
Alas I'm sensible how well y'have ser•'d,
And have been kinder much than I deserv'd.



Why in this Empire should I longer stay,
My Passion and its weakness to betray.
Others, though I retire, will bring their Joys,
To Crown that Happiness which mine destroys.



You triumph thus, because your pow'r you know,
Or if you did not, you'd not use me so.
Though Crown'd Romes Empress, I the Throne ascend;
What pleasure in my Greatness can I find,
When I shall want my best and truest Friend.



I reach your purpose, you would have me there,
That you might see the worst of my despair.
I know it, the Ambition of your Soul;
Tis true, I've been a fond obedient Fool.
Yet came this time but to new freight my heart,
And with more Love possest than ever part.



Though it could never enter in my mind,
Since Caesar's Fortunes must with mine be join'd.

  That any Mortal durst so hardy prove,
T'invade his Right, and talk to me of Love.
I bear th' unpleasing Narrative of yours,
And Friendship, what my Honour shuns, endures.
Nay more; Your parting, I with trouble hear,
For you next him, are to my Soul most dear.



In Justice to my Memory and Fame,
I fly f••m Titus, that unlucky Name.
A name which ev'ry Moment you repeat,
Whilst my poor heart lies bleeding at your feet.
Farewel: Oh be not at my Ravings griev'd,
When of my death the news shall be receiv'd,
Remember why I di'd, and what I liv'd 




I grieve for him, a Love so true as this,
Deserv'd, methinks, more fortunate success.
Are you not troubled Madam 




Something within me difficult to quel.



You should have staid him.



Who, I stay him? no,
From my Remembrance rather let him go.
His Fancy does with wild Distraction rove,
Which thy raw ignorance, interprets Love.




Titus his thoughts, yet to unfold, denies.
And Rome beholds you but with jealous eyes.
Its rigorous Laws, create my fears for you;

Romans no Forrain Marriages allow
To Kingly Power still enemies th'ave been,
Nor will, I fear, admit of you a Queen.



Phaenicia, no, my time of fear is past,
Me Titus loves, and that includes the rest.
The splendor of this night thou hast beheld▪
Are not thy Eyes with his bright Grandeur fill'd?
These Eagles fasces, marching all in state:
And crowds of Kings that with their Tributes wait.
Triumphs below, and Blessings from Above,
Seem all at strife to grace this Man of Love.
Away Phaenicia, let's go meet him strait,
I can no longer for his coming wait.

  My Eager wishes drive me wildly on;
Nor will be temp•r'd till my Joy's begun.










TOth' Syrian King, did you my Message bear?
And does he know that I expect him here?



Sir, in the Queens appartment, He alone
Was seen, but e'r I there arriv'd, was gone.



'Tis well Paulin•s for these ten days past.
I have to Berenice a stranger been:
But you can tell me all how does the Queen?



She does, what speaks, how much she values you;
When you mourn'd for your Father, she mourn'd too.
So J•st a Sorrow in her face was shown,
It seem•d as if the Loss had been her own.



Oh lovely fair one, little dost thou know

How hard a Trial thou must undergo.
Heav'n! oh my heart!



What is't your Grief should raise
For her whom almost all the East obeys.



Command Paulinus that these retreat,


hand and all the
rest exti.

R•m• of my purposes uncertain yet,
Exp•cts to know the fortune of the Queen;
Their Murmurings I have heard, and Troubles seen.
The business of our Love, is the Discourse,
And expectation of the Universe.
And by the face of my affairs, I find,
'Tis time that I resolve and fix my mind.
Tell me Paulinus, justly, and be free,
What says the World of Berenice and me?



In every heart you Admiration raise:
All, Your high Vertues, and her Beauty praise.



Alas! Thou answerst wide of my desire,

Paulinus, be my Friend, and come yet nigher
How do they of my sighs and vows approve?
Or what expect they from so true a love?



Love or not love, Sir, all is in your power,
The Court will second still the Emperour.



Courtiers Paulinus seldom are sincere
To please their Master they have too much care.
The Court did Nero's horrid Acts applaud,
To all his lusts subscrib'd, and call'd him God.
Th' Idolatrous Court shall never judg for me,
No, my Paulinus, I rely on thee:
What then must Berenice expect? declare,
Will Rome be gen•le to her, or severe?
My happiness is plac'd in her alone.
Now they have rais'd me to the Imperial Throne,
Where on my head continual cares must fall,
Will they deny me what may sweeten all?



Her vertues they acknowledg and desert
Proclaim indeed she has a Roman heart:
But she's a Queen, and that alone withstands
All which her beauty and her worth demands.
In Rome the Law has long unalter'd stood,
Never to mix it's race with strangers blood.



It is sign they are capricious grown,
When they despise all vertues but their own.




Iulius, who first subdued her to his Arms,
And quite had silenc'd Laws with Wars alarms,
Burning for Cleopatra's love; to Fame
More just fled from her eyes, and hid his flame.



But which way from my heart shall I remove▪
So long establisht and deep rooted love?



The Conflict will be difficult I guess,
But you your rising sorrows must suppress;
Who can a heart that's not his own controul?
Her presence was the comfort of my Soul.



Af•er a thousand Oaths confirm'd in tears,
By which I vow'd my self for ever hers,
I hop'd with all my Love and all her charms,
At last to have her in my longing Arms.
But now I can such rare perfections crown,
And that my love's more great than overgrown,
When in one hour a happy Marriage may
Of all my five years vows the tribute pay▪

  I go Paulinus how my heart does rise.







To part for ever from her eyes,
Tho I requir'd th'assistance of thy zeal,
To crush a passion that's so hard to quell.
My heart had of it's doom resolv'd before,
Yet Berenice does still dispute the war.
The conquest of so great a flame must cost
Conflicts, in which my soul will oft be tost.



You in your birth for Empire were design'd,
And to that purpose Heav'n did frame your mind;
Fate in that day wise providence did shew,
Fixing the destiny of Rome in you.



My youth rejoyc'd in love and glorious wars,
But my Remains of life must waste in cares.

Rome, my new Conduct, now observes 'twould be
Both ominous to her, and mean in me,
If in my Dawn of power to clear my way
To happiness, I should her Laws destroy:
No, I've resolv'd on't, Love and all shall go;
Alas! it must, since Rome will have it so.
But how shall I poor Berenice prepare?



You must resolve to go and visit her,
Sooth her sad heart▪ and on her patience win,
Then by degrees 



 But how shall I begin?
Oh my Paulinus, I have oft design'd
To speak my thoughts, but still they stay'd behind.
I hop'd as she discern'd my troubl'd Brest,
She might a little at the cause have guest;
But nought suspecting, as I weeping lay,
With her fair hand she'd wipe the tears away,
And in that m•st never the loss perceiv'd
Of the sad Heart she had too much believ'd;
But now a firmer constancy I take,
Either my heart shall vent its grief, or break.
I thought to h•ve met Antiochus, and here
All I e're lov•d surrender'd to his care.
To morrow he conducts her to the East,
And now I go to sigh, and look my last.



I ne're expected less from that Renown,
Which all your Actions must with glory crown▪



How lovely's glory, yet how cruel too!
How much more fair and charming were she now,
If through eternal dangers to be won!
So I might still call Berenice my own.
In Nero's Court where I was bred, my mind
By that example to all ills inclin'd,
The loose wild paths of pleasures I pursu'd,
Till Berenice first taught me to be good.
She taught me Vertue, but oh! cursed Rome!

The good I owe her, must her wrong become.
For so much Vertue and Renown so great;
For all the Honour I did ever get;
Her for whose sake alone▪ I same pursu'd,
I must forgo to please the Multitude.



You cannot with Ingratitude be charg'd,
You have the •ounds of Pales•i•e••larg'd.
Even t' Euphrates, her wide power extends;
So many Kingdomes Berenice commands.



Weak Comforts▪ for the Griefs must on her dwell▪
I know fair Berenice, and know too well;
To greatness she so little did incline,
Her heart ask'd never any thing but mine.
Let's talk no more of her, Paulinus.








The thought of her, but shakes my co•st•ncy,
Yet in my heart if doubts already ri•e,
What will it do when I behold her eyes?





Sir, Berenice desires admittance here 








Can you already fear?
So soon are all your resolutions shook?
Now, Sir, 's the time 







I have no power to look.



Sir, ben't displeased, that I thus far presume,
It is to pay my gratitude I come.
Whilst all the Court assembled in my view,
Admire the Favour you on me bestow;

  18It were unjust, should I remain alone,
Silent, as though I had a sense of none.
Your mourning 's done, and you from griefs are free.
Are now your own, and yet not visit me?
Your present of new Diadems I wait.
Oh! g•ve me more content, and less of state.
Give me a word, a sigh, a look at least,
In those th• Ambition of my Soul is plac't.
Was your discourse of me when I arriv'd?
Was I so happy may it be believ'd?
Speak, tell me quick, is Berenice so blest;
Or was I present to your thoughts at least?



Doubt it not, Madam, by the Gods I swear't;
That Berenice is always in my heart.
Nor time, nor absence, can you thence remove.
My heart's all yours, and you alone I love.



You vow your Love perpe••al and •incere,
But 'tis with a strange coldness that you •wear.
Why the just Gods to witness did you call?
I don't pretend to doubt your faith at all.
In you I trust, would only from you live;
And what you say I ever must believe.







Proceed: Alas, whence this surprize!
You seem confus'd to turn away your eyes.
Nothing but trouble in your face I find,
Does still a Fathers death afflict your mind?



Oh, did my Father good Vesp•s•an live!
How happy should I be!



Ah, cease to grieve!
Your tears, have reverenc't his mem'ry now.
Cares are to Rome, and your own glory due.
A Father you lament, a feeble grief,
Whilst for your absence I f••d no relief.
But in your presence only take delight,
I, who shall dye, i• but deb•rr'd your sight.



Madam, what is it that your griefs declare?
What time d' you choose? For pitty's fake for•ear.
Your Bounties my Ingratitude proclaim.



You can do nothing that deserves that name;

  19No Sir, you never can ungrateful prove.
May be I'm fond, and tire you with my Love.



No Madam! No, my heart (since I must speak)
Was ne're more full of Love or half so like to break.
But 















The Empire Rome 







Oh, the dismal secret will not come 
Away Paulinus, e're i'm quite undone.
My Speech forsakes me and my heart's all stone.




So soon to leave me, and in trouble too?

Titus how have I this deserv'd from you?
What have I done, Phaenicia? tell me, speak.



Does nothing to your memory appear:
That might provoke him ?



By all tha'ts to me dear,
Since the first hour I saw his face, till now,
Too much of Love, is all the guilt I know.
Thus silence is too rude, and racks my breast,
In the uncertainty I cannot rest,
He knows, Phaenicia, all my moments past.
Perhaps he 's jealous of the Syrian King;
'Tis that's the root whence all this change must spring.

Titus, this Victory I shall not boast.
I wish the Gods would try me to the most.
With a more potent Rival, tempt my heart,
One that would make me greater than thou art.
Then my dear Titus, shouldst thou soon discern,
How much for thee I all mankind would scorn.
Let's go, Phaenicia, with one gentle word
He will be satisfied, and I restor'd:
" My Injur'd truth by my complyance find,
" And if he has a heart he must be kind.













ANtiochus! y'have done your Friendship wrong,
In that y'have kept this Secret hid so long.
What is't that your departure does incite,
Which not unjustly, I may call a Fright?
Tho on the Imperial Throne I'm plac'd,
So highly seem with Fortunes favour grac'd;
As if the nothing further had to grant:
I more than ever, do your friendship want.



Sir, your great kindness I so well did know,
I durst not stay where I so much did owe.
When first Iudaea heard your loud alarms,
You made me your Companion in your arms.
Nay, nearer to you did with friendship joyn,
And lodg'd the secrets of your Brest in mine.
Yet all this goodness but augments my sin,
For I have false and most ungrateful been.



I can't forget that to your arms alone,
I owe the half of all I ever won:
Witness those precious Spoils you hither brought,
Won from the Iews when on my side you fought.
To all those Purchases I lay no claim;
Your heart and friendship are my only aim.



My Heart! my Friendship! Heav'n, how you mistake!
On my deceipt how weak a glos• you make!
When first you thought your self of me possest,
You took a very Serpent to your brest.




Antiochus, I find where thou art stung,
Tell me th' officious Slave that does me wrong.
Some base Detractor has my Honour stain'd,
And in your easie heart a Credit gain'd.
Ab•s'd and told you Titus is unjust;
But I will know th• tr•acherous Fiend, I must.

  21Tho you unkindly from your friend would run,
And own th' unjustice which you think I've done.



Oh Titus, if I durst but speak my heart;
But 'tis a Secret hard from thence to part.
'Tis not from you, it is from Rome I fly,
There's a Disease in't, I must •hun or dye.
Seek then no more what's dangerous to know,
When most your friend, I shall appear your foe.



I either to your heart a stranger am,
Or sure Antiochus is not the same:
What else should make you not your mind declare?
What is't that you dare say, I dare not hear?



If then, what e'r I utter, you dare hear,
Receive the fatal Secret in your Ear.
But arm your heart with Temper; well 'tis this:







I love the charming Berenice.








Yes, nor was I hateful to her Eyes,
Till you came on and robb'd me of the prize.
When at your Armies head you did appear,
You sackt Ierusalem and conquer'd her.



A braver Rival I'd not wish to find,
Than him that dares be just and tell his mind.
So far's Resentment from my heart remov'd;
That Berenice is by my friend belov'd.
That, I Antiochus, the thing extol,
For she was made to be ador'd by all:
And happy he that shall possess her;




But 'tis fit none should be so blest but you,
And Berenice for none could be design'd,
But him that's the Delight of all Mankind.
'Tis for this cause to Syria I repair,
For when you 're blest no envy should be near.



O my Antiochus, when thou shalt see,
How small's the happiness in store for me:
Thou needst not fear thy Envy, let me have
Thy pitty and thy aid, 'tis that I crave.

  22My best and truest friend, you must be so,
For there's none fit for't in the World but you.
None but a King, my Rival and my friend,
Is 〈◊〉 to speak the torments of my mind.
In 〈◊〉 behalf you Berenice must see.



Is that an office, Titus, fit for me?
I•'• not enough her Cruelties I bear,
But yo• must too solicite my despair?
I 〈◊〉 for ever from her to depart;
Ala•! and dare not trust again my he•rt.
Your passion by another may be shown,
I have enough to do to rule my own.



He that so well his own misfortunes bears,

〈◊〉 b•st instruct her how to temper hers.
Nay, my Antiochus, you must not start.
I know by mine, your news will shake her heart,
For I m•st too, for ever from her part.







Yes! curst necessity! 'tis true,
She that both conquer'd me and fetter'd you;
In whom alone I sum'd up all Delight,
Must be for ever banish'd from my sight.



It cannot be. No Slave that wears her Chains,
Up•n so e•sie terms his Freedom gains.



Lord of the World my Empire wide does flow,
I can m•ke K••gs, and can depose 'em too▪
Th•〈◊〉 hearts must to my power bow down,
A•d yet I •m not Master of my own.

〈◊〉 th•t to Kings so long a foe has been,

〈◊〉 not 〈◊〉 my marriage with the Q•een.
If 〈◊〉 to morrow be not gone,

〈…〉 will to her Palace run;

〈…〉 t••ir rude outragious tougues, she'll hear

〈…〉 to tell, and you to hear.




Now if my heart was to Revenge alli'd,
How mi••t I triumph in her falling Pride!
To 〈◊〉 her Cruelties to me repaid,
A•••ith •em all her tortur'd soul upbraid.

〈◊〉, Titus, I'm more just, and rather mov'd,
Th•t •v'n, Sir, you dare wrong the thing I've lov'd.



When I the Imperial Power did first assume,
I firmly swore t'uphold the Rights of Rome;

Should I to follow Love, from Glory fly,
Forsake my Throne, in every Vassal's eye,
How mean and d•spicable must I prove!
An Emperor led about the World by love!
No, Prince, the fatal story you must tell,
And bid from me, poor Berenice farewel.
But if the hopes of reigning in my heart
May any ease to her sad mind impart;
Swear, friend, by all that to my Soul is dear,
Entire I will preserve her ever there.
Mourning at Court, and more exil'd than she,
My Reign but a long Banishment shall be,

〈…〉 those Joys that wait on Pomp and Power.

〈…〉 she her journey hence must take,

〈…〉 that e'r I lov'd, forsake.

〈…〉 Care and Conduct I commend,

〈…〉 my Rival as a King and Friend,
T•••earest Treasure I dare with you trust;



Sir, do not tempt me, lest I prove unjust:
Her charms that mad• me my own Fame forgo,
Will be too apt to make me false to you.



No more; I know thee, have thy Honour try'd,
Firm still in Dangers found thee by my side.
Thou knew'st my Love, whilst thine was yet conceal'd,
When all thy hopes by my success were quell'd:
Even at that time thou didst no falshood show,

And wilt not wrong me on advantage now.



No, I'le not see her, neither dare I go:
Too soon from others her hard lot she'l know.
Dost thou not think her Fat•'s enough severe,
Unless that I th' unwelcome Message bear?
I who'm her hate, enough have felt before,
And need not seek new ways to purchase more.



See, she approaches, now the Coward play,
And when you might have Conquer'd run away.









My Lord, I see you are not gone,
Perhaps 'tis me alone that you would shun.



You came not here Antiochus to find,
The visit to another was design'd.

Caesar, and 'tis on him the blame must light,
If now my presence here offend your sight.
Th' are his Commands, are guilty of the sin:
It may be else I had at Ostia been.



His friends are always with his presence Grac'd,
'T•s I alone that cannot be so blest.



Too much his prejudice upon you gain'd:
'Twas for your sake alone I was detain'd.








Tyrannick fair, 'tis true,
He kept me here only to talk of you.



Of me, my Lord forbear this courtly art,
Y' are brave and should not mock an easie heart.
In my distress, what pleasure could you see?
Alas! or what could Titus say of me?



Better a thousand times than I can tell,
So firm a passion in his heart does dwell.
When you are nam'd, he's from himself transform'd,
And every way betrays how much he's charm'd.
Love in his face does like a Tyrant rise,
And Majesty's no longer in his eyes.
But there are things behind I dare not speak:
For at the news your tender heart would break.







Ere night the truth of what I've said you'l know,
And then, I doubt not, Justifie me too.
Farewell.



Oh, Heaven what can this Language mean!
You see before your eyes a wretched Queen.
Sir, of my quiet, if you have such care,
Or if my self your eyes held ever dear,
Dispel this mist of trouble from my Soul.



Madam, your self excuse,

  25For your own sake it is that I refuse.
'Twill not be long before the doubt's remov'd.



You told me once Antiochus, you lov'd;
But sure'twas only that you might betray;
Or else you more would fear to disobey.



I disobey you, ask my life and try,
How gloriously I for your sake can dye.
It would by far, be the more welcome fate.
Then now to speak, and ever gain your hate.



No Sir, you never shall my hatred find,
'Tis my desire, and you must be so kind.
Will you? 



Heaven this constraint is worse than death,
You drive, and will not give me time to breath.
Oh, Madam! put me too no further pain.



Must I then ever beg, and beg in vain?
Hence forward Prince, either the truth relate,
Forbear or be assur'd for ever of my hate.



My heart was always yours, and is so still:
For ever must depend upon your Will.
I wish another way, your power you'd try'd:
But you 're resolv'd, and must be satisfi'd;
Yet flatter not your self, I shall declare,
Those horrors which perhaps you dare not hear.
You cannot but believe I know your heart,
Look then to feel me strike its tender'st part.

Titus has told me.



What? fear no Surprize.



That he must part for ever from your eyes.



We part! can things another nature take?
Or Titus ever Berenice forsake?



Perhaps 'tis strange that I shou'd tell you so,
But you shall find I'll do him Justice too,
What ever in a heart both kind and great
Love with despair most dreadful could create.
I saw in his he weep's, laments, and more,
Then ever dos fair Berenice adore.
But what avails it, that such love he shows?
A Queen suspected to Romes Empire grows.
And Titus cannot with her Laws dispence,
For therf•ore 'tis you must be banisht hence.



What do I hear, alas 〈◊〉!




Nay, to morrow is your last and utmost day,
In bearing this the Courage well you'l prove
Of that great haughty Soul which scorn'd my love.



Will Titus leave his Berenice forlorn?
He who so many Oaths, so oft hath sworn?
I'le not believe't, his love and faith's more strong,
I'm sure he's guiltless and you do him wrong.
This is a snare to disunite us laid,

Titus, thou lov'st me, dost not wish me dead.
No, strait I'le see him, and secure all fear.
Let's go.



Too well you may behold him here;



Too well you wish it to perswade it, No;
In this your base degenerate Soul you show.
When you no other stratagem could find,
T' abuse my heart you would betray your friend.
How e're he prove, Know I your sight abhor,
And from this minute never see me more.



Oh Berenice! remorseless cruel fair▪
Born only for my torment and despair,
Was it for this so faithfully I serv'd?
Is this the recompence I have deserv'd?
I who for you did all Ambition wave,
And l•ft a Kingdom to become your Slave.
Curse on my Fate▪



If 're my heart you priz'd,
You never h•d this cruelty devi•'d.
Never to work my Torment, been thus bold;
And •o Triumphantly the story told.
Away Phaenicia no more I'le hear him speak.





Now, my Arsaces, would my heart but break
But yet I hope in part I've freedom won.
And what love would not, by her hate sh'as done.
The pain I lately endur'd thou hast beheld,
I left her all Enamour'd, Jealous, Wild▪
But now pe•forming this Ignoble part,
Perhaps, I'le ever bani•• her my heart.

  27She left me cruelly, and let her go;
My Honour and Repose command it too,
For ever to my eyes a stranger be,
Till I have learn't to scorn as well as she.









I Of my wrong too well am satisfied;
To see the perjur'd Titus, twice I try'd.
Twice for admittance to him begg'd in vain:
Nor is Phaenicia yet return'd again.

Phaenicia has no answer to bring back.
In•gateful Titus will not hear her speak:
But hides himself and from my fury flyes:
Nor will have sense, though Berenice dies.


Phaenice, Well, my Titus hast thou seen?
What will he come and make me live again?



Madam▪ the Emperor I alone did find;
And saw in his the trouble of your mind;
I saw the tears he would have hid run down.



But was he not asham'd they should be shown▪
Look't he not as he th•ught his Love disgrace?
And was not all the E•p•r•r in hi• face?



Doubt it not, Madam, he will soon be her•,
But wherefore will you this disorder wear?
Your rifl'd dress let me in order place,
And these dishevel'd lo••s that hide your fac•.



Forbear, Phaenice, let it all alone▪
No, he shall see the triumph 〈◊〉 has w•n;
How vain those foolish ornam•n•s 〈◊〉 p•ove▪

  28If neither faith nor tears nor means can move!


Oh, my unruly sorrows! Oh, my fears!
Who's here?




Arsaces, Berenice in tears;




Antiochus! Phaenice, let's away,
To let him see my torments I'le not stay.




Now whither's all my resolutions gone?



who could se•'t and be his own?
I said I•d never see her sace again:
But come and •ind my boastings all were vain;
Seeing her sufferings, all her scorn forget,
And lose at on•e my vengeance and my hate.
VVretched Antiochus! with how much care
And labours, my own mischiefs I prepare!
How poorly all my injuries have born!
Hopeless, undo•e and to my self a scorn,
Leave me alone unhappy as I am:
I would not have a witness of my shame.




'Twas cruel not to see her, Oh my heart!
And now I go to see her, but to part.

•utilius, fly and sooth the Queens despair,
And for our meeting Ber•nice prepare.



What have you done, Sir? Berenice will dye
I saw her hence with hair dishevel'd fly.
'Tis only you her fury can surcease.
When e're you •re nam'd she's instantly at peace.
Her eyes still bent to your apartment were,
And every moment seem'd to wish you near.




Antiochus, assist me what to do.
I'm not prepar'd, for the sad Interview.
I have not yet consulted well my heart,
And doubt it is no• strong enough to part.
Since first I took possession of the Throne,
What is it for my honour I have done?
My love and folly only I've disclos'd,

  29And nothing but my weaknesses expos'd.
The golden days where are they to be found,
So much expected, when this head was Crown'd?
Whose tears have I dry'd up? or in what face
Can I the fruits of any good act trace?
Know I what years Heaven has for me decreed?
And of these few, how few are to succeed?
And yet how many have I spent in wast!
But now to honor I'le make greater hast.
Alas! 'tis but one blow and all is past.





Let me alone, your counsels all are weak.
See him I must, he's here, and I will speak.
Has Titus then forsook me? is it true?
Must we too part, does he command it too?



Oh! stop the deluge, which so fiercely flows;
This is no time t' allay each others woes.
Enough I feel my own afflictions smart,
And need not those dear tears to damp my heart.
But if we neither can our griefs command,
Yet with such honour let 'em be sustain'd.
As the whole World to hear it told shall smart;
For dearest Berenice we must part.
And now I would not a dispute maintain,
Whether I lov'd, but whether I must Reign.



Reign (Cruel) then and satisfie your pride,
And for your Cruelties be deifi'd.
I'le ne'r dispute it farther, I but stay'd
Till Titus who so many vows had made,
Of such a Love as nothing could impair.
Should come himself and tell how false they were,
Now I believ't, enough I've heard you tell,
And I am gone eternally farewell,
Eternally Ah, Sir, con•ider now,
How harsh that word is and how dreadful too.
Consider, Oh the Miseries they bear,
That are for ever rob'd of all that•s dear.
From this sad Moment never more to meet,

  30Is it for day to dawn▪ and day to set,
In which I must not find my hopes still •oung,
Nor yet once see my Titus all day long?
Heav••s how I wildly rave to lose my pains
O• him ungra•eful that my tears d•sdains!
Of all those days of absence I shall count,
With him, the number will to nothing mount.



Doubt it not, Madam, there will be no need
To count the days that shall your loss suceed.
I hope e•re long that you will hear from •ame,
How very wretched and how just I am.
My heart bleeds now, I feel the drops run down▪
Nor can it be long dying when you 're gone.



Ah why, Sir, must we part if this be true?
My cl•ims to Marriage I'le no more renew.
Will •ome accept of nothing but my death?
Or why d' ye envy▪ me the air you breath?



M•dam, you are too powerful every way▪
Shall I withstand it? no, for ever stay.
Then I from bliss must always be debarr'd,
And on my heart for ever keep a guard.
With fears through all my cours• of Glory move,
L•st e•re aware I lose my self and Love.
Ev'n •ow my heart is from my bosom stray'd,
And a•l its swellings on a sudden laid.
Bent thus to you by all Loves softest pow'rs,
And only this remembers that 'tis yours.



O Titus, whilst this charming tale you tell▪
D'ye see the Romans ready to reb•l?



How they will look on the affront who knows,
If on•• they •urmur and then fall to blows:
Must I in Battel j•stifie my Ca•se;
Or if they should submit and set their Laws;
How must I be expos'd another day;
And for their Patience too, how▪ largely pay!
With Grievances and wild Demands still c••st,
Shall I dare plead th• Laws that break '•m first?



How much you are an Empe•or now I find,

•Tis plain in your unsteady anxious mind▪
You weigh your Peoples Rights to your own •ears▪

  31But never value Berenices tears?



Not value 'em▪ Why are you so unjust?
Now by the honour of my Father's dust,
By Heav'n and all the gods that govern there,
If to me any thing be half so dear;
May I be as a Slave, depos'd and serve,
Or else forlorn in some wild Desart starve,
Till I'm as wretched as my ills deserve.



Laws you may change, why will you for their sake,
Into your brest eternal sorrows take?

Rome has her Priviledges, have not you
Your Int'rests, your Rights as sacred too?
Say, speak.



Alas! how do you rend my brest!
I know indeed I never can have rest;
And yet the Laws of Rome I cannot change,
Do, break my heart and take your full Revenge.



How weak a Guard does now your Honor keep!
You are an Emperor, and yet you weep▪



I grant it, I am sensible I do,
I weep, alas! I sigh and tremble too.
For when to Empire first I did attain,

Rome made me swear I would her Rights maintain.
I did, and must perform what I then vow'd,
Others before me to the Yoke have bow'd:
And 'tis their Honor: yet in leaving you;
All their Austerest Laws I shall out-do.
And an Example leave so brave and great,
As none shall ever after imitate.



To your Barbarity there's nothing hard,
Go on, and Infamy be your reward.
Long since my fears your falshood had displ•y'd;
Nor would I at your Sute have 〈◊〉 stay'd.
Would I the base Indignities had born,
Of a rude People, publick Hate and Scorn?
No, to this breach I would have spurr'd you on,
And I am pleas'd it is already don•.

  32No longer shall the fear of me prevail;
Alas! you must not think to hear me rail▪
Or Heav'n invoke, its vengeance to prepare;
No, for if Heav'n vouchsafe to hear my Pray'r,
I beg no memory may there remain,
Of either your Injustice, or my Pain.

But the sad Berenice before she dies,
Is sure to have Revenge if you have eyes.
Nor, Titus, need I go to find it far,
No further than that heart, I have it there:

Within your sel• shall rise your dreadfull'st foe;
My past Integrities, my Torments now;
VVhich you, ungrateful perjur'd Man, have bred,
My blood which in your Palace I shall shed.
Sufficient terrors to your Soul shall give,
And '•is to them that my Revenge I'll leave.




Thus, Sir, at least the Conquest you have won,
The Q•een you see's contented to be gone.



Curse on thy Roman Rudeness, that canst see
Such tears, unmov'd, and mock such Misery!
Oh! I am lost, and 'tis in vain to strive,
If Berenice dies, I cannot live.
Fly and prevent that Fate to which she's gone.
Bid her but live, tell her the World's her own.




Sir, if I might advise, you should not send,
Rather command her women to attend;
They better can her Melancholy chear:
The worst is past, and now 'tis mean to fear.
I saw your melting Pity when she wept,
And my rough heart but very hardly scap'd.
Yet look a little farther and you•• find
That spite of all your fortune yet is kind.
What triumphs the whole VVorld prepares, you'll see,
And then hereafter think how great you'll be.



VVho for Barbarity would be ador'd!
I hate my self, Nero so much abhor'd,
That bloody Tyrant, whom I b•ush to name;
VVas never half so cruel as I am.

  43No, I'll pursue the Queen, she loves me still,
VVill pardon me when at her feet I kneel:
Let's go, and let proud Rome say what it will.







By Heav'n I know not what I say:
Excess of Sorrow drives my mind astray.



O follow where your full Renown does lead,
Your last adieus Report abroad has spread.

Rome that did mourn, does now new triumphs frame,
The Temples fume with Offerings to your name:
The people wild in the applause y'have won
With Laurel Wreaths to crown, your Statues run.



By that their Salvage natures they betray,
For so wild beasts roar o'r their murder'd prey.
VVho would have sense the sweets of power to prize!
Since most in danger when we highest rise:
For who by Greatness e'r did happy grow?
None but the heavy Slave is truly so.
VVho travels all his life in one dull road,
And drudging on in quiet, loves his load.
Seeking no farther than the needs of Life,
Knows what's his own, and so exempt from strife,
And cherishes his homely careful wife.
Lives by the Clod, and thinks of nothing higher;
Has all, because he cannot much desire.
Had I been born so low, I had been blest
Of what I love, without controul possest.
Never had Honour or Ambition known,
Nor ever to be Great, had been undone.




The Tribunes, Sir, and Senate with their state,
I'th' name of all the Empire for you wait,
They'r follow'd too by an impatient throng,
VVho seem to murmur, you delay so long.



Toyle me no more, disperse that clamorous Rout:
Tell 'em they shall no more have cause to doubt;
The Queens departure they'll to morrow see,
And me as wretched as they'd have me be.
Take this Paulinus: bear it to the Queen,

For •hould we meet, I must relapse again;
I h've bid her here eternally adieu,
Stay while she reads it, and her troubles view,
And bring me faithful word, as thou art true.
Hold! oh my Heart! yet go, 〈◊〉 it must be done,
For what's necessity, we cannot shun.
Would I had never known what 'tis to live,
Or a new Being to my self could give.
Som• monstrous and unheard of Shape now find,
As S•lvage, and as Barbarous as my mind.
Anti•chus!





My last Adieu to pay,
I come, and dare in Rome no longer stay.
My griefs, and my afflictions, grow so high;
If not by absence slacken'd, I must dye.



What reason have the happy to repine?
Now Berenice for ever will be thine.
VVith all her charms receive her to thy brest,
And be of all I ever lov'd, possest.



It is beneath you, Sir, to mock my pain:
I ever kneel to Berenice again!
No, •h•uld I stay to see you when you part,
Tho I am sure the sight would break my heart,
Yet •he, as still my prayers have been deny'd,
Tho I but beg'd one blessing ere I dy'd,
Even then •ith scorn would throw me from her side.



Oh Heaven! she's entring, from her Charms lets fly,
I know my weakness; if I stay, I dye.

  45Meet, and prevent her 







How h• hasts away!
Ingrateful! Dearest Perjur'd Titus, stay.

Afflictions catch him, great as those I bear.
My Lord, at last I have receiv'd my Doom:
'Tis seal'd; but ere I part from you and Rome,

I ask, and I your pardon would receive:
Can you the wrongs which I have done, forgive?



I never any Injuries did find;
No, Berenice has always been too kind.
With one soft word, how suddenly I'm lost,
And have no sense of my disgraces past!
But must I then for ever lose you so?
I am no Roman, nor was ere your foe.
No, rather here continue, and be Great,
Whilst I live ever hopeless at your feet.



Should I stay here and my wrongs tamely bear
From him that shuns, and flies me every where?
I have a nobler mind, and you shall see
I can disdain and scorn as much as he:
For tho 'tis true, I never can be yours;
Both Rome and him my heart this hour abjures.



To banish him your heart, whilst you prepare,
VVhat will you do with all the Love that's there?
There's no one Mortal can deserve it all,
And sure a little to my share might fall.



Oh of that killing Subject, talk no more,
I would have lov'd you, if I could, before.
Love for another struck me with his Dart,
And 'tis not in my power to force my heart.



When first my Passion was disdain'd for him,
You kept me yet alive with your esteem.
But now at last his breach of Faith you see,
And bear it nobly too: how can it be
T' your self so Just, and yet so hard to me?



What cruel storms, and fierce assaults you make,
To batter down a heart you cannot take!
Till you have broke it. Will you not give o'r?
No, rather let me go, and hear no more.



O stay, since of the Victory you are secure,
Pitty the pains and anguish I endure;

In wounds which you and none but you can cure.
Look back, whilst at your feet my self I cast,
And think the sigh that's coming is my last.
My heart it's •ad eternal farewell takes:
Be but so kind to see me when it breaks.



Rise, rise my Lord. The Emperor's return'd.
Conduct me hence, let me not more be scorn'd.





How am I lost! resolve on what I will,
Spite of my self I wander this way still.
Why would you Berenice my presence shun?



No! I'le hear nothing, I've resolv'd on flight,
And will be gone. Why come you in my sight?
Why come you thus t'exasperate my despair?
Are you yet not content? I know you are.



If ever yet my heart was dear to yours;
By all our plighted vows, those softest hours
In which for ever to be true I swore,
I beg that you•d afford me yet one more.



I till to morrow had your leave to stay;
But my resolves are to be gone to day.
And I depart.



No journey must you take.
Would you poor Titus in his griefs forsake?
No! Stay 



I stay! Ungrateful as you are.
For what? a Peoples rude affronts to bear.
That with the sound of my misfortune rend
The Clouds, and shouts to Heaven in Vollys send?
Does not their cruel joy yet reach your ears,
Whilst I alone Torment my self in tears?
By what offence or crime are they thus mov'd?
Alas! what have I done, but too much Lov'd?



D'you mind the voice of an outragious throng?
I ever thought your constancy more strong.
Never believ'd your heart so weak could be,
Whose powerful charms had captivated me.



All that I see distraction does create,
These rich Apartments and this Pompous State.
These Places where I spent my happiest hours,
And plighted all my Vows, false Man, to yours.
All, as most vile Impostors I detest,
How strangely, Titus, might we have been blest!



This art to torture souls where did you learn?
Or was it in your nature with you born?
Oh Berenice! how you destroy me!
Atendants, bring your Chair nearer.




Return and to your famous Senate go;
That for your cruelties applaud you so.
Have you not honour to your full delight?
Have you not promis'd to forget me quite?
What more in expiation can you do?
Have you not ever sworn to hate me too?



Can you do any thing to make me hate?
Or can I ever Berenice forget?
This hard suspition was unjustly urg'd,
'Gainst a poor heart too much before surcharg'd▪
Oh Madam! know me better, and recall
The wrong, since first I at your feet did fall.
Count all the single days and minutes past,
Where in my vows and my desires I prest.
And at this time your greatest Conquest know,
For you were never so belov'd as now.
Nor ever 



Still your Love you'd have me own,
Yet you your self command me to be gone.
Is my despair so charming to your view?
D' you think the tears I shed are all too few?
Of such a heart, a vain return you make,
No never call those dear Idea's back.
But suffer me in this belief to rest;
That secretly, long since exil'd your breast,

  48I only from a faithless wretch depart,
And one that never lays the loss to heart.
If you had Lov•d me, this had nere been sent,
Here you have commanded me to banishment.

What wondrous Love you bear me this doth show.
Read, read, ungrateful, read and let me go.





You shall not go, I have not given consent,
Nor will I ever to your banishment.
Your cruel resolution I descry,
To be reveng'd of me you seek to dye.
And then of all I love, except the pain,
Nought but the sad remembrance will remain.

Antiochus! be thou a witness here

Ber. sinks down in a Chair.
Of all my misery and my despair.



D•sp•ir's a Theam I only understand;
You, if you will, your wishes may command.
Such Beauty ready for possession see,
And leave that ugly hag Despair, to me.



Behold those eyes how dull and dark they grow!
Madam, when at your feet I fall thus low,

Vouchsafe my sad afflictions to believe,
Alas! '•is all the ease I'm like to have.
When first the dreadful minute I beheld;
That by my duty and the Laws compel'd,
I found it forc'd that you must hence depart.
Though nothing e're can banish you my heart.
'Twas then m• soul had first a sense of fears,
Foreseeing your reproaches and your tears.
I then expected, Madam, all the weight
Of woes that can on worst misfortunes light.
But whatsoever fears opprest my heart,
I find I but foresaw the lesser part.
I thought my vertue not so apt to bow;

〈◊〉 am asham•d 'tis thus intangled now.



Let me alone and vex my soul no more,
You of your vertue talk't enough before.
Urge it not still to agg•avate my shame.
VVhen Crown'd with conquest from the wars you came,
I know you brought me but to fill your state;
For els• the triumph had not been •omplete.



Since you have then resolv'd: It s•all be so.
And judg by this if y'are belov'd or no.
No longer Torments on my soul shall prey,
Since I to freedom see so brave a way;
A way by more than one great Roman shown,
Who, when their Misery's had prest 'em down,
Propt from within, shook off with life, the weight,
Offers to stab himself
And thus fell nobly grapling with their fate.



Oh stay! to wrong me more what way dy'e take?
Would Titus die for Berenices sake?
I see the blow you cruelly prepare
To wound that breast where I, you say, have share.
To hurt what's mine would be unjustly done▪
No, rather strike this heart, that's all your own.



Best of thy sex! and dearest, now I see.
How poor is Empire when compar'd to thee.
Hence ye, perplexing Cares, that clog a brain,
Whilst struck with extasie▪ I here fall down.

Thus at your feet a happy prostrate laid,
I'm much more blest than if the world I swaid.



Now the blest Berenice enough has seen:

I thought your Love had quite extinguisht been:
But 'twas my error, for you still are true.
Your heart is troubled, and your tears I view.
Ev'n my worst sufferings much o'repaid I see,
Nor shall th' unhappy world be curst for me,
Nothing since first 'twas yours, my love would shake,
So absolute a Conquest did you make.
But now I'le bring it to the utmost test,
And with one fucal Act crown all the rest.



Hah! tell me Berenice what will you do?



Far from your sight and Rome for ever go:
I have resolv'd on't, and it shall be so.




Antiochus! I'm born to be undone;
When I the greatest conquest thought t'have won:
Ev'n in my noblest race I am out-run.
But thou wer't always gen'rous, always kind;
Your inlarg'd Kingdom shall to hers be joyn'd.
And now how much you are my faithful friend;

  50In being so to her, you'l best expres.
Falling on his neck.
Never forsake her in sad distress.
Where e're she goes, for ever with her be.
And sometimes in my absence sigh for me.




Arsaces! on thy bosome let me lye,
VVhilst I but take one last dear look, and die.



No live: and by a generous strife out-do
Us both, and of your self be conqu'rour too.
Farewel.
Let us all three a rare example prove:
Of a most tender though unhappy love.
Thus, Sir, your Peace and Empire I restore.
Farewell and reign, I'le never see you more.








She's gone and al• I valu'd lost:
Now Friend, let Rome, of her great Emp'ror boast.
Since they themselves first taught me cruelty,
I'le try how much a Tyrant I can be.
Henceforth all thoughts of pitty I'le disown,
And with my arms the Universe ore-run.
Rob'd of my Love, through ruins purchase •ame,
And mak• the world's as wretched as I am.












THIS is unhappy News; I did not expect my Fa∣ther
in two Months, and yet you say he is re∣turn'd
already



'Tis but too true.



That he arriv'd this Morning?







And that he is come with a resolution to Marry me?



Yes, Sir, To Marry you.



I am ruin'd and undone; prithee advise me.







Yes, advise me. Thou art as surly, as if thou really couldst
do me no good. Speak: Has Necessity taught thee no Wit?
Hast thou no Shift?



Lord, Sir, I am at present very busie in Contriving some
Trick to save my self; I am first prudent, and then good natur'd.



How will my Father rage and storm, when he understands
what things have happen'd in his absence? I dread his anger and
reproaches.



Reproaches! Would I could be quit of him so easily; me∣thinks
I feel him already on my Shoulders.



Dis-inheriting is the least I can expect.



You should have thought of this before, and not have fallen
in Love with I know not whom, one that you met by chance in
the Dover-Coach; she is indeed a good smug Lass, but God knows
what she is besides; perhaps some 







I have done, Sir, I have done.



I have no Friend that can appease my Father's anger, and
now I shall be betrayed to want and •isery.



For my part, I know but one Remedy in our misfortunes.



Prithee what is it?



You know that Rogue and arch-Cheat Scapin.



Well▪ What of him?



There is not a more subtle Fellow breathing; so cunning,
he can cheat one newly Cheated; 'tis such a Wheadling Rogue,
I'll undertake in two hours he shall make your Father forgive you
all, nay, allow you Money for your necessary Debauches: I saw
him in three days, make an old cautious Lawyer turn Chymist
and Projector.



He is the fittest person in the World for my Business; the
Impudent Varlet can do any thing with the peevish old Man.
Prithee go look him out, we'll set him a work immediately.



See where he comes Monsieur Scapin!









I have been giving my Master a brief Account of thy most
Noble Qualities: I told him, thou wert as Valiant as a ridden
Cuckold, Sincere as Whores, Honest as Pimps in want.



Alas Sir! I but Copy you: 'Tis you are brave; you scorn
the Gibbets, Halters and Prisons which threaten you, and valiant∣ly
proceed in Cheats and Robberies.



Oh Scapin! I am utterly ruin'd without thy assistance.



Why? What's the matter good Mr. Octavian?



My Father is this day arriv'd at Dover with old Mr. Gripe,
with a resolution to Marry me.







Thou knowest I am already Married; How will my Fa∣ther
resent my Disobedience? I am for ever lost, unless thou canst
find some means to reconcile me to him.



Does your Father know of your Marriage?



I am afraid he is by this time acquainted with it.



No matter, no matter, all shall be well: I am publick-spi∣rited;
I love to help distressed young Gentlemen, and thank
Heav•n I have had good success enough.



Besides, My present want must be considered, I am in re∣bellion
without any Money.



I have Tricks and Shifts too to get that: I can cheat upon
occasion; but Cheating is now grown an ill Trade; yet Heav'n
be thank'd, there were never more Cullies and Fools; but the
great Rooks and Cheats allow'd by publick Authority, ruin such
little Undertraders as I am.



Well, Get thee straight about thy Bus'ness: Canst thou
make no use of my Rogue here?



Yes, I shall want his assistance; the Knave has Cunning,
and may be useful.



Ay Sir; But like other wise Men, I am not over-Valiant:
Pray leave me out of this Bus'ness; my Fears will betray you;
you shall execute, I'll sit at home and advise.



I stand not in need of thy Courage, but thy Impudence,
and thou hast enough of that: Come, come, thou shalt along;
What, Man, stand out for a Beating? That's the worst can
happen.









Here comes my dearest Clara.



Ah me Octavian! I hear sad News: They say, your Father
is return'd.



Alas! 'Tis true, and I am the most unfortunate person in
the World; but 'tis not my own misery that I consider, but yours:
How can you bear those wants to which we must be both reduc'd?



Love shall teach me, that can make all things easie to us,
which is a sign it is the chiefest good: But I have other Cares;
Will you be ever constant? Shall not your Father's Severity con∣strain
you to be false?



Never, my dearest, never.



They that love much, may be allow'd some fears.



Come, come; we have now no time to hear you speak
fine tender things to one another: Pray do you prepare to encoun∣ter
with your Father.



I tremble at the thoughts of it.



You must appear resolute at first: Tell him you can live
without troubling him; threaten him to turn Souldier; or what
will frighten him worse, say, you'll turn Poet. Come, I'll war∣rant
you, we bring him to Composition.



What would I give 'twere over?



Let us practise a little what you are to do. Suppose me
your Father, very grave and very angry.







Do you look very carelesly, like a small Courtier upon his
Country Acquaintance; a little more surlily: Very well: Now I
come full of my Fatherly Authority. 
Octavian, Thou makest me weep to see thee; but alas they are
not tears of joy, but tears of sorrow. Did ever so good a Father
beget so lewd a Son? Nay, but for that I think• thy Mother Ver∣tuous,
I should pronounce thou art not mine; Newgate-Bird,
Rogue, Villain, what a Trick hast thou play'd me in my absence?
Marry'd? Yes: but to whom? Nay that thou •knowest not. I'•
warrant you some Waiting-Woman corrupted in a Civil Family,
and redu•'d to one of the Play-Houses, remov'd from thence by
some Keeping Coxcomb, or 



Hold Scapin, Hold 



No offence Lady, I speak but anothers words.
Thou abominable Rascal, thou shall not have a groat, not a
groat. Besides, I will break all thy bones ten times over; get thee
out of my house Why Sir, you reply not a word, but stand as
bashfully, as a Girl that's examin'd by a Bawdy Judge, about a
Rape.



Look yonder comes my Father.



Stay Shift, and get you two gone, let me alone to manage
the old fellow.






Was there ever such a rash action?



He has been inform'd of the Business, and is now so full of
it, that he vents it to himself.



I would fain hear what they can say for themselves.



We are not unprovided.




Will they be so Impudent to deny the thing?



We never int•nd it.



Or will they endeavour to excuse it?



That perhaps we may doe.



But all shall be in vain.







I know how to lay that Rogue my Son fast.



That we must prevent.



And sor that Tat•erdemal••on 〈◊〉, I'le thrash him to death,
I will be three Years a Cudgelling him.



I wondred he had forgot me so long.



Oh Oh! Yonder the Rascal is, that brave Governour, he
tutor'd my Son finely.



Sir, I am overjoyed at your safe return.



Good mor•ow Scapin, indeed you have followed my In∣structions
very exactly, my Son has behaved himself very pru∣dently
in my absence, has he not Rascal, has he not?



I hope you are very well.



Very well Thou sayst not a word Varlet, thou sayst not
a word.



Had you a good Voyage Mr. Thrifty?



Lord Sir! A very good Voyage, pray give a Man a little
leave to vent his Choler.



Would you be in Choler Sir?



Ay, Sir, I would be in Choler.







With that confounded Rogue there.







Upon what reason? hast thou not heard what hath hap∣pened
in my abscence.



I have heard a little Idle story.



A little Idle story. Quoth a • why Man, my Son's undone,
my Son's undone.



Come, come, things have not been well carried, but I
would advise you to make no more of it.



I am not of your opinion, I'le make the whole Town ring
of it.



Lord Sir, I have stormed about this business as much
as you can do for your Heart, but what are we both the bet∣ter?
I told him indeed, Mr. Octavian, you do not do well, to wrong
so good a Father: I preached him three or four times asleep, but
all would not do, •till at last, when I had well examined the Business
I found you had not so much wrong done you as you Imagine.



How not wrong done me to have my Son married without
my consent to a Beggar!



Alas he was ordained to it.



That's fine indeed, we shall steal, cheat, murder, and so be
hang'd, then say we were ordained to it.



Truly I did not think you so subtile a Phylosopher, I mean
he was fatally engaged in this affair.



Why did he Engage himself?



Very true indeed, very true; but fie upon you now,
would you have him as wise as your self, young men will have
their follies, witness my charge Leander; who has gon and thrown
away himself at a stranger rate then your Son. I would fain know
if you were not once young your self; yes I warrant you, and had
your frailties.



Yes, but they never cost me any thing; a man may be as
frail and as wicked as he please, if it cost him nothing.



Alas he was so in Love with the young wench, that if he
had not had her, he must have certainly hang'd himself;



Must! why he had already done it, But that I came very
seasonably and cut the rope.



Didst thou cut the rope, Dog? 'Ile Murther thee for that
thou shouldest have let him hang.



Besides, her Kindred surprized him with her, and forc't
him to marry her.



Then should he have presently gone, and protested against
the Violence at a Notaries.



O Lord Sir, he scorn'd that.



Then might I easily have disanulled the Martiage.











You shall not break the marriage.



Shall not I break it?







What shall not I claim the priviledge of a Father, and have
the Satisfaction for the violence done to my Son?



'Tis a thing he will never consent to.



He will not consent to!



No. Would you have him confess he was hector'd into a∣ny
thing, that is to declare himself a Coward: Oh fie Sir, one
that has Honour of being your Son, can never do such a thing.



Pish, ta•k not to me of Honour, he shall do it or be dis-in∣herited.



Who shall dis-inherit him?



That will I Sir.



You dis-inherit him! very good.







You shall not dis-inherit him.



Shall not I dis-inherit him?















Sir, you are very merry; I shall not disinherit my Son?



No I tell you.



Pray who shall hinder me?



Alas Sir, your own self Sir; your own self.







Yes Sir, for you can never have the Heart to do it.



You shall find I can Sir.



Come you deceive your self, Fatherly affection must show
it self, it must, it must; do not I know you were ever tender hear∣ted.



Y'are mistaken Sir, Y'are mistaken: Pish, why do I spend
my time in tittle tattle with this Idle fellow? Hang-dog go find

whil'st I go to my Brother Gripe and Inform him of my misfor∣tune.



In the mean time if I can do you any service. 



Oh! I thank you Sir, I thank you. 




I must confess thou art a brave Fellow, and our affairs be∣gin
to be in a better posture but the money, the money we
are abominable poor, and my Master has lean Vigilant dunns that
torment him more than an old Mother does a poor Gallant, when
she solicits a maintenance for her discarded Daughter.



Your money shall be my next care let me see, I want a
fellow to Canst thou not Counterfeit a roaring Bully of Alsatia?
 Stalk look big very well. Follow me, I have ways to dis∣guise
thy voice and countenance.



Pray take a little care and lay your plot so that I may not
act the Bully all wayes, I would not be beaten like a Bully.



We'l share the danger, we'l share the danger.










SIr, what you tell me concerning your Son, hath strangely
frustrated our Designs.



Sir, trouble not your self about my Son, I have underta∣ken
to remove all Obstacles, which is the business I am so vigo∣rously
in pursuit of.



In troth, Sir, I'l tell you what I say to you, The Education
of Children after the getting of e'm, ought to be the nearest Con∣cern
of a Father: And had you tutored your Son with that Care
and Duty incumbent on you, he never could fo slightly have for∣feited
his.



Sir, to return you a Sentence for your Sentence. Those that
are so quick to Censure and condemn the Conduct of others,
ought first to take Care that all be well at home.



Why Mr. Thrifty, have you heard any thing concerning my
Son?



It may be I have, and it may be worse than of my own.



What is't I pray? My Son?



Ev'n your own Scapin told it me, and you may hear it
from him or some body else: For my part, I am your Friend, and
would not willingly be the Messenger of ill news to one that I
think so to me: Your Servant: I must hasten to my Councel to
advise what's to be done in this Case. God-bu'y till I see you again.




Worse than his Son! For my part I cannot imagine how;
For a Son to marry impudently without the Consent of his Fa∣ther,
is as great an Offence as can be imagin'd I take it: But
yonder he comes.





Oh my Dear Father, how Joyful am I to see you safely
return'd. Welcome as the Blessing which I am now craving will
be.



Not so fast Friend'a mine, soft and fair goes far Sir. You are
my Son, as I take it.



What d'ee mean Sir?



Stand still, and let me look yee in the Face.



How must I stand Sir?



Look upon me with both Eyes▪



Well Sir I do.



What's the meaning of this Report?







Yes Report Sir, I speak English as I take it, What is't that
you have done in my absence?



What is't Sir which you would have had me done?



I do not ask you what I would have had you done; but
what you have done.



Who I Sir? Why I have done nothing at all, not I Sir.



Nothing at all! (Leand.) No Sir,



You have no Impudence to speak on.



Sir, I have the Confidence that becomes a Man, and my
Innocence.



Very well, But Scapin, d'ye mark me young man, Scapin has
told me some tales of your Behaviour?







Oh have I caught you? That name makes ye blush do's it?
'Tis well you have some Grace left.



Has he said any thing concerning me?



That shall be examined anon. In the mean while get you
home d'ye hear. And stay till my return; But look to't, if thou
haft done any thing to dishonour me, never think to come within
my Doors, or see my Face more; but expect to be as miserable as
thy folly and poverty can make thee.





Very fine: I am in a hopeful Condition. This Rascal
has betrayed my marriage and undone me: Now there is no way
left but to turn Outlaw, and live by rapine: and to set my hand
in; the first thing shall be to Cut the throat of that perfidious
Pick-thank Dog that has ruined me.





Dear Scapin, how infinitely am I obliged to thee for thy
Care!



Yonder he comes: I'm overjoyed to see you good Mr.
Dog!



Sir your most humble Servant, You honour me too far.



You act an ill fools part, But I shall teach you.











No, Octavian, I'le make him confess the Treachery he
has committed; yes Varlet Dog, I know the trick you have playd
me: you thought perhaps no body would have told me. But i'le
make you confess it, or I'le run my Sword in your Guts.



Oh Sir, Sir, would you have the heart to do such a thing?
have I done you any Injury Sir?



Yes Rascal that you have, and I'le make you own it too,
or I'le swing it out of your already tan'd thick hide.




The Devil's in't, Lord Sir, what d'yee mean? Nay good
Mr. Leander, pray Mr. Leander; Squire Leander As I hope to
be saved 



Prithee be quiet: for shame enough: 




Well Sir, I confess indeed that 







About two Months agoe you may remember, a Maid Ser∣vant
dyed in the house. 



What of all that?



Nay Sir, if I confess you must not be angry.







'Twas said she dyed for love of me Sir; But let that pass.



Death, you trifling Buffoon;



About a week after her death, I dreft my self up like her
Ghost, and went into Madam Lucia your Mistresses Chamber,
where she lay half in half out of bed, with her woman by her, read∣ing
an ungodly Play-book,



And was it your Impuden•e did that?



They both beleive it was a Ghost to this hour. But it
was my self playd the Goblin to fright her from the Scurvy Cu∣stome
of lying awake at those unseasonable hours, hearing filthy
Plays when she had never said her Prayers.



I shall remember you for all in time, and place; But
come to the point, and tell me what thou hast said to my Father.



To you Father? I have not so much as seen him since his re∣turn,
and if you'd ask him he'll tell you so himself.



Yes he has told me himself, and told me all thou hast said
to him!



With your good leave Sir, then he ly'd, I beg your par∣don
I mean he was mistaken.




Oh Sir, I bring you the most unhappy news.







Your Mistress Sir, is yonder arrested in an Action of 200 l.
They say 'tis a debt she left unpaid at London; in the hast of her
escape hither to Dover, and if you do not raise money within this
two hours to discharge her, Shee'l be hurried to prison.



Within this two hours?



Yes Sir, within this two hours.



Ah my poor Scapin, I want thy assistance.




Ah my poor Scapin! Now I'm your poor Scapin now
you've need of me.



No more▪ I pardon thee all that thou hast done, and
worse if thou art guilty of it.



No no, never pardon me, run your Sword in my Guts,
you'l do better to Murder me.



For Heaven's sake; think no more upon that, but study
now to assist me.



You must do something for him.



Yes to have my bones broken for my pains.



Would you leave me Scapin in this severe extremity!



To put such an affront upon me as you did;



I wrong'd thee I confess.



To use me like a Scoundrel, a Villain, a Rascal, to threa∣ten
to run your Sword in my Guts.



I cry thy Mercy withall my Heart, and if thou wilt have
me throw my self at thy Feet, I'le doo't.



Faith Scapin you must, you cannot but yield.



Well then; But d'yee mark me Sir, another time better
words and gentler blows.



Will you promise to mind my business?



As I see convenient, Care shall be taken,



But the time you know is short.



Pray Sir, don't be so troublesome: How much money is't
you want?



Two hundred pounds. (Scap.) And you? (Oct.) As
much.



No more to be said. It shall be done; For
you the Contrivance is laid already; and for your
Father though he be covetous to the last degree,
Yet thanks be to Heaven hee's but a shallow per∣son,


his parts are not extraordinary, do not take it ill Sir, for you
have no resemblance of him, But that y'are very like him; Begon
I see Octavians Father coming, I'le begin with him.


Here he comes mumbling and chewing the Cud to prove him∣self a
clean Beast.



Oh audacious Boy, to commit so insolent a Crime, and
plunge himself into such a mischief!



Sir, your humble Servant.



How do you Scapin?



What, you are ruminating on your Sons rash Action.



Have I not reason to be troubled?



The life of man is full of troubles, that's the truth on't;
But your Philosopher is alwaies prepared I remember an Excellent
Proverb of the Ancients, very fit for your Case.







Pray mind it, 'twill do ye a World of good.



What is't I ask you?



Why; When the Master of a Family shall be absent any
considerable time from his home or Mansion, he ought rationally,
gravely, wisely, and Philosophically, to revolve within his mind
all the concurrent Circumstances, that may during the Interval
conspire to the Conjunction of those misfortunes, and trouble∣some
accidents, that may intervene upon the said absence, and the
interruption of his Oeconomical inspection, into the remissness,
negligences, frailties, and huge and perillous Errours, which his
Substitutes, Servants, or Trustees, may be capable of, or liable
aud obnoxious unto, which may arise from the imperfection
and corruptness of ingenerated Natures, or the taint and conta∣gion
of corrupted Education, whereby the Fountain-head of
Man's Disposition becomes muddy, and all the Streams of his Man∣ners
and Conversation run consequently defiled, and impure:
These things premised, and fore-considered, arm the said pru∣dent
Philosophical Pater Familias, to find his House laid waste,
his Wife murdered, his Daughters deflowred, his Sons hang'd:
Cum multis aliis qua nunc perscribere longum est▪
and to th•nk Heaven 'tis no worse too: D'ye mark, Sir?



S'deat•! Is all this a Proverb?



Ay, and the best Proverb, and the wisest in the World:
Good Sir, get it by heart: T'will do ye the greatest good imagi∣nable;
and don't trouble your self: I'le repeat it to you, till you
have gotten it by heart.



No, I thank you, Sir, I'll have none on't.



Pray do; you'l like it better next time; hear it once
more, I say When the Master of a 



Hold, hold, I have better thoughts of my own; I'm
going to my Lawyer; I'll null the Marriage.



Going to Law! Are ye mad to venture your self among
Lawyers? Do you not see every day how the Spunges suck poor
Clyents, and with a company of foolish, non-sensical terms, and
knavish tricks, undo the Nation: No, you shall take another way.



You have reason, if there were any other way.



Come, I have found one. The truth is, I have a great
compassion for your grief; I cannot when I see tender Fathers af∣flicted
for their Sons miscarriages, but have bowels for 'em; I
have much ado to refrain weeping for you.



Truly my Case is sad, very sad.



So it is; tears will burst out; I have a great respect for
your person.




Thank you with all my heart; in troth we should have a
fellow-feeling.



Ay, so we should; I assure you there is not a person in
the World whom I respect more than the Noble Mr. Thrifty.



Thou art honest Scapin. Ha' done, ha' done.



Sir, Your most humble Servant.



But what is your way?



Why, In brief I have been with the Brother of her whom
your wicked Son has Married.







A most outragious roaring Fellow, with a down-hang∣ing
Look, contracted Brow, with a swell'd red Face enflam'd
with Brandy; one that frowns, puffs, and looks big at all Man∣kind,
roars out Oaths▪ and bellows out Curses enough in a Day,
to serve a Garrison a Week; bred up in blood and rapine, used to
slaughter from his youth upwards; one that makes no more con∣science
of killing a Man, than cracking of a Lowse; he has killed
sixteen, four for taking the Wall of him; five for looking too big
upon him; two he shot pissing against the Wall: In short, he is
the most dreadful of all the Race of Bullies.



Heav'n! How do I tremble at the Description? But what's
this to my Business?



Why, He (as most Bullies are) is in want, and I have
brought him, by threatning him with all the Courses of Law, all
the assistance of your Friends, and your great Purse, (in which I
ventur'd my life ten times, for so often he drew and run at me) yet,
I say, at last I have made him hearken to a Composition, and to
null the Marriage for a sum of Money.



Thanks, dear Scapin; but what sum?



Faith, He was damnably unreasonable at first, and gad
I told him so very roundly.



A Pox on him, what did he ask?



Ask? Hang him, why he ask'd 500 l.



Ouns and Heart, 500 l. Five hundred Devils take him, 
and fry and frigassee the Dog; does he take me for a mad-Man?



Why, so I said; and after much argument I brought him
to this: Dammee, says he, I am going to the Army, and I must
have Two good Horses for my self, for fear one should die; and
those will cost at least Threescore Guinea's.



Hang him Rogue! Why should he have two Horses? But
I care not if I give Threescore Guinea's to be rid of this Affair.



Then, says he, my Pistols, Saddle, Hose, Cloth, and all,
will cost Twenty more.







Well reckoned; faith, this Arithmatick is a fine Art:
Then I must have One for my Boy, will cost Twenty more.



Oh the Devil! Confounded Dog! Let him go and be
damn'd, I'll give him nothing.







Not a Sous, damn'd Rascal, let him turn Foot-Souldier
and be hang•d.



He has a Man besides; Would you have him go a Foot?



Ay, and his Master too, I'll have nothing to do with him.



Well, You are resolv'd to spend twice as much at Doctors
Commons, you are, you will stand out for such a Sum as this; do.



Ha•! Oh damn'd unconscionable Rascal! well if i •must
be so. Let him have the other twenty.



Twenty! why it comes to forty.



No I'le have nothing to do in it. Oh a Coveteous Rogue!
I wonder he is not ashamed to be so Covetous.



Why this is nothing to the Charge at Doctors Commons,
and though her Brother has no Money, she has an Uncle able to
defend her.



Oh Eternal Rogue! well I must do't, the Divels in him I
think!



Then saies he, I must carry into France money to buy a
Mule to carry 



Let him to the Devil with his Mule, I'le appeal to the
Judges.



Nay good Sir, think a little.



No, I'le do nothing.



Sir, Sir, but one little Mule?



No not so much as an Ass!







I will not consider, I'le go to Law.



I am sure if you go to Law you do not consider the Ap∣peales,
Degrees of Jurisdiction, the intricate proceedings, the Kna∣veries,
the Craving of so many Ravenous Animals that will prey
upon you, Villanous Harpies! Promoters, Tipstaves, and the like;
None of which but will puff away the clearest right in the World
for a Bribe; on the other side the Proctor shall side with your Ad∣versary,
And sell your cause for ready Money; Your Advocate shall
be gained the same way, And shall not be found when your cause
is to be heard: Law is a torment of all torments.



That's true: Why what does the damn'd Rogue rec∣kon
for his Mule?



Why for Horses, Furniture, Mule, and to pay some Scores
that are due to his Landlady, he demands and will have two hun∣dred
pounds.



Come, come, let's go to Law.


Thr. walks up and down
in a great heat.


Do but reflect upon 



I'le go to Law?



Do not plunge your self.



To Law I'le tell you?



Why there's for Procuration, Presentation, Council, Pro∣ductions,
Proctors, Attendance, and scribling vast Volumes of
Interrogatories, Depositions, and Articles, Consultations and Plead∣ings
of Doctors, for the Register, Substitute, Judgments, Signings 
Expedition Fees, besides the vast Presents to them and their Wives.
Hang't, the Fellow is out of Employment, give him the money,
give him it I say.



What, two hundred pounds!



Ay, ay, why you'l gain 150 l. by it, I have summ'd it up;
I say give it him▪ I, faith do.







Ay, besides you ne're think how they'l rail at you in plead∣ing,
tell all your Fornications, Bastardings, and Commutings in their
Courts,



I defie 'em, let 'em tell of my whoring, 'tis the fashion.



Peace, Here's the Brother.



Oh Heaven! what shall I do.





Damme, where is this confounded Dog, this Father of Octa∣vian?
Null the Marriage: By all the Honour of my Ancestors I'le
chine the Villain.








He cares not Sir, He'l not give the 200 l.



By Heaven, he shall be Worms-meat within these two
hours.



Sir, he has Courage, he fears you not.



You lye, I have not Courage, I do fear him mortally.



He! he! Ounds he! would all his Family were in him, I'd
cut off Root and Branch: Dishonour my Sister! This in his Guts:
What Fellow's that? Hah!







Nor none of his Friends?



No, Sir: Hang him, I am his mortal Enemy.



Art thou the Enemy of that Rascal.



Oh! ay, hang him Oh damn'd Bully!




Give me thy hand, old Boy, the next Sun shall not see the
impudent Rascal alive.



He'll muster up all his Relations against you.



Do not provoke him, Scapin.



Would they were all here: Ha! hah!
hah! Here I had one through the Lungs;
there another into the Heart; Ha! there another into the Guts:
Ah Rogues! there I was with you. Hah hah!

He foyns every way
with his Sword.


Hold Sir, we are none of your Enemies.



No, but I will find the Villains out while my Blood is up; I
will destroy the whole Family. Ha, ha, hah!




Here Scapin, I have two hundred Guinea's about me, take
  49
e'm, No more to be said, Let me never see his face again, take e'm
I say, This is the Devil.



Will you not give e'm him your self?



No, no! I will never see him more. I shall not recover this
these three Months. See the business done, I trust in thee, Honest
Scapin: I must repose somewhere; I am mightily out of Order 
A plague on all Bullies I say.




So ther's one dispatcht, I must now find out Gripe; He's
here, how Heaven brings e'm into my Nets one after another!





Oh Heaven! Unlookt for misfortune, poor Mr. Gripe,
what wilt thou do




What's that he says of me?



Is there no body can tell me News of Mr. Gripe?







How I run up and down, to find him to •• purpose! Oh!
Sir, is there no way to hear of Mr. Gripe?



Art thou blind, I have been just under thy Nose this hour.











Oh! Sir your Son 



Hah, my Son 



Is fallen into the strangest misfortune in the World.







I met him a while ago, disordered for something you had
said to him, wherein you very idly made use of my Name. And
seeking to divert his Melancholy, we went to walk upon the Pier,
amongst other things he took particular Notice of a New Caper
in her full Trim, the Captain invited us aboard, and gave us the
handsome•t Collation I ever met with.



Well, and where's the disaster of all this?



While we were eating he put to Sea; and when we were
at a good distance from the Shoar, He discover'd himself to be an
English Renegade that was entertain'd in the Dutch Service; And
sent me off in his Long-Boat to tell you, That if you do not forth∣with
send him two hundred pounds, he'l carry away your Son
Prisoner; Nay, for ought I know he may carry him a Slave to
Algier.



How in the Devils name? 200 l!



Yes Sir, and more then that, he has allowed me but an
hours time; you must advise quickly what course to take to save
an only Son.



What a Devil had he to do a Shipboard? Run quick∣ly
Scapin, and tell the Villain Ile send my Lord Chief Justices
Warrant after him.



Oh law! his Warrant in the open Sea, d'ye think Pyrates
are Fooles?



I'th Devils name what business had he a Shipboard?



There is an unlucky Fate that often hurries Men to mis∣chief,
Sir.



Scapin thou must now act the part of a faithful Servant.







Thou must go bid the Pyrate send me my Son and stay
as a pledge in his room, till I can raise the Money.



Alas Sir, think you the Captain has so little wit as to
accept of such a poor Rascally fellow as I am, instead of your Son?



What a Devil did he do a Shipboard?



D'ye remember, Sir, that you have but two hours time.



Thou say'st he demands. 







200 l. Has the fellow no Conscience?



O law! the Conscience of a Pyrate, why very few lawful
Captains have any.



Has he no reason neither? Do's he know what the Sum
of 200 l. is.



Yes Sir, Tarpawlins are a sort of People that understand
Money, though they have no great acquaintance with Sence.
But for Heav'ns sake dispatch.



Here take the key of my Compting House.















In the left hand Window lyes the Key of my Garret; go
take all the Clo•ths that are in the great Cheft, and sell 'em to the
Brok•rs, to redeem my Son.



Sir, Y'are mad; I shan't get Fifty Shillings for all that's
there, and you know how I am •treightned for time.



But what • Devil did he do a Ship-board?



Let Ship-board alone, and consider, Sir, your Son. But
  51
Heav'n is my witness, I ha' done for him as much as was possible,
and if he be not redeemed, he may thank his Father's kindness.



Well, Sir, I ll go see if I can raise the Money. Was it not
ninescore Pounds you spoke of?







What, 200 l. Dutch, ha?



No, Sir, I mean English Money, 200 l. sterling.



I'th Devil's Name, what business had he a Ship-board?
Confounded Ship-board.



This Ship-board sticks in his Stomach.



Hold Scapin, I remember I received the very Sum just now
in Gold, but did not think I should have parted with it so soon.
He presents Scapin his Purse, but will not let it go, and in his tran∣sportments,
pulls his Arm to and fro, whilst Scapin reaches at it.







But tell the Captain, he is a Son of a Whore.















A Thief, a Robber, and that he forces me to pay him
200 l. contrary to all Law or equity.



Nay, let me alone with him.



That I will never forgive him, dead or alive.







And that if ever I light on him, I'll murder him privately,
and feed Dogs with him.








Now make hast, and go redeem my Son.



Ay, but d'ye hear, Sir? Where's the Money?



Did I not give it thee?



Indeed, Sir, you made me believe you would, but you
forgot, and put it up in your Pocket again.



Ha my griefs and fears for my Son make me do I know
not what.



Ay, Sir, I see it does indeed.



What a Devil did he do a Ship-board? Damn'd Pyrate,
damn'd Renegade, all the Devils in Hell pursue thee.



How easily a Miser swallows a Load, and how difficultly
he disgorges a Grain? But I'll not leave him so, he's like to pay in
other Coyn, for telling Tales of me to his Son.






Well, Sir, I have succeeded in your Business,
there's 200 l. which I have squeez'd out of your Father.









But for you I can do nothing 




Then may I go hang my self. Friends both adieu.



D'ye hear, d'ye hear; the Devil has no such necessity
for you yet, that you need ride Post. With much ado I've got
your Business done too.







But on condition that you permit me to revenge my self
on your Father, for the Trick he has served me.



With all my heart, at thy own discretion, good honest
Scapin.



Hold your hand, there's 200 l.



My thanks are too many to pay now; Farewel dear Son of
Mercury, and be prosperous.



Gramercy Pupil: Hence we gather,
Give Son the Money, hang up Father.










WAS ever such a Trick play'd, for us to run away
from our Governesses, where our careful Fathers
had placed us, to follow a couple of young Gentlemen, only be∣cause
they said they lov'd us, I think 'twas a very noble Enterprize?
I am afraid the good fortune we shall get by it, will very hardly
recompence the reputation we have lost by it.



Our greatest satisfaction is, that they are Men of fashion
and credit, and for my part I long ago resolv'd not to Marry any
other, nor such a one neither, till I had a perfect confirmation
of his Love; and 'twas an assurance of Octavian's that brought me
hither.



I must confess, I had no less a sence of the Faith and Ho∣nour
of Leander.



But seems it not wonderful, that the Circumstances of our
Fortune should be so near ally'd, and our selves so much Stran∣gers.
Besides, if I mistake not, I see something in Leander, so
much resembling a Brother of mine, of the same Name, that did
not the time since I saw him make me fearful, I should be often apt
to call him so.



I have a Brother too, whose Name's Octavian, bred in
Italy, and just as my Father took his Voyage, return'd home; not
knowing where to find me, I believe is the reason I have not seen
him yet: But if I deceive not my self, there is something in your
Octavian, that extreamly refreshes my memory of him.



I wish we might be so happy, as we are inclin'd to hope;
but there's a strange blind side in our Natures, which always
makes us apt to believe what we most earnestly desire.



The worst at last, is but to be forsaken by our Fathers;
and for my part, I had rather lose an old Father than a young
Lover, when I may with reputation keep him, and secure my self
against the Imposition of fatherly Authority.



How insufferable it is to be sacrificed to the Arms of a nau∣seous
Blockhead, that has no other sense than to eat and drink
when 'tis provided for him, rise in the morning, and go to Bed at
night, and with much ado be perswaded to keep himself clean.



A thing of meer Flesh and Blood, and that of the worst
sort too, with a squinting meager hang-Dog Countenance, that
looks as if he always wanted Physick for the Worms.



Yet such their silly Parents are generally most indulgent
to, like Apes, never so well pleas'd, as when th'are fondling with
their ugly Issue.



Twenty to one, but to some such charming Creatures,
our careful Fathers had design'd us.



Parents think they do their Daughters the greatest kind∣ness
in the World, when they get them Fools for their Husbands,
and yet are very apt to take it ill, if they make the right use of
them.



I'de no more be bound to spend my days in Marriage to a
Fool, because I might rule him, than I would always ride an Ass,
because the Creature was gentle.



See, here's Scapin, as full of Designs and Affairs, as a Cal∣low
Statesman at a Treaty of Peace.







Oh Monsieur Scapin! W••t's the reason you have been
such a Stranger of late?



Why, faith Ladies, Business, Business, has taken up my
time, and truly I love an active life, love my Business extreamly.



Methinks tho, this should be a difficult place for a Man of
your Excellencies to find imployment in?



Why, faith Madam, I•m never shy to my Friends: My
Business is, in short, like that of all other Men of Business, dili∣gently
contriving how to play the Knave and Cheat, to get an ho∣nest
Livelyhood.



Certainly, Men of Wit and Parts need never be driven
to indirect Courses?



Oh Madam! Wit and Honesty, like Oyl and Vinegar,
with much ado mingled together, give a Relish to a good Fortune,
and pass well enough for Sauce, but are very thin Fare of them∣selves.
No, give me your Knave, your thorow-pac't Knave;
hang his Wit, so he be but Rogue enough.



You'r grown very much out of humour with Wit, Sca∣pin▪
I hope, yours has done you no prejudice of late?



No, Madam, Your Men of Wit are good for nothing, dull,
lazy, restive Snails; 'tis your undertaking, impudent, pushing
Fool, that commands his Fortune.



You are very plain and open in this Proceeding, what∣ever
you are in others.



Dame Fortune, like most others of the Female Sex,
(I speak all this with respect to your Ladiship) is generally
most Indulgent to the nimble melted Block-Heads, Men of
Wit are not for her turn, even too thoughtful when they should be
Active; why who beleives any man of wit to have so much as
Courage. No Ladies, if y'ave any Friends that hope to raise them∣selves,
advise them to be as much fools as they can, and they'l near
want Patrons: And for honesty, if your Ladiships think fit to
retire a little further; you shall see me perform upon a Gentleman
that's coming this way.



Prithee Lucia, let us Retreat a little and take this oppor∣tunity
of some divertisement: which hath been very scarce here
hitherto.









Speak not too loud, my Masters coming.



I am glad on't, I shall teach him to betray the secrets of
his Friend, if any man puts a trick upon me without return, may
I loose this Nose with the Po•, without the pleasure of getting
it:



I wonder at thy Valour, thou art continually venturing
that body of thine: to the Indignity of bruises and indecent Ba∣stinadoes.



Difficulties in Adventures makes them pleasant when ac∣complisht



But your Adventures how Comical soever in the beginning,
are sure to be Tragical in the end.



'Tis no matter, I hate your pusillanimous Spirit; Revenge
and Leachery are never so pleasant as when you venture hard for
them, begone: here comes my Man.


Oh Sir, Sir, shift for your self, quickly Sir, quickly Sir, for Hea∣vens
sake.



What's the matter Man?



Heaven! is this a time to ask questions? will you be
Murdered instantly? I am afraid you'l be killed within these two
Minutes.



Mercy on me! killed for what?



They are every where looking out for you.







The Brother of her whom your Son has marry'd, hee's
A Captain of a Privatere, who has all sorts of Rogues, English,
Scotch, Welsh, Irish, French, under his command; and all lying
in wait now, or searching for you to kill you, because you would
Null the Marriage; they run-up and down, crying where is the
Rogue Gripe, where is the Dog, where is the Slave Gripe; they watch
for you so narrowly that there's no getting home to your Hou•e.



Oh Scapin! what shall I do? what will become of me?



Nay Heaven knows, but if you come within their reach
they'l De wit you, they'l tear you in pieces: heark.







Hum 'tis none of them?



Canst thou find no way for my Escape, dear Scapin?



I think I have found one.



Good Scapin, show thy self a man now.



I shall venture being most immoderately beaten.



Dear Scapin, do; I will Reward thee bounteously: Ile give
thee this Suit when I have worn it 8 or 9 Months longer.



Listen! who are these?



God forgive me, Lord have Mercy upon us.



No, there's no body; look, if you'l save your life go into
this Sack presently.







No body: get into the Sack and stir not, what ever hap∣pens,
I'le carry you as a Bundle of Goods through all your Ene∣mies
to the Majors house, or the Castle?



An Admirable Invention, Oh! Lord quick.

Gets into the Sack.


Yes, 'tis an Excellent Invention; if you knew all, keep in
your Head, Oh here's a Rogue coming to look for you.
Scapin counterfeits a Welshman.
Do you hear, I pray you, where is Leander's Fathers, look you.
In his own Voice.

Have with him, look you! her has no creat pus'ness, but her woud
have satisfactions and reparations, look you, for Credits and Honours, by
St. Tavy he shall not put the Injuries and Affronts upon my Captains,
look you now, Sir,
In his own Voyce.
He Affront the Captain, he meddles with no Man.
〈◊〉 Sir, look you, and h•r will give you beatings aud chastisements,
for your Contradictions when hur Wells ploods up, look you, and hur will
Cudgel your Packs and your Nottles for it, take you that pray you now.
His own Voyce,
Beat the Sack.
Hold, hold, will you Murder me. I know not where he is,
not I.
Hur will teach saw•y Iacks how they profook Hur Welse ploods and
hur Chollers: and for the old Rogue hur will have his Guts and his plood
•ook you Sir, or hur will never wear Leek upon St. Taffyes day more, look you.

  57His own Voice.
Oh! He has mawl'd me, a damn'd Welch Rogue.



You? The Blows fell upon my Shoulders: Oh! Oh!



'Twas only the end of the Stick fell on you, the main sub∣stantial
part of the Cudgel lighted on me.



Why did you not stand further off?



Peace Here's another Rogue.

In a Lancashire Dialect.


Yaw Fellee, wi'th Sack theere, done yaw knaw whear th'a•d
Rascast Graip is?
Not I; but here is no Rascal.
Yaw Leen, yaw Dogue, yaw knawn weel eenuh whear he is, an yaw∣den
teel, and that he is a foo Rascatt as any is in aw the Tawn; I's tell a
that by'r Lady.
Not I, Sir, I know neither, Sir, not I.
By th' Mess, an ay tack thee in hont, ay's raddle th'bones on thee,
ay's keeble thee to some tune.
Me, Sir? I don't understand ye.
Why, Th'awrt his Mon, thaw Hobble, I•ll snite th' Nase o'thee.
Hold, hold, Sir, what would you have with him?
Why, I mun knock him dawne with my Kibbo, the first bawt to the
grawnt, and then I mun beat him aw to pap by th' Mess, aud after Ay
mun cut off the Lugs and Naes on en, and Ay wot, he'll be a pratty
swatley Fellee, bawt Lugs and Naes.
Why, truly Sir, I know not where he is, but he went down
that Lane.
This Lone, sayn ye? Ays find him by'r Lady, an he be above
grawnt.
So, he's gone, a damn'd Lancashire Rascal.



Oh good Scapin! go on quickly.
Hold, here's another.


In an Irish Tone.
Dost thou hear Sack-man? I pridee fare is de dam Dog Gripe?

  58His own Voice.
Why, What's that to you? What know I.
Fat's dat to me Ioy? By my soul Ioy, I will lay a great Blow upon
thy Pate, and de Devil take me, but I will make thee know fare he is in∣deed▪
or I'l beat upon till thou dost know, by my salvation indeed.


I'll not be beaten.
Now the Devil take me, I swear by him that made me, if thou dost
not tell fare is Gripe, but I will beat thy Father's Child very much
indeed.
What would you have me do? I cann't tell where he is. But
what would you have with him?
Fat would I have wid him? By my soul, if I do see him, I will
make Murther upon him, for my Captain's sake.
Murther him? He ll not be murther'd.
If I do lay my Eyes upon him, gad I will put my Sword into his Bow∣els,
de Devil take me indeed. Fat hast dow in dat Sack? Ioy, by my
salvation I will look into it.
But you shall not. What have you to do with it?
By my soul Ioy, I will put my Rapier into it.







Fa•t it does grunt, by my salvation; de Devil take me, I will
see it indeed.
You shall not see my Sack; I will defend it with my life.
Den I will make beat upon thy Body; take that, Ioy, and that, and


A Plague on him, he's gone; he had almost kill'd me.



Oh! I can hold no longer; the Blows all fell on my Shoul∣ders.



You cann't tell me; they fell on mine: Oh my Shoul∣ders!



Yours? Oh my Shoulders!



Peace, th'are a coming.

In a •oarse Sea-man's Voice.
•here is the Dog? I•ll lay him on fore and aft, swinge him with a
Cat o•nine tails, Keel-hale, and then hang him at the Main Yard.

  59In broken French-English.
If dere be no more Men in England, I vill kille him, I vill put my
Rapire in his Body, and I vill give him two tree push'e in de gutte,
Here Scapin Acts a Number of e'm together.
We mun go this way o'th' right hand, no to th' left hand 
lye close search ev'ry where by my salvation, I will kill the
dam Dog and we do catch en, we'll tear 'en in pieces, an I do heer
he went thick way no, streight forward. Hold, here is his Man,
where's your Master Dam me, where? in Hell? speak 
hold, not so furiously and you don't tell us where he is, we'll mur∣der
thee 
Do what you will, Gentlemen, I know not.
Lay him on thick, thwack him soundly.
Hold, hold, do what you will, I'll nere betray my Master.
Knock'en down, beat'en zoundly, to'en, at'en, at'en, at.



Oh Dog, Traitor, Villain! Is this your Plot? Would you
have murder'd me, Rogue? Unheard of Impudence.

Oh Brother Thrifty! You come to see me loaden with disgrace;
the Villain Scapin has, as I am sensible now, cheated me of 200 l.
this beating brings all into my memory.




The impudent Varlet has gull'd me of the same Sum?



Nor was he content to take my Money, but hath abus'd me
at that barbarous rate, that I am ashamed to tell it; but he shall pay
for it severely.



But this is not all, Brother, on Misfortune is the fore∣runner
of another: Just now I received Letters from London, that
both our Daughters have run away from their Governesses, with
two wild debaucht young Fellows, that they fell in Love with.





Was ever so malicious Impudence seen Hah Sure∣ly,
if I mistake not; that should be my Father.



And the other mine, who Scapin has us'd thus.



Bless us! Return'd, and we not know of it?



What will they say to find us here?



My dearest Father, Welcome to England.











My Clara here too?



Yes, Sir, and happy to see your safe Arrival.



What strange destiny has directed this happiness to us?









Oh Son! I have a Wife for you.



Good Father, All your Propositions are vain; I must
needs be free, and tell you, I am engaged.



Look you now; is not this very fine? Now I have a mind
to be merry, and be friends with you, you'l not let me now, will
you? I tell you, Mr. Gripe's Daughter here 



I'le never marry Mr. Gripe's daughter, Sir, as long as I
Live; No, yonder's she that I must Love, and can never Entertain
the thoughts of any other.



Yes Octavian, I have at last met with my Father, and all
our fears and troubles are at an end.



Law ye now, you would be wiser than the Father that
begot you, would you? did not I always say you should marry
Mr. Gripes daughter? But you do not know your Sister Luce?



Unlook'd for blessing, why she's my friend Leander's Wife!







What my Son Leander?



Yes, Sir, your Son Leander.



Indeed! well Brother Thrifty, 'tis true, the Boy was al∣ways
a good natur'd Boy. Well now am I so overjoyed, that I
could laugh till I shook my shoulders, but that I dare not they
are so sore. But look here he comes.





Sir, I beg your pardon, I fi•d my marriage is discove∣red;
nor would I indeed, have longer concealed it, this is my
Wife, and l must own her.



Brother Thrifty did you ever see the like, did you ever
see the like? Ha?



Own her quoth a! why kiss her, kiss her, Man, oddsboddi∣kins,
when I was a young fellow and was first married, I did
nothing else for three months. O my conscience I got my Boy



there, the first night before the Curtaines were quite
drawn!



Well, 'tis his Fathers nowne Child; Just so Brother was it
with me upon my Wedding day, I could not look upon my dear
without blushing, but when we were a Bed, Lord ha mercy upon
us but I le say no more.



Is then my Father Reconcil'd to me.



Reconcil'd to thee, why I love thee at my heart man, at
my heart, why 'tis my Brother Thrifty's daughter, Mrs. L•ce,
whom I always design'd for thy Wife, and that's thy Sister Cla∣ra
married to Mr. Octa. there.



Octavian are we then Brothers? there is nothing that I
could have rather wisht after the Compleating of my happiness
with my charming Lucia.



Come Sir, hang up your complements in the Hall at
home, they are old and out of fashion: Shift go to the Inn and
bespeak a Supper may cost more Money than I have ready to pay
for't, for I am resolved to run in debt to night.



I shall obey your commands Sir.



Then d'you hear, send out and muster up all the Fidlers,
Blind or not Blind, Drunk or Sober) in the Town; let not so
(much as the Roaster of Tunes, with his crack'd Cymbal in a
Case, escape ye.



Well what would I give now for the fellow that sings the
Song at my Lord Mayors Feast, I my self would make an Epitha∣lamium
by way of Sonnet, and he should set a Tune to it, 'twas
the pretty'st he had last time.





Oh Gentlemen here is the strangest accident fallen out.











Ha! Rogue let him be hang'd, I'le hang him my self.



Oh Sir, that trouble you may spare, for passing by a
place where they were building, a great stone fell upon his
head and broke his Scull so, you may see his Braines.











if he had been wounded


Oh me! Oh me! Gèntlemen you see me, you see me
in a sad Condition, cut off like a Flower in the prime of my
years: But yet I could not dye without the pardon of those that
I have wrong'd, yes Gentlemen I beseech you to forgive me all
the injuries that I have done; but more especially, I beg of you
Mr. Thrifty, and my good Master Mr. Gripe.



For my part, I pardon thee freely, go, and dye in peace.



But 'tis you Sir, I have most offended, by the inhumane
Bastinadoes which 



Prithee speak no more of it, I forgive thee too.



'Twas a most wicked Insolence in me, that I should with
Vile Crab-tree Cudgel 



Pish, no more, I say I am Satisfied.



And now so near my death 'tis an unspeakable grief that
I should dare to lift my hand against 



Hol thy Peace, or dye quickly, I tell thee I have forgot
All 



Alas! how good a man you are! But Sir, d'you pardon
me freely and from the bottom of your Heart, those mercyless
drub• that 



Prithee speak no more of it. I forgive thee freely, here's my
hand upon't.




Oh! Sir, how much your Goodness Revives me!



Hows that! Friend take Notice I pardon thee, but 'tis up∣on
Condition that you are sure to dye!



Oh me! I begin to faint again.



Come, fie Brother, never let Revenge imploy your
thoughts now, forgive him, forgive him without any Condi∣tion.



A dewce on't Brother, as I hope to be sav'd he beat me
basely and scurvily, never stir he did; But since you will have it
so, I do forgive him.



Now then let's to supper, and in our mirth drown and for∣get
all troubles.



Ay, and let them carry me to the Lower End of the Table.
Where in my Chair of State, I'le sit at ease,
And eat and drink, that I may dye in Peace.


