


LEad me to my Chair, then send Gervatio hither.








This Morning I've out-•isen the Sun, to scourge that Dog
whose curst Contrivance brought the Mischiefs which destroy my Sleep: Oh! here he comes, the Coast is clear, and I'll secure it so.





Good morrow to your Lordship; what does your Lordship mean?



What did you mean, Rascal, to make me mad, horn mad, with this coun∣terfeiting
Blindness? but I can see your Plots, you Pander, and you shall feel my
Rage.




Thus faithful service ever is rewarded; Will ye but hear me?



No, I've seen too much; you'll make me deaf next, I suppose, sirrah, and
then set the World upon abusing me that way, Villain.



Hold and hear what I can urge, or I'll raise all the House, and lay the Im∣posture
open.



Well, I will hold, not out of any kindness, but that I'm out of breath.



If I am not reveng'd on ye, ye old Don, I'll be hang'd.
(Aside.



Well, what have you to say, Sir?



Look ye, my Lord, in the first place I'll go close to the Door, and if your
Lordship offers to move or stir your Cane, I'll fly out, and this minute proclaim
in Venice, that 



Hold, I am quiet.



Then how have you the face to use me thus? Am I not privy to all your
Extortions and Briberies? Have I not carried the tempting 〈◊〉 that corrupted
Knaves, and excused your self from greater? Have you not 〈◊〉 a taxing power,
tho' for the good of the Commonweal, was worse than a luxurious Tyrant, wh•
thought of nothing but his Pleasures? Nay more, if the Grand 〈◊〉 would let
you enjoy your Wealth, you had as live have him for your Head as his Holiness.



Well, good Gervatio, thou dost know my Failings, but 'tis •he ill conse∣quence
of this blindness puts me in all these passions.



Does not your Conscience (but I have forgot, you have •one, 〈…〉
would) fly in your Face, for abusing me on that account? Did not you, when the
old President of Dalmatia died, come to me, Oh! dear ••rvatio,•'m undone! my
turn is next to that chargable Post, I shall lavish all the Wealth my whole •ife has
been scraping together! Then you coaxed me, Thou art ingenious, think some
way I may be mist, and I'll make thy Fortunes.



Nay, this is true.



Is it so? I almost lost my Eyes in reality in poring over old musty Sta∣t•tes;
there I found nothing but some natural Incapacity could exempt the rich
Nobles in their turns: Accordingly I advis'd you to counterfeit Blindness; you
did it; succeeded, Ma•ti•o Cornaro is chose in your place, and I am cudgel'd for my
〈◊〉.





Ah Gervatio, thou hast told the Sweets and Profits of the story, but left
the bitt•r sting out. Whilst the Duke and Senate believed my Blindness, and I
escaped that hateful Office, my Wife and Daughter do so too at home, my Wi•e
with ogling Eyes just at my Nose, •iews her Gallant, and the young Gipsie lets
that Bankrupt's Son, Count Fidelio, steal her Hand: This makes me mad, and wish
I were blind indeed.



For this I also provide a Remedy: You know by my care the Ladies are
almost alwaies with you else; I watch 'em, let 'em look on, squeeze Hands, they'l
••arce venture to make you a Cuckold or a Grandfather. Beside, my Diligence goes
farther; this day the Girdle of St. Sylvester comes your tutelar Saint, for you will
ha•e a Saint too, tho' to my knowledge all your Religion lies in filling your Bags.
But, as I said before, to day the wonderful Gir•le comes, and will get credit, for I
dare swear you see immediately after the operation.



Well, thou art a Wag; co•••, take care of my Wife and Daughter till I
dare own I perceive 'em again, and I'll make amends for my Blows; faith Gervatio
▪twas hard last night to see a Man kiss my Wife half an hour together before my
Face, and when I call'd, the Baggage would take off her Lips and cry, How do'st
my D••r? Then my Daughter, you know, I design for my Lord Insuls, Son to the
rich French Merchant Monsieur Opulant, who by his Industry has purchas'd three
〈◊〉•udding•rench Beaux Estates.



For a Son that as like a Iack Pudding Beau will spend it, to my knowledge.
(Aside.)




Here, here, to my Chair, quick, quick, open the Door.





A happy Morning to my Lord.



〈◊〉 Voice, I think; Gervatio, conduct me to salute him.



By no means, my Lord, your condition excuses Ceremony, at all times
〈◊〉; the Duke comme•ds him to you, he with much pains has got a famous
〈◊〉.



The Devil he has.
(Aside.



Now I thank thee Fortune, thou hast revenged me.
(Aside.




Unwilling to lose the Advice of such a Pillar of the State, has took true
p•ins 〈…〉 expe•ienc'd Man.




I am much beholden to his Princely Care; but, my Lord, I look on this
Affliction 〈◊〉 from He•ven as a Judgment, and hope by Penitence to obtain from
thence a Rem•dy: You must•know, my Lord, I beyond measure coveted the Pre∣si•ent
of Dalm••i•'s place, nothing but that would suffice my Ambition; nay, Hea∣ven
forgive me, I often wish'd his death.




Oh, mercy upon me, was there ever such a Dissembler!
(Aside.




Now ma•• the end: Just as the old President died this Darkness fell upon
  3
me; I have no Hopes in human Aid, but my own dear St. Silves•er methoughts, in a
Dream, express'd, his sacred Girdle might do me good.



The Dream is not to be neglected, nor the Duke's Goodwill to regain the
loss or precious sight, both may be try'd, i'th' Afternoon I'll wait upon you•with
the famous man, in the mean time I am your Lordship's servant.
(Exit Gonsalvo.



So Gervatio, what think you of your project now? I shall have a pragmatical
fellow poke my Eyes out indeed.



Fear nothing, my Lord, I'll do well enough with him. If I don't sit you
Seignior for your drubbing, you shall call me Iohn a Styles.
(Aside.



Gervatio, lead me into the green Room, and see if my Wife and Daughter
are up, send 'em to me.



It shall be done, my Lord.



Oh this damn'd O•nlist, Gervatio!



Pho, pho, I'll banter him out of his senses.



Give me thy Hand, lest any of the Family should see us.



Scene draws, Ariana dressing, and Beat•ice▪



Ha' done trifling, I'm well enough.



You are indeed charmingly pretty, Madam.



How nauseous 'tis, and yet how natural 'tis to have our Women slatter us.
Well Beatrice, here's a wonderful alteration since my Father's Blindness, I can put
on a new suit every day, and my Jewels, laid up only for the Festival of St. Mark,
may be worn now without a chiding.



These are great privileges, Madam, yet 'tis a sad thing to think how sud∣denly
my Lord was struck blind.



I swear so it is; but then remember, Beatrice, how he forbad Count Fidelio
to think on me, tho' his Father was of Birth noble as mine, despis'd that Dross my
Father makes his God, and left his Son only a liberal Education and innate Cou∣rage,
which appears unknown to most of our Venetians.



My Lord dares not deny him the House, because he is of the ancient No∣bility,
and he has been an hour walking in the Garden, waiting your coming down,
and then, I suppose, gives my Lord the good morrow.



Well, 'tis a mischievous Rogue, he has so many Tricks before my Father,
yet can't I forbear joyning, nor scarce keep the Laug• in.



Confess Madam, are you really sorry at the Darkness has overtaken your
Father?



Why truly, Beatrice, I always say my Prayers for his Eyes restor•tion the
last thing I do, that is, just when I am falling asleep.





Madam, my Lady sent me to tell you, your Father expects you with her
presently.



I'll wait upon her, Silvia.
(Exit Silvia.)
That Mother-in-law of mine is a hopeful young Gentlewoman too; she takes Op∣portunity
by the Forelock, and makes all the haste she conveniently can to give my
  4
old Dad Horns instead of Eyes: Am not I a wicked Jade to wink at this? Why, I
don't know, if I should betray her, she'd serve me the same sauce; besides, my Fa∣ther
married the young Creature the perfect Venetian way, only for her Portion,
never saw one-another beforehand: I can't but think what a fright she was in, to
behold an old Man with a grizled Beard instead of a brisk young fellow. Well, I
hope Heaven makes Allowances for such a case, and my Guilt won't be great for
guessing at it.



Your Ladiship considers what may befal your self another day, Madam.



God forbid Wench, I hope to marry my dear Fidelio, and that Woman
that takes a Man for Love deserves to be disgrac'd here, and damn'd hereafter, if
but her Inclinations wayer, and she in Thought abuses him.



Ay, but Madam, if your Father's choice, my Lord Insuls should be forc'd
upon you.



Hang him, per•um'd Poltoon, I hate him worse than a Nunnery, where
they wear Hair Smocks.



He comes this Afternoon to make his second visit; my Lady Temptyouth
says he's a fine Gentleman.



He is indeed fit for her use: Well, 'tis a strange thing a Lady of her qua∣lity
should give her self the trouble, now she has pass'd the beaten Road of Wic∣kedness
her self, to draw others in. My Mother has a good Friend of her; I
know my Father hates her, but his dear Interest prevails, she helps him to the pur∣chase
of many a Prodigal's Estate.



Madam, you forget my Lady stays.









How does my pretty Daughter to day? But why do I ask? you look fresh
and fair as the new-blown Rose.



When your Ladiship consults your Glass you'll find a brighter, Madam.



Fie upon you for a little Flatterer, what your Mother!



'Tis true, the Law calls you my Mother, but the World must be blind as
my father, if they did not take us for Sisters.



Well, your Father's Blindness is a dreadful thing, Ariana; why, he'll ne∣ver
suffer us to be out of the Room.



There is no Conveniency but has its Inconveniency, Madam.



Thats true; come, we must to him.





I have a fine melancholy Life on't, thank my Stars; but should I discover
my self before this arch Rogue has brought matters about, I must be the laughing-stock
of Venice, besides paying a swindging Fine for deceiving the Duke and Senate
in putting off the Government. Boy.







Are not the Women ready?



My Lord, they are entring.









Formality, I believe you mind your topping more than my Blessings, or
Heavens either.



How are your Eyes, my Lord?



Not clear enough to see into your Heart, my Lady.







Truly I hope purging my Father's Choler does him good, else surely he
would never practice it so often, but that he finds benefit by it.







Nay, I am out of the reach of your Cane, Sir; come, I would •ain say
something to divert ye, the Spleen is very hurtful to your Eyes.




Madam, my Lady Temptyouth is coming up.



That everlasting Tattler, I would retire and shun the noise, only my being
here perhaps may in part hinder your luscious Imagination from being tickled with
all the Intrigues of the City.





Good morrow, my Lord; good morrow my sweet Buds of Beauty.



Pray, my Lady Temptyouth, don't put my Wife in amongst your Buds of
Beauty; if she is not five and twenty, she ought to appear like fifty, that's sittest
for her, and would please me best.



Lord, you're so captious: Well, I swear your Wife looks very hand∣som,
'tis for your sake she dresses, 'tis to look amiable in your Eyes.



Ay, now you've hit it.



Pox on him, I had forgot his blindness. (Aside)
I mean, she us'd to do; now, poor Lady, she's like any Slattern. Here's my lit∣tle
Ariana appears as she had not look'd in a Glass to day.



Bare two hours I assure you, Madam.



Well said Pride, I have a good mind to have all the Glasses in the House
broke; no, sold I meant.




My Lord, my Actions never disobey you, pray allow me a little freedom
in speech.



She that's so free of her Tongue, commonly is as free 〈◊〉



Oh hold, my Lord, an immodest word, nay, any hint, tho' never so
darkly, tending that way, drives me out of •he Room.



Your Ladiship has then a quick apprehension.



Yes, I vow, my Lord, at a Play, when no Woman of Quality else has
found out a •eastly wrapt-up thing, I han't show'd my Face in a quarter of an hour.







My Lord, Count Dresswell has a Bank Note of Five hundred pound, he
can't stay till the Bank pays, and would part with it for two hundred and fifty ready
Mony; will your Lordship meddle with it?



Let him send it to Gervatio, and he shall have his Mony.



I am always studying for your good; Lord, your Lady stands like any
Statue, I beg your pardon, I must rouse her▪ My Dear, Count Andrea dies for you;
  6
I swear •e was in s•ch a condition, I could not forbear bringing this Letter from
him. But may your Laughter be trusted?

(Takes her a one side.


With my Life, or what's dearer, my Honour.



Well, I swear he talks so passionately of ye, says such warm extrava∣gant
things, he sets my old Blood a glowing like dying Coals blow'd by a strong
pair of Bellows.



What's this long whisper, m• Lady?



Only a Receipt for your Eyes, my Lord.



Then why may not I hear i•?



There's something so nauseous 'twill set you against using it. Read
your Letter, Child.



What paper is't that ru••els.?



Why, the Receipt, Simpleton: This man is so mistrustful. Well, but
Child, I can•t let this precious Receipt go out of my Hands for a thousand Worlds.



I beg your pardon, Madam, then I'll copy it; nothing shall be neglected by
me that will help my Lord. A Pen and Ink there.



A •e•ter from her G•llant, and she•s a going to answer it; Hell and Fu∣rie!
I can't hear it, nor can have remedy.
(Aside storming.



Heavens! what's the matter?



My Eyes smart intolerably.



Fretting, fretting; Lord, you must be p•tient. Madam, I beg you•d
be as quick as you can, for I'm in haste.



Your Ladiship sees I'm about it.



Ah the Devil, and I see it too, and be hang'd to ye.
(Aside.
When you have done, Gervatio shall read it to me.



Gervatio is my mortal Enemy, what shall I do now, Madam?
(Aside.



Pho, pho, write a scrip of paper good for the sight, put in Eyebright,
White-Rose-water, and whatever comes in your Head.



Here's mighty Consultation about this damn'd Receipt.



I tell you, my Lord, if you fret thus you'l never see again.



No matter, wo••d I could see what I wish.







The conflagration fall upon the Women first, and leave the Men by them∣selves
an Age longer.



Then they would be the nastiest, most helpless Creatures; ha, ha, ha.




Count Fidelio to wait upon your Honour.



Count Fiddlestick; Why did you not say I was busie?



Well, I vow, my Lord, if you are thus froppish, all your Friends will
forsake ye, a dark Room will be sittest for you.



Friendship, there's no such thing, Nature laid the Ground work of Enmity
i• every Mortal; indeed in some 'tis spiced over with Dissimulation; I hate this
man, and yet must speak him fair.



Why do ye hate him?







Which I can guess at.
(Aside▪
Enter Fidelio.

Now my turn's a coming.



Your Lordship's humble Servant; how does your Lordship to day?



Well in health, my Mind is like my Sight, oppressed.



I am sorry for it.



Madam, there's your Receipt with Thanks.



I wish it may do him good.



Yes, yes, I shall feel good on't, methinks my Horns are sprouting already.
(Aside.



Madam, can't you engage my Father in a little Discourse, whilst I talk
with 
(Aside to Lady Temptyouth.




That young handsom fellow, thou art a Rogue; I'll do't, I warrant ye.
Well, you say you'l have the Bank Bill, my Lord.



I told you so once already.



Lord, you are so short one can't speak to ye,* tho 'tis for
your own good: I believe Count Dresswels Estate too, you may make
a good hole in't if you will.



His Villa is very pretty, upon that he may have what Mony he pleases.
Damnation!





What's the matter with the man? I swear you made me start, why you
turn your Head about as if your Eyes were of use.



I shall be discover'd strait, was ever punishment like mine?
(Aside.



You are very uneasie, my Lord, can I do any thing for you?



Yes, make me worse, I seldom ever knew a Wife bring Quiet or Content
to her Husband.



This is my usage ever.



I wonder you are not asham'd, for a surly Devil; see, pish, you can't see
how the poor Lady weeps.



Ay, he is blind, and I believe he designs to make me cry my Eyes out to be
like him.



Oh the Devil! at this very minute she can scarce hold laughing. (Aside)
You are very merry Daughter.


Ariana claps her Fan on Fidelio's Shoulder.


I only drop'd my Fan, Sir.



My Lord Fidelio, how went the Votes in the Senate yesterday concerning
the new Levies?



Fidelio! why he is gone, my Lord, he only gave you the good mor∣row,
and passed through the Room.



That's well enough, I'll swear.



This is abominable, but I must endure it.



Thou art a dear Angel; but, my Lady, cou'd not you contrive to get my
Father away? this Gentleman hath earnest business with me.
(Aside. to L Tempr.




Well, well, I'll try at that too; but which way? Gad, I've got a Bot∣tle
of Orange-water in my Pocket, I'll make the old fool believe 'tis something
good for the Eyes, 'twill do him no hurt, only make 'em smart a little, that perhaps
will induce him to lye down.
(Aside.
  8
My Lo•d, can you forgive me when I own I am the greatest Beast in the World?



I always thought you so. (Aside) What's the matter, Madam?



Here's a Bottle of precious Water, given me by the Dutchess, to
be applied at all times, and I quite forgot it, I swear; I have such a respect for
〈◊〉, that at every place I am picking up something.



Yes, Gallants for my Wife.
(Aside)
Madam, I'll have none of your old Womens Medicines.



By your leave, my Lord, but you shall, I know the goodness on't.



I tell you I will n•t.



Pray, my Lord, be rul'd.



True Wife, tho' she cares not if I was deaf as well as blind, yet be sure to
be for any thing I am against.



Come, come, don't tell me, I swear you shall wash your Eyes with it.



I swear I won't.



By Heavens you shall, now I've sworn again, I'le see who'll be master.



A Pox take ye;* Oh the confounded pain! Boy, here
lead me to my Couch; I must e'en send Gervatio to watch 'em,
that Woman will be the death of me.
(Aside)




Ha, ha, ha. So Ladies, what do ye think of me now?



Oh, you are the best of Women.



Heavens! yonder's Gervatio a coming, he is our mortal Foe, my Father
has sent him, he had as good have staid himself.



Let me alone, I'll send him away, I'll lay a Wager.



Fidelio, step behind the Skreen, whilst my Lady trys her Power, he•l tell
my Father you are with us.



I will, Madam; dear Lady Temptyouth, if thou canst effect this, I'll have thy
Statue made in Brass.



Brazen-face! could you think of no other Metal? go, be gone.


Your Servant, good Don Gervatio, you are come luckily to receive my Instructions,
you must immediately carry to my Lord Dresswell Two hundred and fifty pounds,
and take his Bank Note for •ive hundred.



Your pardon, Madam, my Lord sent me to stay here.



And your pardon too, Sir; I am sure your Lord would not lose such a
Bargain; and he must have the Mony presently, or he'l sell it to some-body else.



Indeed I heard your Master say he would have it.



He's a Prodigal, and may give me something out on't: here's no Men,
what should I stay for? (Aside.) Well, I'll carry it presently.



Presently, nay, you must go now, this very Instant, now.




What, does your Ladiship intend to ravish me?



When I thrust thee from me, Fool. Come, good Gervatio, make haste,
because I undertook my Lord's business, and I love to go through stitch with any
thing I meddle with: Be speedy, come, I may do ye a Kindness another day.



I must be gone, there's no disputing with her.
Exit Gerv.




Appear absconding Knight, appear.



Be gad, my Lady Temptyouth, you have charm'd me so, you shall have a Kiss
with as much Ardour as if you were but sixteen.



O sweet young Gentleman, Heavens bless him! You are happy, Ma∣dam:
Come, I must do more for you yet, Time's precious; my Lady Olivia Bondi,
let you and I go into the Garden, and consult about that Receipt.



You'l find what I have done in it is to your satisfaction. Daughter, your
Servant, I'll keep your Father from sending for you as long as I can.



Madam, I am yours and my Lady Temptyouth's most humble.



I am her Slave.



Well, you are a couple of dear Kittens, bless you both.




My Lord, you have talk'd of Flames and Fires, and Darts, and the Devil
and all, but how shall I be convinc'd 'tis not the Hundred thousand pound I am
like to be worth kindles these Fires and Passions?



Why faith, Madam this way; let's marry without your Father's Consent,
and he'l turn us out of doors, then I'll beg for ye, fight for ye, starve for ye, dye
for ye.



Thou art an honest Lad, but I don't like starving, 'twill be apt to take
away all your Appetites, and you won't care for me.



Oh no, my Love to thee is implanted in my Soul, and were my youthful
Arms reduced to very Bones with the worn Skeleton, I should hug thee to my
Heart, as my chiefest Blessing and divinest Treasure.



'Tis pretty to hear a young fellow one loves talk thus, but this wont do,
Love and Plenty crown the circling Year with Pleasure, but where either's want∣ing,
Content scarce ever appears. Is it impossible to get Gervatio to our party?
He is cunning, and can rule my Father.



I'll try; but, Oh! 



You want a Bribe; come, be not asham'd of your poverty, since your no∣ble
Father wasted his Fortunes in being always in Arms for the defence of his
Country against our common Enemy the Turks, the ungrateful Senate ought to
have took you to their care; but since neglected, accept of this without a blush.




Bound by innumerable Charms, by Obligations unaccountable, when I cease
to love thee, may Heaven and all my Peace of Mind forsake me.



Try Gervatio, tell him that I'll for ever be his Friend.



Madam, I will with joy, and urge whatever eager love can to my Soul sug∣gest.





Madam, my Master raves for you like one mad.



Then I must go.



My Lord Insulls, that Rival; but why name I him? I know your noble Soul
despises him.



Rest in that secure, I loath the man, my Father's power shall force my
Death sooner than Consent: farewell.



'Tis Death to part, tho' but for a moment; Is there a time, is there that
white day in Fate when I shall call thee Wife? let others scoff, think the Matri∣monial
Bonds uneasie, term it
A Hell, a Pit, an endless painful Snare,
The Heaven I covet is to wed my Fair.











WEll, your Importunity and the Count's has prevail'd, I'll vow I blush
to think on't, through a back-door into the Garden, the hour that my
Husband sleeps, a young Gentleman; faith, Madam, 'tis very scandalous.



Fiddle f•ddle, scandalous! if you have the Pleasure, much good may
do the World with the Scandal.



You'll stay with me, Madam.



Yes, yes, Madam; I left my poor Girl at home not well on purpose to
come.



What kin is that young Lady to you, Madam?



Her Mother was my Friend, to tell ye the truth, she is a Bastard, I have
bred up several, and help'd 'em all to good Husband, or Gallants, which is better.



A charitable Lady you are. Hark! I hear a noise, 'tis he, I swear I shall
••sh to death.



I never heard of any-body dy'd of that Disease; here's the man, look
what a well-built person 'tis.









Did you come in 〈◊〉 observ'd, my Lord?



Yes, Madam; but ••ve had a little misfortune, I've broke the Key in the
Door, and know not how I shall get out again.



Here's a Fool now is taking care to get out before he is well in, mind
your business, I'll get ye out, I warrant ye.



Pardon me, Madam, 'tis my dear Olivia's Honour I am careful of; for my
self, I'd wade ten thousand Dangers only to touch this beautious Hand.



Why that's well said, kiss it now, or else you do nothing.



A thousand and a thousand times.



Well, I'll in, and watch the old man's motions.



You won't leave me, Madam.



Indeed but I will, I cannot stay a moment longer.





Shall we waste the time in talk, Olivia? Need I tell thee how much I love
thee? Wast thou not torn from my longing Arms by an inhuman Father, and gi∣ven
to the wither'd ones of richer Bondi? Yet tho' I am denied whole Draughts of
Love, I'll snatch the precious Cordial when the blest minute gives it, and devour it
eagerly.




Away, my Lord, think whose I am, think of my sacred Vow, I dare not
break it.



Your Vows first were made to me, no matter whose you are, this hour is
mine, and shall be spent in richest Love, Love that has so well reveng'd my Cause,
and as your cruel Lord snatch'd her from these •ond Eyes, so Fate has now de∣priv'd
him of his own, he only cannot view your unequal Charms, which dart on
every wishing gazer Joy.



If Judgments do hang upon my wretched Lord, shall I by Falshood wound
deeper than his Fate?



Who e'er crys out of pain they neither feel nor apprehend? Think Oli∣via,
my Olivia, for I will please my self, and call thee mine; think the vast Cha∣rity,
the mighty Kindness, that saves my Life, and hurts not Bondi.



The Man is mad, to b•d a Woman think; no, talking Deluder, when we
think we never yield. Now I have thought on the fatal consequence, and resol∣ved
from this minute to grow wise; that I have took the opportunity of my Hus∣band's
blindness, and seen you often, was due to your injurious Wrongs; for
witness those Stars that smiled not on our plighted Faiths, I ever •ound you con∣stant,
and I lov'd you for it.



Oh sweet Confession! and if you love me, will you not bless me too?
the Argus Eyes of Jealousie are useless, the watchful Dragon that should guard the
golden Fruit now sleeps for ever.



But Angel, Honour is still awake, that secures my beating Heart, yet I
will fly the charming sounds that are familiar there, but do not follow me, I charge
ye, do not, lest ye meet the everlasting Anger of my Eyes.
Exit.



Not follow thee, when my Veins are all on fire! yes,
Thro' every Path of this delightful Grove,
Till my warm Sighs her Honour shall remove,
And fill her panting Breast with yielding Love.







Seignior Gonsalvo sends word, the Oculist is sick, and cannot come till to
morrow.



Hum, then my Revenge is lost, for the Girdle comes before that
  12
time. Did not I see Actwell cross the Court just now into the Kitchin?







Call him to me.
Exit Serv.
That fellow that plays tricks for his Victuals, perhaps, for a Pistole, may do my
business; my Lord knows him not.
Enter Actwell and Servant.
Leave us.





What's to be done now? What am I sent for to Master Steward?
(Aside.



Actwell, my Lord, was to have a famous Oculist come to day, and he just
sent word, he cannot; 'twill put my Lord so damnably out of humour, there will be
no enduring it; cannot you pretend to be the Oculist, get a Launcet, look into
his Eyes, talk Nonsense, make him believe you'll do Wonders, but when it comes
to the upshot, I'll enter, and prevent your touching him? You must say you came
from the Duke and Gonsalvo; I'll give thee a Pistole.



I thank you, Sir, I am daily obliged here, I believe I could do it well
enough, only I don't understand those damn'd cramp words those Quacks
have.



O say any thing; half an hour hence come to the Wardrobe, I'll give you
an old-fashion'd Cloak, that you may look like an experienc'd man full of
Years.



I will, Sir; the Film, the Tenders, the Devil, I'll look into a Book of
Anatomy, and get some terms from thence; I will be sure to wait upon you, Sir.
This was happy for poor Actwell.
Exit.



To fright him, is that all for such an intolerable caring? Gad, if the
Devil was not wanting in a Temptation, I could do him a greater Mis∣chief.





Your Servant, Don Gervatio.



Sir▪ my Lord's asleep.



'Tis you, not your Lord; I am come to but e're I tell my Suit, re∣ceive
this Purse, a young Lady's present.








Indeed I don't Gervatio, you can see, tho' Melito Bondi's blind and might
have seen, I live but for Ariana's sake, the kind Maid meets my Flames, and ge∣nerously
returns 'em; my wretched Fortune hinders me from following the way
my Love proposes, taking her my only Blessing from her Father; 'tis in your
power, Gervatio, to assist us in making up, if but a moderate fortune, you can
perswade, decoy, do any thing with the old man,



The Temptation I wish'd for is come. (Aside)
My Lord, your Offers are made in a happy time, for I was just designing to wait
on the young Lady, and proffer her my Service.







By all that's good I am, my Master has beat me into a right understanding.



What shall we do with this Lord Insuls, Gervatio?



Why, as he's made of Cork, we'l set him a floating, and return him to
the rest of the mercurial Gentlemen in his own Country. Well, my Lord, leave
your Affairs to me, and if I don't bring Ariana to your Arms, and more Bags than
three Men can carry, my Ears shall be at your mercy.



Well, thou art a dear Rogue, and shall command my Fortunes.



My Master rings; trust to me, and be happy.














Where's my Wife and Daughter?






Here, here, my Lord. Well, I believe your Wife is the best of Wo∣men,
we three have been all at work in the outer Room, and I'll swear poor Oli∣via〈◊〉 in upon you twenty times, she is so fond, for all you are a naughty man,
and use her so barbarously.








Here's a Tale of a Tub indeed, where is she now?



I fancy gone to take a turn in the Garden.



Boy, go call her.



What's the Boy a Fool? 'Tis not convenient for him to go, he
shan't go.



Heyday! my Lady Temptyouth, are you to order every thing in my
House?



I will order things when Decency requires; look, to end Disputes,
here the good Lady comes.





I heard the Bell had rung, and hasten'd to my Dear.







Such Answess would make a Woman mad.



You have got a pure colour, Olivia.






But, my Lady, how shall I get him out, there's no opening that Door, and the other
way lies through this Room?



Why, what's he afraid on, isn't my Lord blind, where is the Fool?



Speak softly, walking at the Door.



Let me come by; Who have we here? my French Taylor has fol∣low'd
me hither about the Girl's Stays; Oh the Impudence of these Country-men!
Monsieur, go to my House agen, I'll come home presently.



C•un•Andrea passes over the Stage, and kisses Olivia's Hand.


Pardon a moy, Madam.



Pardon a moy kether, rude •rute! I'm sure I am not like most Quali∣ty,
I owe him nothing.



Count Andrea, my Wife's first Love! Oh, the Garden, the Devil! curst,
curst Gervatio.



What mean these starts of Passion? do you want Gervatio?



I want a Halter.



Wou'd you had one then, you're cross enough to deserve it.



Some-body, I'm sure, does.




M• Lord Insuls is just arriv'd.



Let me desire all this Company, except my Daughter, to retire, I've
made up the business with my Lord's Father, there wants nothing but a Visit or
two, which formality requires: Come, Mrs. Crooked-rib, will you walk into the
next Room?



I'm ready to wait on you.



Oh, my Lady Temptyouth, now my Plague's a coming.
(Aside.



Have Patience, Child, and I'll send Fidelio to thy aid.



D'ye hear, Mistress, receive this Lord as the man I have unalterably re∣solv'd
shall be your Husband.







yes, Sir; what a tone's that in! I think you're but too well, an Estate, a
Title, and an handsom fellow.



Pray add an empty Pate.



Goodlack, Mrs. Flippant, any other Woman would have leapt at him;
upon my Blessing use him as he deserves. Come, my Lady Temptyouth.





As he deserves, that is to be cudgel'd. Now I had rather have the Visits
of fifty Gossips from a drunken Christening, than the Plague of this Prince of
Fops: Hang it, I'll bridle my Inclination, let him run on with his Vanity, then
burst my Sides with laughing at him.




This is prodigiously opportune, by the Muses, to find your Ladiship alone,
Powderwell, adjust my Garnature, I beg your Ladiships Pardon, that I do any thing
of this kind before your Ladiship; but there was an uncivil Wind, as I pas∣sed
the great Court, has blown me into the very disabilee of the vile
Mob.



I can't perceive an Error in your Lordships Dress.



Your Ladiships very humble Servant, by the Muses, I am all in confusion; I
beg your Ladiships Pardon (takes out his Pocket-glass.)
For this freedom before you, but 'tis that I would not appear negligent in your
Ladiships presence.



What a nauseous Fool 'tis.
(Aside)
My Lord, methinks you're very well.



'Tis your goodness, Madam, poison me if I don't look like a Carr∣man;
I look most abominably, by the Muses: Was your Ladiship never in France,
Madam?







There a Man will keep his Chamber three days, if his Complexion is out of
order; they are not arriv'd to that nicety of Perfection here.



'Tis pitty your Lordship does not instruct our young Nobility.



I am not sparing of my Advice, Madam; some I find very tractable, there's
my Lord Dresswell has consulted my Judgment in laying out above a brace of thou∣sand
pounds in Clothes, I believe the World, especially the Ladies, will own 'tis
to his advantage.



Yes, and a good help towards spending his Estate, which, I'm inform'd,
will be gone before he's five and twenty. (Aside.)
None doubts your Lordships skill in those Affairs.



But of all the moving lumps of Earth, commend me to the English, those
awkward Imitators, by the Muses, Madam, there's scarce one in ten understands
the Dress, the Dancing, the Singing, those chief parts of a Man of Quality;
the Duce take me if I was not afraid they had infected me, and when I re∣turn'd
into France, liv'd a whole month retir'd, had all my Masters, practis'd
every Coupee before I durst appear among the Ladies; yet, by the Muses, I
know not how long I shunn'd my self; methought I had the Brutal Plague upon
me. I beg your Ladiships Pardon for troubling you with a description of the dull
Northern fellows.



Every thing your Lordship says is agreeable, I observe very pretty Asse∣veration
you have, by the Muses.



Does your Ladiship like it? Indeed I think it sounds better in the mouth of
a Man of Quality than Damn me, Rot me, and such Porter-like Expressions.



Oh, better much, my Lord; I have a shrewd suspicion you that me•tion
the Muses so often have a familiar acquaintance with 'em, and write.



I write like a man of Quality, to please my self.



I dare swear 'twill ne'er please any-body else. (Aside)
Wou•d not your Lordship oblige me with the sight of some entertaining
Poetry?



By no means, I beg your Ladiship's Pardon, 'twill sp•il Conversation, I
can send your Ladiship several gilt Quires scribbl'd over, if your Ladiship's a
lover on't; most of what I write is Satyr •pon ill drest fell•ws, and then, by the
Muses, the nauseous Subject makes me so sick, I cannot forl•••r being spiteful too,
and criticise upon what others write.



That's the fault of all great Wits, methinks their good Nature should
balance their Judgment.



Good Nature, Madam, why that's only the civiler word for a Fool: If your
Ladiship did but see in France how the poor Poets at a new Play sneak, and wou'd
  16
cr•ep into an Augur-hole; when I come in, by the Muses, I have often wish'd my
my self a Woman, that I might have gone in a Mask, and not frighten the little
Dogs (that write for Bread) out of their Wits.



D•es your Lordship never write Plays?



Yes, often, but I could never get either of the Houses to play one.



What's the reason of that?



Can't y•ur Ladiship guess?







It will favour too much of Vanity to tell yo•.



Pray, my Lord, you have set me a longing.



I must run the risque of every thing, rather than deny a Lady: Then truly,
Madam, I believe they think, and that wisely, should they once play a Play of mine
no other would ever be receiv'd afterwards, and, you know, a man of Quality can't
be their Drudge.



Very true, that is a substantial Reason.



But, Madam, I know not how you hav• betray'd me into these things, when
I design'd to have imploy'd my minutes much more agreeably, in telling your Ladi∣ship,
I adore you to an infinite degree.



His Courtship will be worse than all the rest of his Nonsence, Heaven send
me a deliverance. (Aside)
My Lord, a person of your merit cannot value one so unpolish'd, Nature has neg∣lected
me, and I have neglected Art.



Oh •ie, Madam, this is Blasphemy, they are both Rivals in your Perfections.
But were it what you say, which I positively deny, by the Muses, when I have the
Honour to call you mine, I say, if you did want Instructions, the rectitude of your
Dress should be my care.



Rude Fool, I have no patience.
(Aside.



Madam, you seem uneasie.



It's want of Breeding then.



Gad, I believe so too, for I never saw a Woman in my company so before.
Madam, you I break your Fann.
(Aside.



No matter, 'tis paid for.
I can act the dissembling part no longer.
(aside.



She's strangely alter'd, jealous she can't keep me to her self, her Fancy's at
work; there's nothing out of order in my Wig sure.

(Pulls out his Glass.




Oh Fidelio, do something, do any thing to that Animal, and let me be
gone, for I am teased to death.





Gad, I know not what to do but affront him; flatter him I can't, 'tis not
in my Nature.



Every Hair, I protest, is in as perfect Symmetry as my Features, as I was
saying, Madam.



As I was going to say, Sir.



Sir! hey, what rude Brute have we here? (Aside.
Friend, wou'd you speak with my Gentleman, or the Groom of my Chambers?
there they stand both.



There let 'em be damn'd both; no, 'tis you, Essence and no Brains, I speak
to; Shadow of a Man, vainer than Woman, emptier than the Plumes thou
wear'st. Thou thing, dost thou pretend to court that Lady which went out just now?



If the Lady went away, I suppose she kn•w you better than I, and avoided
so rough a fellow.







Something near my Name, tho' still without my Title.











Did you not receive a Letter signed Fidelio, which told you my Birth was
noble as the first Ven•tians, tho' my sunk Fortunes were now my •oe, yet Arian•,
that all-generous Maid, through my dejected Poverty smiled on my const•nt Love,
and gave me Hopes▪ I beg'd ye to desist, else let you know, that my Life must first
be had before the glorious Pri•e; read you not that Letter?



Something I do remember of such a Paper, but I saw it was a Man's Hand,
and gave it my Val•t to peruse, and asking him if there was any thing in it to di∣vert
me, he said, No; so I ne'er thought on't more.



Now you have heard the Contents, pray dismiss your numerous Attendants,
and meet or go with me to the Field that lies behind the Lemon-Grove, where this
Dispute shall instantly be ended.



What's the man mad? wo•'d ye have me •ight in this Wig?







Oh Heavens! any thing towards a violent motion would raise such a D•st
out on't, I shou'd be kill'd in a mist.



Pho, pho, we'll call at my Lodgings, and you shall put on one of mine.



Poison me if ever I heard the like, prithee where dost think I was bred?
wear another man's Wig, when the best Barber in Venice knows, that after he has
alter'd, amended, reform'd, and modell'd a new Wig for me half a Year, it is with
much perswasion I try it.



Here's a deal of Nonsence, come, what a pox must we do then, for •ight
you I am resolv'd, or kick and post you thro' the Streets of Venice.



By the Muses, I know not what to say; in France I have a Campaign for the
bloody purpose, 'tis so necessary, yet so becoming, several Mars•als of 〈◊〉 have
been ready to pull me to pieces for it; there I have also sighting Shoes, sighting
Gloves, sighting Sword, &c. and, in •ine, can in a moment be equipp'd 〈◊〉
Travelling now like a Man of Quality, and to obtain my 〈◊〉, I le•t my War∣like
Habiliments behind; if you'll have Patience, I'll send post for 'em.



Incorrigible Fool! No, Sir, I give you but till to morrow to a•swer me,
and that you may be sure not to forget the Affront, there's a Reme•brance upon
your Nose, 

and a warm one for your Cheek.




Well Tarpaulin, Monster, half Fish half Man, I'll be reveng'd, I will Vil∣lain,
there's those shall punish ye; hey my Attendants.
Exit Lord Insuls.




Now this fellow goes directly to my Ariana's Father; sure her Love will
inspire me to counterplot one Rival-fool.
By Force or Wit his Claim he shall decline;
If Heaven is just, the Virgin must be mine.







Bondi sitting in a Chair.
Enter Ariana, near the Audience.


HUmph, my Father here already! I did not think he had been come in∣to
this Room; he can't see me, and I will steal softly through, he
•han't hear me neither.
(Aside.

(As she's about the middle of the Stage.)






What shall I do now? I'll counterfeit Madge the Dairy-maid's Voice, for
if he knows me, I shan't get from him the Lord knows when.
(Aside.
(Speaks broad.)
'Tis I, my Lord, I did not think any of the Gentry had been come into this Par∣lour,
so I went this way to serve my Pullein; Ise warrant Ise come no more here.

(Runs stamping off, Bondi throws h• Cane after her.


Oh, dissembling Baggage! Are all blind men served thus? Two such Wo∣men
as my Wife and Daughter are enough to make twenty Men mad.




My Lord, some Company from the Duke, and with them the famous
Oculist Gonsalvo spoke of.



So, now my greatest Misfortune is falling upon me. (Aside.
Call my Family together, and go to Gervatio, bid him, as he values his Life, consi∣der
what I said to him, and hasten to me. (Exit Servant.)
The Imposture known, Boys will hoot me out of Venice; then, to have an un∣skilful
  19
Man put me to intolerable pain, perhaps real Blindness, (Stamps)
Oh! I shall go mad.
Enter Olivia, Actwell dress'd like a Doctor, and several others.
I know not a Face of those, sure my Friends are afraid to come, the Operation is
so dangerous.
(Aside.



How d'ye, my Dear, were you in a passion just now?



I found by Instinct you were near me, and that made me Horn mad.



Humph, I am a Fool to speak to you at all.



You are a Fool, a gross one, because you dissemble poorly; but, blind as
I am, I can see thro' it.



What does he mean? he can't be jealous of Count Andrea, because he ne∣ver
saw him. (Aside.)
Well, my Dear, I consider your Condition, and will bear with your peevish Hamor.
Here's some Gentlemen, and a famous Oculist, sent by the Duke, to look into your
Eyes.



Peace, Scriech-owl, I am in pain enough already.



I hope he will give you ease, my Lord.
Sir, please to look into my Husband's Eyes.



Fear not, my Lord, putting your self into my Hands, shou'd I, or some
of those Gentlemen that have travel'd with me, recount the Wonders I have done,
you wou'd rejoyce at your good Fortune in meeting with me. There's the Em∣peror
of Germany's Aunt, threescore and ten, was led about stone blind twenty
Years; I came, and in a few weeks time made so perfect a Cure, that she has since
work'd her Nephew a Point Cravat. I take out Specks where no body else can
see 'em.



That will be my Case.
(Aside.



Oh, the sweet Duke of Tuseany! what a Film did I clear his Eyes of! the
Good of Mankind prevail'd with me, or else 'twas hard to get from him.



Mr. Doctor, I don't doubt your Skill, but I had rather wait the Will of
Heaven for the restoring my Sight.



By your Leave, my Lord, I am Heaven's Instrument, and here's the Duke's
Command to do my best for you. Gentlemen, draw near, and hold him in the
Chair, while I look in his Eyes.



I shall be murder'd here.




Pray, my Dear, be rul'd.







Ay, ay, here it is, a huge Speck, just growing on the Ball of his Sight,
the worst of black Catarachs, but I shall out with him: let's see, how is t'other
Eye? Oh Lord, further gone! Well, you may bless your Stars that you met with
me as you did, or else you had never seen in this World agen.



I am contented with my present condition, and desire to speak with the
Duke before you meddle with me.



My Lord, your condition is a desperate condition, and the Duke shall see
some of my Art before you speak with him.

(Looking out his Instruments.


Oh the Devil! I shall be ruin'd, where's this Dog Gervatio?
(Aside.



When I have couched your Eyes, my Lord, you must lye upon your Back
for six weeks, and b• fed with nothing but a Feather.









Why you us'd him most inhumanly, I fear he'l complain to the old Gen∣tleman.
Heyday, what have we here, my Father in the hands of the Philistins?
Stay, don't you speak till some time after me. What's the matter, Sir?



So, here's another of my Comforts, with her Beggar at her Tail. (Aside.)
The matter! here's a Fellow will mangle my Eyes whether I will or no.



Can I serve you, Sir?



Yes, if you I beat that fellow.



How! beat me, that have the Badges of all the Princes of Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America! Come, come, I find my Lord's mad; pray, Gentlemen, help
me to bind him in his Chair.



Murder, murder! then, to tell you the truth, I am not blind.





Nay, then 'tis time for me to appear.
(Aside.



I tell you I am not blind.



Pho, pho, this is only his fear.



Nothing else, you may assure your selves.



Well s•id, M•ther, I think you may be pretty confident on't, for no man
that cou'd have seen would have had Patience to have born what you have acted
•efore his Face.



Make way there, let me come at my dear-lov'd Master, the sacred Girdle
of St. Silvester, brought by two holy Men, is just arriv'd; a new unusual Light
struck thro' the Hall, and I could see as if I had ten pair of Eyes, so light, so glo∣rious
was the place; 'tis lodg'd i'th'Chappel, whither the Priests desire you all to
repair, and invoke the power of the Saint.



A Pox of those Miracles; d'ye hear, if your Saint does you no good, don't
send for me, for, by Belzebub, I'll not come at ye.



R••ely perform'd, I'll speak with ye by and by.
(Aside.





Thy Hand, Gervatio, I tremble every Joynt of me; thou art a Rogue, but
I forgive thee. Come, Gentlewomen, tho' I believe your Prayers signifie but little.





Madam, what think you of this miraculous Girdle?



I don't use to have a great Opinion of those things, but we shall see what
Wonders this will do.



I think the whole Story is all a Wonder.



When your Father cry'd out, he was not blind, I was terribly frighted.



I believe you was, Madam.



I'll try to engage Gervatio farther in our Interest, then we shall know all.



Come, come, if we stay longer, I'm sure we shall be miss'd.








How is it, my Blossom? Let me see, has not sitting up at the Ball last
night spoil'd thy Complexion? No, not a bit: Oh, I cou'd kiss thy pretty Eyes
out.



How can your Ladiship tell my Complexion is not spoil'd? I have got
both my white and red on, Madam.



Oh, that's nothing Chicken, there's a Vivacity strikes through, and thy
pretty Eyes are as sprightly, as if thou hadst drank Nectar this Morning. Come,
what Conquests did you make last night? You know there lies my Pleasure, to
hear of your Victories.



There was my Lord Dresswell said a thousand foolish things to me.



Pho, hang him, he's going down the World, he's neither •it for Hus∣band
nor Cully; think not of him, I charge thee, Lucinda.



I shall never think of any without your Ladiships directions.



That's my good Girl; well, but was there none else?



Yes, there was the Duke's second Son, he only blush'd when he came near
me, trembled when he touch'd my Hand, danc'd with such concern, that I thought
he would have fallen.



Ha, ha, ha, the Fool's in love, I'll put him down in my Table-book, he
may prove considerable.



As for the rest, some swore they hated me, others I was not pretty; so
thro' a Medley of Confusion every one endeavour'd to express their Admi∣ration.



Thou art a dear, dear Charmer; well, I swear I love thee better than
any of the little Creatures I ever brought up before.



I thank my best Mother.



Nay, thy own Mother was a pure good Woman, only her barbarous
Friends turn'd her out of Doors for having such a pretty Rogue as thee: I kept
her, poor Lady, till she died.




My Lady Olivia Bondi sends to tell your Honour, That St. 〈◊〉 won∣derful
Girdle has restor'd my Lord Bondi's Sight, for which, at present, they are
paying their Devotions this Afternoon, the Duke's Musick, Balls, and all Diver∣tisements
  22〈◊〉 will af•ord, 〈◊〉 my Lord Bondi's House; the Ladies desire your
Honour's company, and the 〈◊〉Lucinda's.



We•l wait upon them, our Service to the Ladies. (Exit Servant.
Poor Olivia, her 〈◊〉 Husband's seeing will be but bad for her and Count Andrea:••ang't, 'tis setting our Inventions a little more upon the stretch, and we shall out∣wit
him still. Ha! I have a Thought come into my Head for thy advantage, Lu∣cinda.
Here, 〈◊〉, bring my Girl's best Head, and all her Jewels. Oh, Lucin∣da,
if thou canst play one part to a Masterpiece, I don't doubt making thy Fortunes
for ever.
Enter Tifflewell• with the things.
Ah, Tifflewell now show thy utmost Art, and make thy Mistress charming as an
Ang••.



I warrant ye, Madam, such a piece of Youth and Beauty to work upon, and
fine Clothes, let me alone to make an Angel of her.




If thou canst but humour it.




Give me Instructions, Madam, I am not accounted backward.



No, no, thou'rt a dear forward Girl as Heart can wish; this would
oblige our Friends▪ prove an everlasting Provision for your self, and ravish me with
Joy.



But yet you won't tell me what it is.



Dear Tifflewell, put another Jewel here.



Pray your Honour let me have my own Fancy first.




Lucinda shall sing, and Lucinda shall dance, and if they two, both in
perfection, won't charm him, the Devil's in't.



Sing and dance, is that all? I have done that often enough to no pur∣pose
already.



Yes, yes, thou shalt do more than that, my dear Chicken, can't you
put on a world of Affectation?



With all the •ase in the World: Alas, Madam, It was born with me, and
I have as much ado in some measure to overcome it, as I have my Inclinations to∣wards
the eating green Fruit.



Affectation is a mighty Art, my Dear, and those pretty Eyes must be
manag'd a thousand several ways, severe, languishant, ogling, darting their Beams,
cast around, and i• they chance to meet, a Lover's thrown with wondrous haste and
modesty into your snowy Bosom.



My Eyes, dear Mother, ever were at my Command, but never let Fools
in them read my Heart: Thus I have look'd upon the man I scorn'd, thus on him
I would not have believe my Love impossible, tho' hard, to gain; kind and coming
Looks I seldom use, I'm not arriv'd at that Age yet.



Dear Girl, your Aptness prevents the Care I would have undergone in
your Directions, but you must be very sure to rail, commend neither Man nor Wo∣man,
•ither in their Persons or Dress, except my Lord, to whom you are all the
while addressing.



I am glad 'tis a Lord, for I hate to take pains about a fellow that has no
Title.



He has not only a Title, but an Estate, and every thing I cou'd wish for
thee; Are you quite ready?



Yes, Madam, do I look killing?



Like a Cherubim; come along.






Oh my Olivia! Bondi's Sight restor'd deprives me ever of the Light of
those dear Eyes: I ne'er believ'd those Miracles told by canting Priests, now Hea∣ven,
to punish my Incredulity, has sent one that robs me of all my Bliss, and no∣thing
but the crowd, the noise of this wondrous Girdle brought, could have gain'd
my Admittance now.



My Lady Temptyouth is our Friend; beside, these warm Desires will soon
grow cool, and then you will be glad of an Excuse.



Never, Olivia, never; my Youth, my Life, my Fortunes, all are dedica∣ted
to thee.



 I say, my Lord, you shall not press into your Ladies Chamber
till she has word we are here.



 Sure this Woman intends to vex me stark mad.



Oh Heavens, my Husband! what shall we do?



I'le get into the Closet.



Alas, he has the Master-key.



 'Tis but in vain, Heaven has restor'd my Eyes, and I will see
what is done in my House.



Good my Lord, under my Toylet, quick, quick.





And what wou'd you see now, your good Lady all alone, returning
Heaven Thanks, I dare swear, for the wondrous Blessing you have receiv'd.



I'm sure I saw the glimpse of a Man follow her to her Chamber.



A Man with me!



Pho, Child, 'tis Jealousie, he takes thy Shadow for a Man.



I'le look into this Closet, but not enter it, lest you juggle him from under
your Petticoats.





Come, is your Maggot over? will you down into the Dining-room,
hear the practice of Musick, and my Lucinda shall give you a Dance.



Dancing be damn'd, I'd as live see a Monkey leap from Tree to Tree.



Not even his Eyes agen will put this man into a good Humour. Well,
I hope we have a noble Entertainment, according to the old Proverb, a Miser's Feast
is always the best; will ye go down, or no?



No, I'll dine here.



Seem willing, madam, 'tis the only way to prevent him.
(Aside.



With all my Heart, for I hate much Company: Here Diego, and your fel∣low,
carry this Table to the Dressing-room-door, a-top of the back Stairs, there
Sylvia can thrust it in, and bring the Side-board hither.




Ha•e a care you drop nothing.







You are wondrous forward, perhaps I won't dine here when all is
d•ne.



〈…〉 the old Gentleman does not know his own mind.



〈…〉, are you setled in yours?



If I am not, my Lord, my Years excuse it.




One of your bringing up, my Lady Temptyouth, I suppose, because she is
so brisk.



I'm not asham'd to own her; yes, 'tis my dear Girl.



An•t •lease your Honour, my Lord I•sulls desi•es to speak with you, on very
earnest business.



I believe I may dare venture to go, for my Gipsi• would never have been
so-willing I should have di•ed here, if the Coast had not been clear. (Aside)
Shew me where he is.




So, he is gone, I hope the Count is safe.



Yes, yes, I saw him slip down the back-stairs as soon as ever the Men
were out of sight.



How do you do, pretty Lady, I scarce dare speak to you before my Hus∣band,
he's so peevish.



Peevish, indeed I never saw such a cross old man in all my life.



What would you do, my Dear, if your pretty Youth was confin'd to such
an one.



O, I'd quickly send him to Heaven in a String; I'd have half a score Gal∣lants;
Madam, if I did not •eaze him to that degree, that in a months time he
went to sleep with his Fathers, hang me for a Fool.



Thou art a Mad-cap.



Let us go down, for I have a Design upon that Lord Insulls, which I'll
tell you as we walk.



I am ready to wait upon you.







Was ever such Impudence, such Disobedience practis'd under one's own
Roof? Mercy on me! what will this World come to? A wanton Wife and an
undutiful Daughter! the Plagues of Egypt were meer •lea-bitings to them.



Nay, I thought your Lordship was not privy to the Aff•ont, because I knew
your Lordship first propos'd the Match; indeed never man of Quality was so abu∣sed;
I would have fought the fellow, but that I fear'd, by his Carriage, he was a
Scoundrel, and would disgrace my Sword.



Oh, 'tis a vile Wretch, but I'll be so reveng'd on him. My Lord, if
yet you think my Daughter worthy, the Ball just ended, a Priest shall make her
yours for ever, tho' indeed she ought to expect your Scorn and Hatred.



My Education taught me never to bear Displeasure against the fair Ladies,
I shall wait with much Impatience and Joy till you summon me to the fair one.



My Lord, I beg you would go to the Company, whilst I send for my
Daughter, and give her a Lesson, for I fear she was at the bottom on't.
Call Ariana.




I will leave ye pray be not too severe upon the Lady, I have a great re∣spect
for her; but for that rude fellow, by the Muses, he deserves kicking and
pumping.
Exit L. Insulls.






Did you send for me, Sir?



Yes, Mrs. Manybetters, and none worse; how you are trick'd up! the
Dancing, not your Father's Sight restor'd, is your Joy: Are not you a Cockatrice?
dare you look me in the Face after what you have done?







Yes done, Minx, you and your beggerly Bravo abuse a man of Quality, For∣tune
and Honour.



Has the Baby been to tell its Tale then?



D'ye make a Jest on't Huswife? Hear what I say, and mark it: This night
thou shalt be my Lord Insulls Wife, or else, by Heaven, I'll turn thee loose into
the wide Streets of Venice, stript of all Means, all Comforts, there to get thy Bread
amongst thy fellow-prostitutes, but never own thee for my Daughter more.



These are cruel sounds, they strike through my soul, and dead my sence.
Oh, Sir, hear your only Child; you us'd to say you lov'd me, if I have lost that
Blessing, let Compassion plead, heap on me all punishments, spare me but in this;
let not my Youth be condemn'd to what I loath, to such a Fool, a Blockhead,
Coward.







Consider, Sir, you force me on the Road to Hell, for my strong Aversion
needs must lead me on to Murders, Adulteries, or such horrid Crimes that will sure∣ly
plunge me there.



Let go, stand off, for as I have a Soul, this night you are married, or
ten thousand real Mischiefs shall befal thee.
Exit Bond.




Mischief is already on me, lasting Mischief, fix'd for Life, a Hus•and
whom I shall ever hate and all the World will still despise, all my ch•erful hours
are for ever fled, Fate has not one in store: Then let their Revels shake the House
  26
with noisie pleasure, fix'd on this wretched Earth, so stupified I'll grow, till I can
work my melancholy Thought to fancy I'm a piece on't.





What's here, my charming young Mistress on the Ground, she that us'd to
enliven all the World, now, when there reigns a general Joy, sunk in Sorrow?
•ise, d•ar Madam, rise.








I•ll try that; come Madam, what's the cause of this dejection? did I not
receive from you a noble Present? Come, pray believe me yours, and tell me
what's the matter.



If I durst trust thee, but 'tis no Secret; my Father has sworn I this night
shall wed Insulls.



And you had rather have Fidlio.



Rather, oh, there is no comparison



Smile then and you shall; but, 〈◊〉, I'll do nothing without you are
merry.



Were I rid of the fear of Insulls, I could leap over the Moon.



Let me see, does not this Lord Insulls pretend to Poetry?







And is he not vain upon it?



As all Wou'd-•e-wits are.




Then, dear madam, let your Troubles end, and be as brisk as your sweet
natural Temper incites, I warrant your Lumber of a Lover safe enough from di∣sturbing
you when the Ball's done.



O that I could believe thee▪



You'l believe me when by my sole contrivance the Parson hath conjur'd
you between a pair of sheets in Fidelio's Arms; ah! methinks I see you laid on the
delicious Scene.



Go, you are a Talker: Then I am to know nothing of your plot.



Not till you hear of the success to the Company, sweet madam. Yonder
the Hall's as full as it can hold, the Musick's a thrumming, the Gallants are ogling,
my Lady Temptyouth as busie as a Bee, there wants nothing but you to crown the
Assembly.



I'm gone; remember, if you •ail my Heart's broke.



Let your Heart be as light as your Heels, and fear nothing, fair Lady.



Take this and be careful.


•ives him Mony, and exit.


I would not be old Bondi's faithful Fool agen for the World, there's some
delig• a Gus•o in serving these young generous souls: Well, Brains, if e'er you'd do
〈◊〉 service, let it be now, help me to ba•lk this foolish Lord.
Fix soft Ariana where her Wishes tend,
So she secures a Lover, I a Friend.







Wherein is Bondi, Count Andrea, Lord Insulls, Fidelio, and several other
Gentlemen; Olivia, Ariana, Lady Temptyouth, Lucinda, with many
other Ladies.



COunt Andrea is your Guest, I suppose.








No, he is my Guest, sure for the many Estates I have help'd you to for
half the worth of 'em, you may allow me to bring one Friend.



Your Ladiship's alwaies my Friend, I thank you. Come, why don't this
Dancing go on? if your Heels wou'd wag, 'tis to be hoped you would be tir'd and
ha' done once.

SONGS, and a DANCE by Lucinda
and a French Beau.


(to Lucinda) Heavens, Madam! I have seen nothing so ravishly •ine, no∣thing
like it, by the Muses; since I left Versailles, 'twou'd be impertinence to the
highest degree to ask if your Ladiship was not bred in France.



Oh, the Paradise of the World bred there, my Lord: Yes, my Mother
was so nice she had me nurs'd in France; I warrant she would not a let me suck'd
any other than French Milk for a Principality.



A witty Woman, by the Muses, and charmingly pretty: Then your Ladi∣ship
understands the French Freedom and Gallantry? According to those Rules,
pray Madam, number me amongst your humblest Servants.



With all my Heart, there's a Favour to distinguish you. (Gives a Ribbon.
No more words now we are observ'd.



Well done, my Lucinda, she's at him, i'faith, my Maidenhead to an
Eggshell he's her own. (aside.)  28To Ol•v.) This is dull doings, Madam, I wish I could part the Company, send those
Gravities to tope their Noses, and get our selves a little freedom.



I wish you cou'd, Madam; poor Ariana has not spoke a word since she
came into the Hall.




I'le try: Well, now I vote that the Gentlemen and Ladies that have
danc'd retire into the drawing Room, and recruit with Sweetmeats and cool
Wines, and the old Do•s take up their Smoaking-room, and drink lusty Chiaux,
Bagrag, and the warmest Wines my Lord Melito Bondi's Cellar affords.



Spoke like an Oracle.



Spoke like a Devil, putting all the young ones together; but this is the
last day of her Reign, for I'le forbid her my House, tho' I lose Ten thousand
Crowns a Year by it.
(Aside.



I like the motion well, for, by my holy Dame, I am tir'd with
seeing nothing but hip hop, hip hop.



Come, come, you as becomes you, your Age and Quality first.

(Driving out the old Men.


The Devil take thee.
(Aside.




Now pair all, and follow your Leader.




I'•e let A•iana see I stomach the Affront.



Madam, may I crave the honour of your Hand?



Yes Gallant, 'tis at your service.




Did you see my Fool strut by with Lucinda? Now he is vain enough to
fancy I will be jealous.



He is not worth a Thought.



Alas, you know not how formidable he is; my Father, with the dismal'st
Threats that Man could utter, has sworn to marry me to him this very Evening,
as soon as the Ball is over.



Hell and Furies! I•ll cut his Throat immediately.



Hold, hold, Gervatio with much assurance promis'd me a deliverance, have
a little patience, such desperate Attempts will ruine all.



Dost think I'le stand by and see thee lost?



Nor will I tamely yield; but now let's be calm, and the Company, me∣thinks
I have great Faith in Gervatio's Promises.



And I have Faith in thee; but, oh, if power should overcome madness, De∣spair
and Death would seize me.




Where are you, Chickens? Come hither, or spight of me, the old man
will ro•ze ye.












Mr. Stretchwell, and Mr. Heardouble, you understand your business.



Ay sure, or else we spent our Lives to very little purpose.



Well, here I plant ye, and bring the Lord Insu•ls; if he owns he made the
Libel call'd The present state of Venice, you know what you have to do.



Yes, yes, truss him up for Treason.



Hurry him away to Prison without Bail or Mainprise.



Right, behind those Hangings conceal your selves, I'll bring him as soon
as possible.



His business shall be done I'll warrant thee, old boy.









Well, Brother, we are a great Prop to this State, Verice had long ago
moulder'd into its watry Foundation, if we Informers had not supported it from
ten thousand Treasons.



Dost think think this Lord Insulls is guilty or not?



What matter is't? he's rich▪ and we'l fleece him.



I hate a poor Dog, that pretends to be in a Plot.



Impudent Varlets! when they han't Mony enough to pay their Fees,
they'l undertake to turn Governments upside down.



Hark, I hear a noise, to our Posts.






My Lord, I humbly ask your pardon, for drawing your Honour from the
bright Assembly, but I understand you are in a fair way to be Heir-apparent to all
my old Master's Wealth: I have been a long and faithful Servant here, and may
prevail with old Bondi to drop more Bags than he design'd.



Honest Gervatio, thou art kind, but the young Lady uses me most scurvily,
by the Muses, she must expect, wh•m I am her Husband, that in return of her scorn
I treat her with Indifference.



She deserves it; good Heavens! slight such Worth as yours!



Nay, by the Muses, Gervatio, without boasting, I may say, all the Courts in
Christendom have admir•d my Person, Parts, and Dress.



No doubt, my Lord, your Lordship has such an Oath, sets my mouth all on
Water, by the Muses: Oh, I had a devilish smatt'ring at 'em in my Youth, but hard
Fate threw me upon Units, Tens, and the Gargon of Accounts, when I long'd to
have been rhiming: I am sure your Honour writes, O that I cou'd be so happy to
peruse some of your incomparable lines.



What I write is all light Satyr, if your Fancy's that way, I can send you
Reams of cover'd Paper.



Is it so light Satyr, •'•aith? ha, ha, ha, nay, then I smell a Rat indeed, they
sed 'twas a 〈…〉.







As i• you did not know, that exquisite, elaborate, most ingenious piece,
〈◊〉 7. 〈…〉 of 〈◊〉, wherein the Satyr is so winning, so instructive, so
reforming, as I may say, that the Duke is pleas•d with it to that degree, he has pro∣mis'd
his •air Daughter's Pict••e-set round with Diamonds, in a Gold Chain that
g••s fifteen times about the Neck to the Man that will own himself the Au∣thor.



He, he, he, does that Trifle make such a noise? Alas, I have writ Five hun∣dred
better than that.



Impossible, b•t we owe this to your Lords••p, I'm sure.



Yes, the Lines are mine, but I ca•e not to expose my Name, I want not the
Duke's Present, Gervatio





(Both the I••ormers run out, and clap two Pistols to his Head.


What's the matter, Gentlemen?



Hold your Tongue, Sirrah, make no noise nor resistance, if you do, one
of these sends your Poetical ••ains into the Air immediately.



Here's a Rogue for ye, Brother! he •ed he had made Five thousand Li∣bels
on the Duke and Senate.



Ay, ay, he shall have his Reward, a Halter instead of a Gold
Chain.



Why Gentlemen, to tell you the truth, I did not write the Verses.



Every Malefactor can deny his Crime.



Oh 〈◊〉! what's the meaning of all this?



Heavens! my Lord, I am as much amaz'd as you, these fellows have be∣tray'd
me, they told me the Poetry was ador'd by the Duke and Senate, and I
should have a swindging Reward if I could discover the Author; my business
was always to •et Mony, my Lord, and I hoped to have done my self a Kindness
and your Lord•hip an Honour.



Yes, you have honour'd me, I t•ank ye, put me in a fair way to be hang'd:
Good Ge•tlemen, remove these horrid Instruments of Death a little further, they
put my P•ruke quite out of the curl▪ and my Body in such violent sweats, I •han't
be able to come near the Ladies agen this •ortnight.



Oh, there's no Ladies where you are a going, come along.



Fe•r not, my Lord, I'll get you Bail.



How, going to whisper the Prisoner! here's anoth•r Fiddle will make
ye dance farther off.

(〈◊〉 out another Pistol.



O •ord, O •ord, I never could endure the Nose of Belzebub ag•••st my
pre•ious pe•son.





Come, let's have him the back way, le•t he alarm the 〈◊〉.



Shall we put him in the D•ngeon?



Good Gentlemen, consider my Ball-clothes.



Here's a Fellow taking care of his Clothes when his Life is in dan∣ger.



Well, Brother, according as his pockets are lined, he shall be
used.



Ay, ay, away with him.



Pray leave haling me, I'll go quietly.








Ladies; Andrea, Fidelio, Gentlemen; a Side-table, with Wine.



Madam, shan't we beg a Song of the charming Lucinda?



Not till my Lord comes, I have told ye my design.




And I like it extreamly.




Heavens! look Fidelio, what•s that stalks behind my Father, a Priest?



The Devil it is.



I fear there's mischief's toward.



As the day has passed in Joy, so, I hope, 'twill have a joyful end, for I
design before all these Witnesses to marry my Daughter, the young Lord Insulls is
the Bridegroom, his Father and I long ago concluded it, only my Infirmity defer∣red
the matter.



Ay, let's have a Wedding, the thoughts on't makes my old Blood
dance.



Rather the strong Wines work upon your weak Brain.



The Devil! all my design's ruin'd, and poor Ariana's Heart broke:
fiddle faddle, my Lord Bondi, this is nothing but thriftiness, now the Fragments of
the days Revels must serve for the Wedding Supper; no, no, old Gentleman,
don't mistake your self, we•l have another Festival for dear Ariana'• Mar∣riage.



My Lady, you have a large rule in my Family, but in this Affair, upon my
word, I'll be Master.



My Veins with kindling Ruge are all on fire, what shall I do, my Ariana?
I'll meet and stab him as he enters.



Have a moments patience, he appears not yet.



What, must I lose my new Servant, Madam?





So it seems, Child.



A welladay! but hang't, while Fifteen has not overtaken me, I•ll never
spoil my Face with grieving.



If I have any power, my Lord, I beg you wou'd oblige your weeping
Daughter, in delaying this unwelcome Match.




Rest assured you have no power with me, and all you say against it hastens
my Resolves; use your Prayers and your Commands where you bestow your
Charms, I am cold, as I have ever found your Love.



This shou'd be Jealousie, but what can give him Ground for a Suspicion?
(Aside.





O, where's my Lord?



Here; what's the matter?



Oh, my Lord, the worst News, the saddest Accident! Oh! my Heart will
break for the poor Gentleman.



What Gentleman? explain thy self.



Gentleman did I say? no, no, not a Gentleman neither, 'tis a Lord.



My Heart bodes Comfort.



Torture me no longer, dear Gervatio.



That hopeful Sprig, oh! I can't get it out, my Lord Insulls.







Alas, the overflowings of his Wit has undone him: In short, my Lord,
some base Trappanners, Informers, of which this State swarms, sent for him from
this Company, and got out of him, that he made that cursed Libel, The present state
of Venice, which has so exasperated the Duke and Senate, that they have resolved
to hang the Author.







Ay, hang him, Sir; my Bowels earn for the young Bud of Quality.



What a Devil had he to do with Poetry, that Leprosie of lazy Minds,
that Weed of Nature? Had he not Estate and Title? must he covet the Begger's
Entail, Parnass•s Lands, and be damn'd to him? Plague consume all the rhiming
Fops in Christendom.



What, your worthy Son-in-law!



He makes me mad.



I cou'd worship thee, Gervatio.



I must be rude, and desire the Company to break up, whilst I go and try
my Interest to release this jingling Coxcomb.



My Lord, we are all your humble Servants.



You two go round, and you will find the back-door of the Garden open;
when my Master's gone I'l• call ye.

(Aside to Andrea and Fidelio.






(to the old Senator) Come, Brother Senator, your company may be use∣ful.





So Ladies, how d'ye like my Contrivance? Bondi may stir, but the duce
a bit will he get his Lordship released to night, and to morrow I have another
Plot, which I hope makes my fair Mistress happy.



Thou art my better Angel.



But my Ariana, won't you give me leave to free my Lord, provided I
take care he never troubles you with love again?



Ay, get him into the Bonds of Matrimony with Lucinda, and free him
from his Prison as soon as you please.



Methinks 'tis pity the pretty Creature should be condemn'd to such
a Fop.



Oh, a rich Fool was alwa•es my desire, that I might show my Discretion
in managing him and his Estate.



Nay, if you are pleased I am.



Come Child, we have many Irons in the Fire, there's not a Senator
but I have done a good turn for some time or other, and therefore I fear not
succeeding.















Come in Gentlemen, the old Enemy's gone.





Let me embrace thee, thou Soul of Ingenuity and Goodness.




Indeed Gervatio has proved just contrary to my Expectations; I hope as he
has freed Ariana, if I crave his Friendship, I may obtain it; I am sure you know
what moves my Lord to use me so intolerably, that I can never meet a civil
Answer.



I own I know the Cause, but dare not tell ye, lest it startle ye too much.



No, Gervatio, prithee speak, for his brutal Carriage is past enduring.



Then, Madam, my Master was never blind, pretended it, only to avoid the
being President of Dalmatia; consider if you have urg'd him.







Then I am lost.




Look up, Olivia, Danger shall never reach thee whilst this Arm can weild
a Sword.



Madam, your Apprehension is too timerous.



All here are your ready Friends.



Oh, 'tis impossible, my Ruine is inevitable, the innocent Freedom I have
given this young Lord, my Virgin Love, before my Husband Bondi, will be punisht
with nothing less than Death, Italy produces no milder Vengeance for suspected
Wives.



Harbour not a Thought so terrible; rather than be punish'd guiltless, fly.
Venice with your faithful Slave; to break forc'd Vows Heaven can never hold a
Crime, my Life, and whatsoever I am Master of, is yours.



Alas, how wild you talk! five noble Brothers adorn my Family, who wou'd
p••sue my guilty Steps, and piecemeal on this wretched Body hew out my Honours
Stains and their Revenge.



Faith Invention pours on me like a Deluge, for your Protection and end∣less
Favour, I'le undertake to bring ye both off.








W•at a mad Risque o•r Sex runs when we plunge in real Guilt! what
Pangs, what Agonies, what Terrors are the fatal Consequence!
(aside.



Hast thou Re•son, Gervatio, for what thou say'st?



I'll serve you all, and, I do not doubt, successfully.




Which Room is the Family in?



I tremble, there's my Lord.



Away, Gentlemen, into the Garden agen, stay in the Grotto, I'll be with
ye presently, and tell ye all my Designs.





We'll wait you there.



Good Ladies, to your Closets, I would talk with my Lord alone.



Come, dear Ariana, thou art happy in prospect of thy love; if mine had
been my Lot, these Mischiefs ne'er had hapned.



I wish your mind at peace.






God I have undertook Hercules's labour, but the greator the Undertaking,
the greater the Glory in the performance.





Oh Gervatio! there's no freeing of this Fool to night; where's my damn'd,
Wife and Daughter?



Gone to undress themselves.



There's no body with 'em.



None but theis Utensils, their Chambermaids.



Gervatio, I hitherto have trusted thee with all the Secrets of my life, shrink
not back when I disclose the greatest: My Wife has certainly abused me, her Rela∣tions
are so numerous, that to expose her I should run ten thousand hazards •here∣fore
I have resolved silently and secretly to take her off by Poison, to stop my
Shame and her future Sins.



If it be so, my assistance shan't be wanting, but, Sir, the Case is weighty,
the Breath of life blown out, Repentance cannot kindle the dead Coal agen.



That's true, but I am by all her wanton Carriages convinc'd, besides a
thousand Circumstances, she's guilty.



Well, more to confirm your Suspicion, I must confess I heard 'em appoint
a meeting in the Garden about some three hours hence.



Oh, damn 'em, damn 'em.



From the Balcony we may overhear and discovet new Cause for your
Revenge, or else find her innocent.



Innocence! 'tis not in the Sex, Eve lost it when she lewdly listen'd to the
Fiend, and intail'd her guilt on her Posterity.



Have patience, and your own Ears shall either acquit or condemn her.



Nay, my Eyes have seen enough already. Well, Gervatio, I trust to thee,
and will be ready when you call me.



Your Lordship ever found me faithful.


If I do deliver these Ladies from all their Fears, I ought at least to be esteem'd a
Knight Errant, and have it inscrib'd upon my Tomb;
Here lies a most puissant Hero:•ox on't, what will rhime to Hero? No, it shall be thus:

The generous Gervatio here lies dead,
To whom for Aid distressed Damsels fled.

Ay, ay, that will do: Now for my Garden-Sparks, my Instruments are Lords.
Exit▪







Bondi and Gervatio appear in the Balcony, a Curtain to draw.


THey are not come yet, but I'm sure they will, for my Tormentor seem'd
very uneasie, and full of •hought.

(Olivia and Andrea meeting.


See, my Lord, they both appear.



Contagion seize 'em, Mildews and Blasts destroy her Beauty, stamp her
Face as deform'd as her Soul, for, a Plague on her, she's too handsom now.



•ay, my Lord, if you are thus passionate, they'l hear us.



Hist, I have done.



Madam, I come to wait on your Commands, which, how strange soever,
blindly I obey.



A Pox of your Complaisance.



Pray, my Lord, be silent.



I am, I am.



When your Duty to your Father took you from my Wishes, and gave you
to the noble Bed of Bondi, great were my pangs; I struggled hard to conquer
Love's fierce Fires, and turn 'em into Friendship's lambent Flames; strong was the
Contest, yet I overcame, and now can boast a Friendship to you and your Lord.



Pho, this is Dissimulation.



Hear 'em out, I am sure they see not us.



I knew your Friendship pure, else I had never trusted you so far; but my
Designs are ended now, and my Lord grows very peevish; lest your coming should
offend him, I beg you would forbear the House, or any Opportunity of speaking
to me.



Madam, I will even in this fulfill your pleasure; but you was pleased to
promise, when you made that odd Request, I would in appearance seem your Gal∣lant,
that you would some time tell me the reason of that innocent Dece•t.







I did, but 'tis a Secret, and I must have your Word and Honour, that nei∣the•
Friend nor Fo• extort it from you.



I give you both, nay, upon my Soul I will not utter it.



Then know my Lord was never blind.











Sure she's a Witch.



What is hid from loving Eyes? tho' all the world believed it, I per∣ceived
the contrary, and often urged my Husband, tho' not plainly contra∣dicting
what he said, yet round about he might perceive I guess'd at it.



Did my Lady ever hint she thought you not blind?



At first she was damn'd inquisitive, which I still thought she did for her
security in sinning.



It sounds like truth: But hush, they go on.



Methought I had no Comfort of my Life, whilst my dear Lord but
seem'd under that Affliction; besides, Heaven knows, I feard a real Judgment might
befall him for his Counterfeiting, and so I plaid a thousand tricks with you, thinking
his Love so strong that he could not bear to see, and pretend not to see ano∣ther
invade his right in me? This is the story, and this was my design, but
my Lord by his own Contrivance now is himself again, and I renew my
request to see you no more, for considering past Actions, your sight makes my
Husband uneasie. When I find him in a good humour I will acquaint him
with my guiltless project.



And if he is not displeased I may hope to continue in the Enjoy∣ment
of your Friendship.



Of that hereafter, but my Lady Temptyouth I resolve to avoid, because
she knew not the bottom of my design, yet was so free to forward it, my
Lord your Servant.



Madam, yours; on this fair hand let me wish you everlasting Happi∣ness.



Remember 'tis your parting kiss, and this indeed your eternal leave.
(Speaking softly.



My Love must mitigate that rigour, besides, our Friend Gervatio has
Imployment for me in the House.



By all my dangers (which I hope are past) I will no more endeavour
or consent to see you. Farewell.




What think ye now, my Lord?



Faith, I know not what to think, were I fare you have not betray'd
me, there may be some truth in't.



Who I, my Lord? Upon my life not I, why your Lordship knows I
never could abide the Ladies; how many times have I made you angry with
'em. I'm sure they hate me.



That's true; if she forbears his sight I'll forbear my revenge, tho'
the Letters and the Ki••es grumble in my Gizard still.



Pshaw, only to carry on her Plot.



Well, I'll believe it if I can, 'twill be most for my ease I am sure 
Come let's in, I'll write to the Duke for this Scribling Lord, tho' in troth I
am almost asham'd to appear in't.
(Exit Bondi.




Go thy ways Don 〈◊〉; my drubbing will be reveng'd at last.
(Exit.





You see my Authority.



Yes, and obey it; the Prisoner is at your Service.



My Lord, your Lordship's humble Servant.



O Heavens! your Ladiship and that brightness see me in this vile Con∣dition,
I don't believe I have a Grain of Powder in my Wigg, the Villains
that took away my Papers took my Mirrour also, because 'twas set in Gold,
now I could wish my self in the darkest Dungeon rather than appear such a
Brute before those resistless Eyes.



Alas, poor Girl, I am sure she never did any thing of this Na∣ture
before, but she received such a vast respect for your Lordship; your be∣haviour
carries in it a shining Complaisance so much above our dull Venetians, that
no wonder it touched a tender Breast.



I would serve the French if I met with any of the Nation in the Per∣son
of a Labourer or Beggar, and sure when a Cavalier is in Affliction, who
may justly beast of all the Accomplishments of mankind, 'twill excuse my break∣ing
the strict rules of Decency in giving him a visit.



I am Transported, such sounds are only fit for Angels to hear, Mortals
cannot bear the Joy.



Nay, she has brought you a Present too, and I hope a welcome one,
your Liberty.



No, the Lady has brought me everlasting Chains, by the Muses (Con∣found
the Oath, I cannot leave it) I'd not leave 'em to be free as Air.



What means your Lordship, I am sure I begg'd your Freedom hearti∣ly
of my Uncle, the Duke.



But your Eyes teach my Heart the pleasing Bondage, which I desire
to Triumph for ever. G•d I say abundance of fine things.
(Aside.



Your Lordship forgets, 'tis not Ariana you are talking to.



No, if it were, every word shou'd stick in my Throat, she a dull In∣sensible,
no Mein, no Air, no Song, no Dance, nothing agreeable.



Oh, the abominable Fool! how he describes the prettiest Creature
Nature ever made.
(Aside.



Your Lordship cannot be in earnest.



By the Inferna•s, (Ay, they'll do me less harm than the Muses) But
vast Fortune if I had married her, which now I never will: 'Twas for her
that my Equippage might have been the finest at the Court of Versailles:  39
My Coach drawn by six Barbs, six Blacks to every Horse. The poor Crea∣ture
my Wife I'd have confined to the Country with a pair of broken
winded Jades and an old Fashion'd Chariot.




I don't like your usage of a Wife my Lord.



She has us'd me ill and deserves such a return, but if your Ladiship
wou'd think me worthy, Heavens! you shou'd shine the Glory of Versailles;
The Barbs be yours, and I the humblest of your Slaves.
How fine is that, the Prison sure inspires me.
(Aside.



Nay, I can't excuse Ariana, for I doubt she had more than a
Finger in this troublesome business, but my Girl's too young to think of Love,
tho' I wish she had never seen your Lordship; I know not what time may
produce.



Pardon my Presumption; I had not broke upon the Lady so abruptly,
but I am prest upon by Fate, my Father to morrow arrives at Venice ex∣pecting
me to marry Ariana? Cou'd I have hoped such Happiness as to have
chang'd my Destiny and fixt here where all my wishes tend, my Father might
storm, but 'twou'd not be in his power to alter it.



Oh Heavens, such a concern ventur'd on so suddenly wou'd kill me
with the Apprehension.



Come, let's leave this detested place and go to my House, there
we'll consider further.



I wait on you, Madam, with unexpressible thanks for this Favour: I
hope I shall hear of my people, that I may once again appear like a Man of
Quality; not like a Rat shut up in a hole. I profess I am scarce fit to touch
that fair hand.



But indeed you are, my Lord! Lucinda.



My Mothers Commands, my Lord.



SCENE changes to Bondi's House.
He at his Table Sealing Letters, two Servants.


This to the Duke, this to Gonsalvo, I hope they'll consider my Lord's
a Fool, and release him: He make the Libel! I found by his discourse he
made it no more than I did.
(Exeunt Servant•

He's foolish 'tis true, but then he is rich and the fitter for a Husband.












What's the matter with the Women?



Alas, d'ye hear no noise in the House?



Noise, what noise, not I.



Why all your Moveables are seizing: Two Priests with Officers walk
o'er the House, nor will they be controul'd, proudly they march along and
break open all the Locks, set down your Plate, your rich Hangings, and
every thing of Value, my dressing Plate that was my Maiden Treasure, that's
down too; Oh, oh.



Nay, as much as my •old Bodkins, and all the Jewels I have on: I
shall be a 〈◊〉 Luss now! Oh, Heavens.



Ye amaze me, what can be the meaning on't?



They' ll tell no body, but seem to have great Authority.



I am at my Wits end. Where's G•rvatio?





Here comes the sorrowfull Man.



Oh, that ever I shou'd live to see this day! such Havock, such Waste
there will be of my dear Masters Goods, wou'd I were dead out of the sight
on't.



Why Gervatio, is all the World mad? What is the reason of all this
Outrage?



I know not, but your Enemies are at my heels, I suppose they'll ac∣quaint
you: Here they come, my Lord.


•nter Count Andrea, and Fidelio, disguiss'd like Friars, and their Servants like
Officers.


Has Heaven nothing but Afflictions for this aged Head! Reverend Fa∣thers
what have I done to deserve such Usage.



Offi•ers give us the Inventory and retire: We will yet, respecting
his grey Hairs, conceal his sh•me and crimes as much as possible: Brother
will you lay the Enormous fa•it open before his hardned Soul.




Your Eloquence will do it more •eelingly Brother.



Excuse me, indeed your Capacity is largest.



Pardo• me, I am weak, very weak, compar'd to you.

(Bowing to one another.


Ah, the Devil take ye both and your Ci•ilities.
(Aside.



Then according to my poor Ability.



How I am tortur'd.
(Aside.



Andrea Coughin• and H•••ing.
Melito Bondi, Thou stand'st accused before the Duke and
Senate, and his Holinesses Nuncio, for such a grand De∣ceit,
for a Crime of such a Nature, so black in it's Root, so wide in i•s Bran∣ches,
the Parent a lie, the Daughter's Hypocrisie, Dissimulation to the high∣est
degree even to Pe•jury: Brother be pleased to discuss.



What will become of me.



Well, may'st thou tremble, old man, who durst affront Heaven in Coun∣terfeiting
blindness.







Ah, we are all undone.



But as one Crime seldom fails to pull a greater on, in thee, lost man,
we find the dire proof of all that's ill; to restore this sight which Heaven
knows was never lost, Silvester's Sacred Girdle must be fetched, and a Miracle
pretended; but know the Saint needs not by your studied lies, addition to
his well established Glory, since the curst falsity has been broached, he has
rous'd him in his Peacefull shrine and waked the Convent with his cries,
Bondi's a dissembler, Bondi has done me wrong, Bondi must be punished.



Worthy Fathers, behold at your Feet a Penitent, have pity on my
lost Estate.



Rise, and hear us out? Brother, proceed.



For this Crime the Senate have decreed, the Nu•cio too concurring,
that thou Melito Bondi be straight Devested of thy Lands and rich Possession,
thy Moveables, thy Debts, and whatsoever's thine Con•iscated to the State,
thy self still to remain a Prisoner for life.



The doom is mild and merciful, if thou hadst fallen where the In∣quisition
Reigns, through what variety of Torments must you have past, and
for conclusion, died: Brother, will you urge any thing further.



Good Reverendissimo's, let me beg you cease, see my poor Master is
just expiring under the severity of your censure: your selves, I am sure, want
refreshing too.



Truly my Spirits are exhausted.



I do perceive mine evaporate.



Within I have prepared something to sustain nature.



Let me entreat ye Fathers to accept it.



Shall we venture to eat the Viands of the Hypocrite.



For that matter I'll be your taster, pray walk in.



My Stomach calleth upon me to venture: Old Gentleman, we shall quick∣ly
return and examine your Papers.



What you please, I am humbled to any thing.



(Complementing about the way) Nay Brother, that will not do.



Upon my Veracity you shall.



By my order I won't.



That's Sacred; then I must.



Re-enter Oliva and Ariana.


How have you come off, my Lord.



•'en stript of all, naked in my old age, as when I first peept in this
wic••d world.







Unfortunate indeed, bred high and not worth a Drachma, I doubt
that handsome Face will tempt you to make the best on't Ariana, and ra∣ther
than live poorly Sacrifice thy virtue.



Think better of me, I'll die first.



Why, that's well said, as for my Wife, she I fear, has learnt her Trade
already.



Why must I suffer all these unkind suspicions?



Nay, I forgive thee, be it how it will, and thou shan't hear of it a∣ny
more from me.



Shall we go and intercede with these cruel Men.



I kneel, and beg, and pray as long as I can speak for my poor Fa∣ther.



Ay, you are wondrous kind.



Come, let us try our power.



Hold, ye Fools, did ye ever know or hear of an Italian Priest let go
his prey; no, no, my long hoarded Wealth is got into Hucksters hands, I may
e'en bid farewell to all my possessions.



Oh, Gervatio, my Fo•s I know are still innexorable, and my ruin resolved.


Yonder they are Nuckle deep in Sweet-meats, and have the best Wines
the world affords before 'em, yet I perceive no signs of mollifying: My Lord,
I would in private tell your Lordship what I have thought on.



If you please, Madam, we'll in and do all we can wish for my •a∣•her's
deliverance.










(Looking sorrowfull upon one another.







But who may I thank for all this, who was at the bottom of the
blind Contrivance that has •uined me.



And pray who would have thought a dead Saint would have distur∣•••
himself with telling tales.



Ah, I rather fear 'twas living Devils, 'tis no matter, I have resolved in
〈◊〉 Afflictions to submit to every thing, and neither quarrel nor complain,
•hough I discover thee and the Wife of my Bosom, two Serpents.



A resigning Will is a great blessing; for my own part, I am sure
the Innocence of a Dove is upon me, towards your Honour, even at this time,
when you are suspecting me, my poor Brain is in Labour for your good.



There's neither help nor hope remain.



Yet we may make the best of a bad Market.




My folly appears so plain, I am ashamed to apply my self to the Duke
〈◊〉 Senate.



I meant not so, that must be done he rea•ter, but you know my Lord,
these Harpies have not yet examined your Papers, I am sure they are tied• by
the Teeth for stirring one while: now if you dare trust me I can take out
Bonds and Mortgages, to the Sum of fifty thousand Crowns, get it setled first
upon my young Lady Ariana, yet not let her know it, then it can give her
no encouragement for disobedience.



I thank thy care, Gervatio, and will instantly put them into thy hands,
but, dost hear, let the Lawyer put in some doubtfull Clause, that if I shou'd
by any means escape, I may re-asume my Right and Title to it again.



I warrant you, my Lord, tho' her name secures it from the Law, she
shall be ne'er the better for it.







My Lord, that way you'll meet the Mo•bi•es.



(starting) My W•es distract me, I scarce know where my Closet is.






So, Gervatio has work'd him to his Ends, 'tis a lucky fellow I protest,
I hope Heaven will forgive me for consenting these tricks should be plaid with
my old Father, since my end is honest and for the sake of my Fidelio, who me∣rits
more than I can obtain for him.



Why, the Sparks did it rarely, but I am sorry Count Andrea has an
opportunity of seeing me again.



Pho, there's no harm in his sight, you should not fall too hastily from
one degree to another.


Here comes the Reverendissimo's, as Gervatio call'd them: Does the Wheel of
Affairs run smooth.


Upon Carpet ground my life, Gervatio has pick'd all the best of the Bonds,
Mortgages, &c. and is gone to an Eminent Lawyer with 'em.



What have ye done with my Father.



Made bold to imprison him in his own Closet, where he must remain
during our Royal Pleasure, and now, Madam, it rests wholly in your generous
breast to compleat my Happiness; Gervatio has secured the Chaplain ours, if
you consent not to what indeed makes me giddy with the vast Joy, giving
me your Beauteous self, this very moment some sinister accident in all pro∣bability
will ruin our designs.



Nay my dear Ariana you have gone too far now to shrink back, come
we'll be witnesses.



Well, Fidelio, I will venture on this B•g-bear-Marriage, but if thou shouldst
prove ungratefull after all my obligations, what punishment dost thou de∣serve.



To be despised by the World, proclaim'd a Coward; and what's yet
greater be hated by yo•.



Whilst I behold another's Happiness, my wretched self am banished for
ever from what my soul admires.



How do ye know 'tis for ever young Gentleman? I may out live my
Lord, then a brisk Widow weigh'd down with Bags, oh, 'tis an excellent
Cordial for the younger branch of a Family.



Ay there is comfort in that thought, if you wou'd in the mean time
allow me to see you; nothing less will preserve my life till the rich Cordial
〈◊〉.



To preserve my own I must deny that, for Gervatio tells me, my Lord
was growing up to great extremities; your forbearance of any sort of address,
• shall esteem as a proof of your affection, but whilst we are idly talking
here, Fidelio views us with impatient Eyes, and longs to have his Joys secu∣•ed;
the Marriage over, I must beg your Lordship to retire, I would not have
my Husband see you for the world.



Howe'er unwilling, those commanding Eyes tell me I must obey.




The Priest our hands, but Heaven our hearts shall join,
And endless raptures Crown me when I call thee mine.


Enter Lady Temptyouth, Lord Insulls, and Lucinda.



Well I never thought any Mortal cou'd have prevailed with me
to have parted with this dear Girl at so short warning, and without more
consideration, but your Lordships merit is irresistible.



I am blest in possessing her, punish me with the beastly Garb of the Vul∣gar,
if I would be unmarried to be an Emperour. This visit is in Triumph
to let proud Ariana see what an excelling Beauty has made me happy. O
my dear Cherubin, I can't but think how the Court of France will admire my
choice.



Shall you like that.



Covet it; I hope, Madam, you will rob the Ladies of all their Sparks, and
the whole Gallantry of the Court be made to you.



Nay, if your Lordship Glories in my Conquests, fear not, they shall
be numerous, I never fail'd when I endeavour'd it.




That's tr•e, for my hearts your prize, which, by the Muses, is a Tro∣phy
not to be despised.



Enter Gervatio, with Parchment in his hands.


Gervatio, where's the Ladies.



Faith, Madam, my young Lady is commiting Matrimony, I believe,
that sweet meat that's commonly attended with sowre sawce.



Is she so, much Joy I wish her.



I must to my old Master, get him to set his hand to these, and
then I think this head has brought wonders to pass.
(Exit Gerv.



Who is my Rival, some ill-drest Fellow I•ll lay my life on't.



Even that robust piece of rudeness that accosted your Lordship so
odly, Count Fidelio.



He, he, he, they are well matched, by the Muses, I believe neither of
'em understand the French way of dressing so well as the Groom of my Horses,
he, he, he.



Ariana always ridicul'd it, which has often broke Friendship between
us.



Heavens, if I had married her, what a world of labour wou'd it have
cost me to have modell'd her for the drawing room at Versailles, whilst you,
my dear, at first sight will appear the abstract of Perfection.



My Lord, you make me blush, but I shall now take unusual care in
my dress, that your Lordship may think me agreeable.



Happy man, happy man, as ever put on the yoke of Matrimony.





Ha, my Lord Insulls, your very humble Servant, this is too transporting
an hour to remember anger, now the dear Ariana's mine, our Quarrel dies.



I wish you Joy with her, I am provided as much to my satisfaction, be plea∣sed
to know the Duke's Neice for my Wife.



Lucinda, the Dukes Neice.



(Aside to Ariana) Hold dear Ariana, spoil not this day's Mirth
with a discovery, he'll know it soon enough; besides, I'll make thee, poor Girl,
worth more than that Fool deserve.



I beg your Pardon, I am dumb.
Madam, we must humour the greatness it seems.




With all my Heart.



This is their Venetian breeding to whisper half an hour: Poyson me, my
dear, if the very sight on't is not enough to spoil a Man.



Joy to your honour, I thought you wou'd not have ventured to have
changed your condition so suddenly.



Your Ladyship might consider the Man, and that would take your Won∣der
off.



Was ever any such Vanity.







Then you say you've obtained I may walk about my House till fur∣ther
order.







(•ees the Company) Heyday, who h•ve we here, nothing but meeting
and revelling, this is a time indeed for Mirth!



Old Gentleman, I am married, but not to thy Daughter, and for that
r•a•on w•ll be merry in spire of thy b••d.



(Ariana kneeling) And I am married to her, and for that happiness
shall be for ever jo•full.



Tri•k'd, Ruin'd, Und•ne; hold, not ruin'd neither, he has •e'er a
〈◊〉, nor none he shall have.



Then I must interpose; if you have no Bowels for such a sweet young
Couple, I have had; my Lord Fideli•, here's the value of fifty thousand Crowns,
come, that will make a shift till the old man pops aside, or something better
happens.




Betray'd by 〈◊〉, I will run mad, I will grow distracted quick∣ly.



My Lord, if you did but see how ill such starts of passion suit your
age, sure you won'd forbear.



Think, my Lord, my want of fortune may be made up in tenderness
towards your Da•ghter, and duty towards your self.



Come, come, my Lord, the Senate, no doubt, when they see him
married to Arian•, will honour him with places of trust and profit, a rising
Man seldom wants a •and to help him higher.



Let me consider, all in this room have been my Foes, I think, eve∣ry
individual Person, for what cause, even because I have been a cross stingy
old Captious fellow, but henceforth I'll throw it away as fast as the best of
•e; Alas, I had forgot, I have nothing but Misfortunes, and am a wretched
Prisoner Cond•m•ed to Shame and Poverty.



All those afflictions I'll take off upon condition you'll forgive your
worthy Son and Daughter.



Do this, •nd we all are Friends.



Then my •ord, be satisfied, the Duke nor Senate know nothing of
your deceit, 'twas only a Contrivance of your humble Servant to oblige this
young Lord and my Charming Mistress.



Well, thou hast proved a great Rogue, but I'll keep my word.



Then I hope we shall not kneel again in vain.



No, take my Blessing, and as you prove, an Addition to her For∣tune.



I have all my heart 〈◊〉.



And my future life shall make amends for venturing once to disobey
my Father.



Now all's well, I hope the Musick I ordered will come that we
may conclude our Joys with a Dance.



By all means, let us have Musick that I may have the pleasure to see my
Lucinda trip like a Fairy.



My Lord, as this is a general Jubilee, I hope I shall partake it, and heart
burnings being laid aside we henceforth may live more quietly.



Yes, yes, according to your deportment, thou hast been! Uh, uh, but
I have promised to say no more.



Gervatio, I will always call thee Friend, and serve thee with my Life
and Fortunes.



Nor will I forget to esteem and reward thee.



I hope you will say I have proved a well-meaning man to all, and
my old Master forgive me.



Aye, aye, that I will for fear thou shouldst play me any more tricks.








Now let's in and taste a Glass of Wine, I want some comfort after all
my frights.
And may my Fate to each a warning give,
How they e'er love or practice to deceive;
For tho' they prosper and their Cheat's believ'd
With ease you see deceivers are deceiv'd,


