
At a distance: The Mufti and Mustapha appear.




HAste each Attendant to perform his several charge
With strictest diligence, and most observant care;
Burn the Sabaean Gums, and all those rich Perfumes
Where our great Master passes, till every Room
Smell sweet as Altars laden with Incense
To the Heathen Gods, spread the gay Persian Carpets
For his Royal Feet, and you to the Apartments fly
Of those Incloister'd Virgin Roses, the select and chosen
Beauties of the habitable World, bid 'em prepare,
Quick let 'em in all their brightest glories be array'd,
For their Sun, the Mighty Ibrahim approaches.


The Mufti and Mustapha come forward.


Now, by our Prophet, what's all this but gaudy Pageantry,
Ill acted Scenes of Pomp and show, instead of real greatness:
O my Friend it was not thus of old,
The great Forefathers of this degenerate Man,
Instead of treading on Persian Carpets,
Trod upon the Necks of Persian Kings:
Whilst now (curs'd reverse of time) softness and ease,
Flatterers and Women, fill alone our Monarch's Heart;
Women enough to undo the Universal World
Are here maintain'd, whole useless hundreds,
And with such a train of Pride and Luxury,
That Eyes before ne'er saw, nor can endless words describe:


Wou'd you believe it? the Vultures deckt in Painted Plumes,
So eager are for their vain trappings,
That soon as a Merchant Ship salutes the Port,
His Goods are seiz'd, and brought to the Seraglio

Without Account, Value, or Justice, yet at this
The Pander Visier winks, whilst the poor Owner
Waits in vain for Answer or Redress.



Most just Observer, as well as Teacher of our Laws,
By me in Friendship like a Brother lov'd,
In counsel like a Father honour'd,
That what you have said is most undoubted truth,
The Impartial World must own. But these complaints
Alas, avail not, our Lord hates us his faithful Servants,
And whatever we shou'd offer, wou'd certainly despise.



You are too good, my Must. to be a Favourite here,
Though so long Married to the Royal Sister of our Emperour;
Nay, in this base Court, your Son, the God-like Amurat,

But coldly is receiv'd, because his wondrous Youth
Has so far out-strip'd their sloathful Age 
O! Pity! that the fairest branch of all the Ottoman Race,

•prung from a Female Root; yet I swear
Were he Lord of all that our Tyrannick Master holds,
I cou'd not esteem him more, or love him better.
Few Kings his Courage e'er obtain'd, or Vertues;
O 'tis Nobler far a Crown to Merit, than a Crown
To wear.



Happy's my Son in such a Patron,
Who never ceases to oblige; I know your kind Attendance
Now is on his behalf, to speak his Actions
In the Sultans Ear, so as may obtain his Royal favour.



It is indeed my chief design 
But oh! Manly Vertue, Courage unequall'd,
Fortitude, and all those Graces that adorn
The glorious Amurat, are truths displeasing
To our Ibrahim, whose soft Soul destructive
Beauty charms into a sleep too sound
For the Report of Noble Deeds to wake.



The Visier is the Minion
Hangs the darling of his heart,
And with ill Counsel poysons
Every design that tends towards Vertue.



Then that vile Woman, to whom
He hath given the sweet Name
Of Sheker Para, she, with the Visier,
Joins to ruin Ibrahim 




Whilst he, contrary to our Countries Laws,
Exposes her to publick view, lets her converse


With Visier, Bashaws, or whom she pleases.



But that I have a Daughter,
Whose early Vertue and sincere Obedience,
Ties my Soul to dote upon:
I for my Countries sake wou'd Curse the Sex.







No more, the Emperours Guards appear,
And see the Visier, and the Woman at his Elbow.






I say the Bashaw's Treason is plain,
Therefore Morat, attend him with the Bow-string,
And my fatal Order that without a murmur
He surrender Life for his Ill-gotten Wealth.
'Tis thine, my faithful, vigilant Azema.




O sacred Sir, whose Justice is Divine,
And 'twould be Impious to affirm
The Bashaw of Damascus hath one Grain of Innocence;
Yet let me beg you wou'd hold that bounteous hand,
The only Wealth I covet is to be my Sultans Slave.
Besides, I have many Enemies, and these high favours
Will I fear create me more.



Who dares to be thy Enemy? No, Visier,
Whilst I protect thee, Kings shall for thy Friendship sue;
And let thy Foes remember what I commanded last.



O let me throw my self beneath your Royal Feet,
And kissing your honour'd Robes, disclose
The Adoration that my heart is full of.








Rise, good Azema! no more!



Great Sir, I have a Suit to you.



What is't, my Religious Councellor?



Not for my self, but one much more deserving,
Your Godlike General Amurat, who brings
Your Conquering Forces back from vanquisht Babylon,

Now lies Incamp'd near this Imperial City:
Next Spring, by your Commands, and his desires,
He goes to Candia, to punish that stubborn Town,
Which dares resist the Ottoman Armies that are Invincible.
By me he humbly prays your Royal License,
That this Winter he may remain
At his own Palace here in Constantinople.




I'll consider his desires but at this time
Let all, except my Eunuchs, and my Sheker Para,





Come, my loved Sheker, what hast thou prepar'd
To calm and tune my Soul, which these affairs
Have ruffled from its own Sphere of
Ease and Pleasure 



To charm my Monarch is the only study and
Business of your Slave, and to that end,
Twenty fair Virgins, whom yet your Eyes ne'er saw,
I have pick'd and chosen from a thousand,
And set in order for your view.



Thanks my good Girl, 'tis by these obliging turns
That thou secur'st the heart of Ibrahim.

Give me that grateful Mistress,
Who when her Lover, sated with that high
Luscious Feast, Enjoyment, she for his
Sickly Appetite
Generously prepares fresh Viands;
I but tast of them, my solid part,
My Friendship that remains with thee.



Now let each Ambitious Maid disclose the Gifts
Of Art and Nature, whether in Voice, or
Tuneful Motion the taking beauty lies;
With Emulation let it be practis'd o'er
To charm the Worlds great Lord.
The Scene draws and discovers the Ladies set in Order for the Sultans Choice, who takes out his Handkerchief, and walks round them; whilst Sheker Para talks to Achmet.




How different, Achmet, is this from the European stories;
I have read there, twenty Heroes for the Ladies
Burn and die, here twenty Ladies for the Hero.



It shows that Mankind maintains his Charter
Better here, yet loses sure the sweetness
Of submissive love; see, he seems sixt.



No the Handkerchief is not dropt yet,
And she's left to use her own.



Now 'tis resolved 




Oh Achmet! O my faithful Slave!
If e'er thou lov'st thy generous Mistress
Who has from nothing raised thee
And pla•'d thee in the highest Orb that thou canst move
For wanting Manhood, though thy Soul's all God-like,
Yet thou canst not rise to greater honours,
Help me now; thou know'st my raging fires
How Passion like a Vultur preys upon my heart,
And the hot flames of love drink up my Spirits,


All this, I say, thou know'st, and yet bringst No
Remedy.



True, when these Convulsive Fits are on ye,
I from your ravings learn you love the General Amurat,

Nor have I been unmindful, even of those 
Imperfect hints;
But the Physician that pretends to administer a Cure,
Must each particular of the Distemper know.



O! I have told thee, o'er and o'er.
Repetition wrecks my Soul 
Yet thou shalt hear't again,
Full well thou know'st the Sultan gives me greater Privilege
Than ever Woman had in the Ottoman Court;
That has undone me, for there I have seen
This Robber of my rest, this cruel charming Amurat.




Knows he his Happyness?



Yes, Yes, for I have stole a thousand burning Glances,
And sent them to his heart
Besides sweet herbs, and Amorous Flowers
(Those Hieroglyphicks, and Emblems of our Countrys love)
In Boxes wrought with gold and set in Jewels
Of unequall'd value, he hath oft received;
Yet still he Ignorance pretends, nor meets my Eyes
But turns his own another way 
Or else looks guilty down.



What stoick vertue rules in his cold Icy Veins,
And gives him power to resist those Eyes?
Or has another gain'd his heart?



Cou'd I find out that, revenge wou'd take the place
Of Injur'd Love, and I shou'd weep no more;
Revenge, sweet Revenge, Injuries, Antidote,
Wronged Womens darling Joy 
The Emperour thinks perhaps,
Because I share him with a hundred Rivals
My Nature's tame. No, No!
We easily give what we despise
But shou'd another be ador'd by my Amurat

Whilst neglected I despair,
How wou'd I wrack her, how glut me
With the ruine of their Loves, and them!



This I have observ'd, that since his Incamping near
He often in disguise repairs to this great Town;
But whether Ambition or Love bring him, I know
Not, for I cou'd never learn his Counsels.



That, de•.. Achmet, be thy future care,
And name thy own reward. But how canst thou effect it,
Hath thy prolifick brain yet laid a form?




You know our Princes for State
Are still attended by their Mutes, who
Follow into all their Privacies
As being unable to divulge them; one of these
Is near my Stature.
Him will I draw aside, knock out his brains,
And in his habit watch the Princes Motions.




The time draws near to quench these raging fires,
In full possession of my fierce desires;
Or else the ungrateful object I'll destroy,
Which rob'd my Nights of rest, my Days of Joy.








THis is not sure that Amurat

Who foremost scaled the Walls of Babylon,

And cry'd aloud, Come on, who fears to die,
Deserves it yet at a Lettet now pauses,
Stops, turns pale, and seems to grow upon the
Earth he treads.



Thou art no judge, my Friend, you never loved,
Nor sure none ever loved like me,
If I acquir'd glory, 'twas for Morena's sake
That she might not despise me 
Nor have I more to do if she is lost.



You terrify your self with groundless fears,
Nor can I from the Mufti's Letter
Discern a danger threatning towards your love



Oh Solyman! forgive the frailty of your Friend,
Forgive the follies that Imperious love creates,
Here the Mufti writes, that on earnest business
He craves my presence, if he hath discover'd
The Adoration that I pay his beauteous Daughter,
And then forbid it, how lost a thing is Amurat,

For I know well, though her poor Slave shou'd suffer
A thousand wracks, she'd tread the rigid paths of Duty,
And let me die, rather than forfeit her obedience.



The Guard our Country lays on that fair charming Sex
Causes my wonder, how you have lov'd thus long conceal'd.



Kind Heav'n who saw my faithful suffering heart,
In pity thus disposed it, a trusty Slave at the


Transporting hours of silent Night still gave
Me admittance
To a Garden, which her Apartment overlook'd,
There, at that awful distance, did I Kneel,
Sent up my Vows with such an ardent zeal
Till at length I melted the heart of my fair
Listening Goddess;
And she from thence, as from an upper Orb of bliss
Sent down sweet words, and answering sighs,
The long expected Manna, for which with such
An Eagerness,
I had prayed Ah Souldier! cou'd I impart
But one grain of this fierce passion which invades
My Soul, to thee; you no more wou'd wonder
If I almost Conquer'd Impossibilities to see Morena

Mark, how the flushing joy leaps to my Cheeks,
Oh! if her very name causes such boundings in my blood,
What wou'd her sight, what to press her in my Arms,
And tast her rosy Lips! excess of Joy wou'd work
The Effects of grief; and I shou'd fall a Victim
At her feet.



Where Heaven gives the greatest hearts
We still the greatest Passions find,
And 'tis the brave alone love most and best.



My Dear Indulgent Friend, farewel,
At the usual Rendezvouz I'll be
Within few hours; and we'll return
Together to the Camp.



Prosperity attend your Wishes.






Welcome Noble Youth, you're most welcome here,
Nor is your request forgot, though not obtain'd,
For your appearing publickly.



Where shall I pay my duty first?
Or which way Kneel? each is a Father,
And each too good for Amurat.




Most sure my Son, you never can
Enough acknowledge the bounties
Of this Reverend Man; whose early care
Shelter'd thy tender youth 
From the rough Blasts of Tyranny
And Faction, and by his Eloquence
Still render'd thee as now thou standest,
Favourite to the Prince, and People.



My Friends, ye over-rate my Endeavours
To serve, and kindly take the will where power is wanting.
No, 'tis not I, 'tis our great Master, to whom
Half the Earth bows down their servile Necks:
Who, with one Almighty nod, can give a little World
Away, 'tis he shou'd Amurat reward, and bestow
A Kingdom, as his Valour due; yet lovely
Royal Warrior, if I have rightly found
The secret of thy heart, there is a present
In my power, which equal to a Crown you'll prize.









Come forth, Morena, my Ages Darling,
And my hearts delight; Joy of my Eyes,
Lov'd object of all my Earthly hopes,
Lend me thy hand, and smile upon thy Father
When he gives thee to thy Wishes.




Thou transporting Image that dances thus
Before my dazled Eyes, art thou real?
Oh! that at the emptying half my Veins,
I were convinc'd this is no Dream.



I saw your secret Love, watch'd the kindling fires,
And blest 'em as they sprang. Had I disapprov'd
They had been prevented e'er risen to a mutual flame,
But take her, Son, and Eternal Blessings Crown ye both.



He is already blest, what Monarch wou'd not forego
An universal sway for such a charming Maid?



Speak Goddess, speak! Angel, speak!
Let your sweet Voice confirm my Happiness,
That my beating heart may force its passage
Through my Breast, and fly to yours!




O Amurat! spare my Tongue and Cheeks
The shame of owning what my Soul is full of;
And by my past Love, judge my present Joy!



Thy future Misery I can read.



'Tis so, and I am blest above all humane kind:
Reign, reign, ye unenvy'd Monarchs!
Fight for this Dunghil Earth, and let
The blood of thousand thousand Wretches,
Whom daily your Ambition Sacrifices,
Lie he•vy on your guilty heads,
Whil•t I, blest with this fair Heaven of Innocence,
This matchless, lovely, charming Creature,
More Worth than Indies joyn'd to Indies;

Than all the Sun e'er sees: am Happier


Than a fancy'd God.



Cease these transports, my lov'd Lord,
Least fate grow angry at our Joys Excess,
And Dash them with Eternal Woes.



Make hast, my Son, in your return
To the Camp, for fear the Emperour
Shou'd Discover our private meeting.
Within few days,
You will return with his Permission,
And from my Arms, receive the lov'd Morena






Oh Morena! my Morena, Now
Permit me to approach, and swear
Upon thy snowy bosom, how much
I love thee, 〈◊〉 with wa•m sighs
I've thaw'd thy Virgin Icy Heart,
And made it burn like mine.



What Maid can hear, and be unmov'd,
The M•n she loves talk at this charming rate;
But Oh! I've read, that Men are all by Nature
False; and this dear pleasing tale of love,
To which 〈◊◊〉 with such rapture,
Will hereafter be, perhaps, Word for Word
Repeated to another.




No, here kneeling in the Face of Heaven
I swear, that though our Law allows Plurality of Wives
And Mistresses, yet I will never practise it;
May Dishonour wrap my head with shame
Instead of Laurels; may I be beaten
Through the Army I command, and branded for a Coward,
When I admit another Love i to my Bed or Bosom;
Let our great Master be Spectator of my Infamy,
And after that let me live.



Hold, my dear Lord, sain wou'd I say something too
To answer all this wondrous love,
Were there a Man Valiant, good like my Amurat,

And greater 〈◊〉 our mighty Sultan, yet wou'd I
Be 〈◊〉•nd pieces, rather than
Break 〈◊〉•ted Faith.




〈◊〉•ore my Life, what need of Oaths
When 〈◊〉 Cements our Hearts,
O! let me tast a parting Kiss,
The sweet memory of which
Win wing my 〈◊〉 return.



What •ean these tremblings here?
Why come these sighs uncall'd?


I know I think I know
You wonnot break your Vow.



Shall I swear again,
Never yet closer to thy heart.
By all these Virgin favours, never.
Here I set up my rest, and plant my Endless Joys
On this fair work of Nature;
When thou was't form'd, curious Heaven
Smil'd at the Exact Creation,
And every power was pleas'd. Oh! I am fix'd
For ever, till glory force me from thy Arms,
Then in all the Hazards of tempestuous War,
Thou, the Auspicious Star that I'll invoke,

Morena's Name shall guide my Sword to Conquest,
And after those Laborious Toils, eager and longing
For my bliss, the Laurels I have gain'd,
At thy feet I'll lay, Crown'd with thy love
And reigning in thy heart;
Such Raptures my transported Soul will seize,
I here shall find our Mahomet's Paradise.






Now is fate at work for me:

Achmet the busy Engine, that darling useful Eunuch,
Close as his genius traces my Hero's secret steps,
And on his Discovery my tortur'd Life depends.
If Amurat's aspiring Soul is only full of Plots
To raise him higher, sixt above the Visiers Power,
And faster in our Empires Honours, I am happy,
For I can further his Ambition; and he in gratitude
Must pay me back with Love, but Oh! I fear
The Victorious Prince full of charms, and blooming youth,
Is rather on the chase of Beauty, then he •btains
The glorious quarry, for though cast in a Coelestial Mould
How cou'd a Nymph Divine resist him?



Madam whilst you talk as if in dreams
Of Heavenly, and Imaginary Beauty,
You forget your own; the Prince I dare
Presume to a•irm, fears to offer, doubting,
What he wishes, your Encouragement, and
Dreading our Sultan. You, Madam, know
'Tis safer far Razing Imperial Cities
Than aiming at a Mistress possess'd,
And valu'd by the mighty Ibrahim.




True, Mirva, I have charm'd the wandring God
More variable than the Heathens Jove,



He darts but like a falling Star upon
The yielding fair, dissolves, and then
To her is seen no more; yet his Soul
Is rivetted to mine, hangs on the Musick
Of my tongue, nay late at my request
For the first blossoms of the early year, he gave
The obliging donor, the rich Kingdom of Natolia:

I look down on the Sultana Queens, despise
Their Pregnancy, and want of power.



The Astonish'd World sees your amazing height,
And justly pays to you their Adoration.



Ah Flatterer, to what hast thou betray'd me,
Whilst my boasting tongue swells with this
Vain story; my trembling foolish loving heart
Beats a sad Alarm, and presages all my hopes destroyed.
Enter Achmet, in a Mutes Habit.
Ha! Achmet, thy dress, thy looks, thy hast,
Discover thy Faith and Diligence Oh
Quickly ease my tortur'd Soul!



Madam, your last and Chief desire was
To see the Prince: if that's Effected
You must not stay to hear what I have learnt;
He passes this moment through the remotest Gallery
That leads towards the Bosphorus, there
I suppose his Galley waits him, this Key
Shortens your walk, and you may
Meet him in the open space.



Fly Achmet, to my Cabinet, and shift thee there
Then wait till my return 
I dare not ask thee is he a Lover?



Madam, he is; if you stay to hear more
You cannot see him.



Yes, I will see him; though ten thousand's ruine
Hung upon the fatal Interview!





to one Attend. See here abouts for Solyman.


Curst accident how shall I avoid her.



Ha! Mirva? is not that our Coelebrated General?



Doubtless, Madam, his very motion shews him
He cannot shroud his Glories.



Excuse me Ladies; a business
Relating only to my self, call'd me for some
Moments hither, without our Lords Permission.



And is this the way we receive our Conquerours?


Old Rome granted Ovations Triumphs
To such exalted Vertue, drawn in the gaudy Chariot
The Noble warriors march'd a long, kindling
In the bright gazing Virgins loves soft fires,
And in the wandring youths Wars sierce
Martial Heats, if through our crowded streets
Mounted high on Persian ruines,
Successful Amurat were to pass (Pardon
My blushes) when I say I think not Rome's
Fam'd Caesar, or her darling Pompey, cou'd
Be more admir'd, esteem'd, or lov'd.



When a Lady praises, I am Dumb.
Shou'd a Man say this, I must call it
Flattery, and I'll resent it.



Fames Trumpet blows aloud, I
Catch but the Echo, and repeat it faintly,
Yet I cou'd wish my self an Emulator
In your glory, a Man, your Companion
In the War, for something I wou'd do
To gain your Friendship; prevent
The lifted Arm of fate, and in my Breast
Receive some wound design'd for you.



War, with its rough Idea, ought not Madam,
To Disturb your gentler mind, by varying
Nature order'd the sweet mansion of love
And soft desires.



But Almighty Nature sometimes sills
Our Souls with both: as I Ambitious
Look up to War, so you methinks,
Too Godlike Hero, might look down to love.



'Tis looking upwards, Madam, surely
When we think of love; for beauty
The resemblance bears of Heaven,
Love is a pleasing Theme, but I must
Indulge my Ears no longer, least
I forget my Duty, which in my swift
Return's exprest.




Fly not with such unwelcome hast.
If you are pleased with any thing
That I can say, I'll take care for
Your excuse, or stay.



Madam, I have left the Army without
Their necessary Orders, I cannot now
Accept your offer'd favour.



Let Confusion be Instead of Order
If your heart's like mine; for mine is all
Tumultuous, Oh General!


A we me not with thy blushes,
For I have lov'd thee long You
Perhaps despise the Jewel, because 'tis offer'd,
But know Visier Bashaws, the greatest
Of our Port, in vain have beg'd a smile.



To the greatest in the Port, and World;
Your smiles are due, and I injure him
When I hear this. Farewel.





Keep down, thou swelling Heart!
Or higher rise, that I may tear
Thee with my teeth! Mirva!

Break all the flattering Mirrors!
Let me ne'er behold this rejected Face again!
Have I seen Scepter'd Slaves kneeling
At my feet, forgetting they were Kings,
Forgetful of their Gods, calling alone on me;
Passing whole days and hours as if measur'd
With a Moments Sand, and now refus'd
By a Curst Beardless Boy! my Arms too
Open'd, all my Charms laid forth! (for
The Joys of Love are double, when our
Sex desires) heedless and cold he flew
From my Embrace; swift as I will do
To form his ruine Achmet! I come!
'Tis he must raise this raging Tempest higher,
Though cold to me, his Bosom's sure on fire.









ENough, Oh Achmet! Hold! for I can bear no more,
And yet the Inquisitive Soul, set on mischief,
And bent for ruine, hangs on the fatal story,
Though every Period gives me Death.
 Was my Curst Rival Fair?
For of her Beauty, you have nothing said;
Or else I left that part unheeded.



Fair! not opening Flowers,
Not the first streaks of rising Day,
Not Painted Angels are half so Charming!
Eternal smiles still Grace her Cheeks,
And Majesty her Eyes; a Thrilling Musick


Is in her Voice; which touches every vital,
And teaches hearts to dance.



I have it now! Her Beauty then be her destruction;
But Creat Talkers seldom Act, and mighty words
Are mighty nothings; like the Crackling Thunder,
Which makes Women fear but seldom harms:
'Tis the thinking Mind that in her own dark Cell
Revolves, and then performs 
Where's the Sultan and the Visier?



The Sultan's retir'd to his Repose;
The Visier in his Apartment alone.



Faithful Achmet! take this Jewel 
And think thy wretched Mistress loves thee,
Though her thoughts are now too full
To Express it 
Thrown, like a neglected Flower from the Bosom,
Where I wou'd have flourished,
How quickly shall I fade! Yet 
With the First Angels Expell'd I'll try
To draw Morena down, that Saint above,
To my black Region of Despair!



Though she has Charms, wou'd stop the fury
Of our Barbarous Troops, when they take
A Christian Town; yet I cou'd flea her lovely Face
With my Keen Dagger; extinguish those
Shining Lights, her Eyes, to Revenge my Patroness!




Of thy Vow'd Constancy, I'll tryal make;
And thou shalt suffer, for thy Lovers sake!
If Amurat Thou Lovest to that degree,
My sweet Revenge will then compleated be;
For I'll take care to spoil the Worshipt Shrine,
And tear Thy Heart, as thou hast tortur'd mine!

The Visier sitting by a Table, whereon lie Books of Account, Riser.


What is't to amass these mighty sums of Wealth,
To be daily crowded with presents from European Kings,
To Command on Land, and Sea, next to our Lord,
Whilst yet I stand unsafe between these Rocks
Of Regulating the People, and a Tyrant Prince!
All those bitter curses which they dare not shoot
At Ibrahim, fall thick on me, the Mufti,

And Mustapha, that Aga of the Janizaries,

Are two I hate, the first, because
Like other Churchmen, instead of Prayers,
He studies Politicks; in vain they Preach
Humility, and teach us to look up for Crowns above:


When we behold them fix'd on these below,
And more ambitious than the Kings that wear 'em.
The Aga's Son, that hot-brain'd Youth, Amurat,

Who dares fight, and therefore scorns to bow,
Or seek my favour: These have censur'd me,
And on these I'll be reveng'd 




On whom is't thou art studying revenge,
Old Statesman! would'st thou have it bitter,
Deep and secure; take a Woman with thee!
 Or Bloody, as thy remorseless Heart can frame,
Still take a Woman's Counsel! But 
Say, Azem, who is mark'd for Vengeance?



To you, I think, I may disclose For
All your Foes are mine, and mine are yours 
The Mufti and Mustapha look awry on our Actions,
Sowing Sedition instead of wholsome Doctrine.



By Heaven! The very same these are,
Those I wou'd destroy And for that purpose
Sought you now I've laid a Train 
Which wants but your assistance to o'erthrow 'em all.



Name it, fair Charmer, quickly!



This old Crafty Priest conceals a Daughter,
Whose Beauty, I am told, without the help of Flattery,
(Excels her Sex) to Ibrahim.

The Charming wonders I'll relate!
And set his Amorous Soul on Fire.



Hold Madam! have you consider'd what you say?
 Is this the vow'd Revenge to make
His Daughter a Sultana Queen?



Short Sighted Politician! 
Had he design'd her for our Lord, why was she
Thus close conceal'd? Besides; I know
The Mufti hates our Licentious Emperour; his late
Attempt upon the Relict of Morat;

His despising all his Queens when once enjoy'd;
Three Sons already bless the Imperial Line,
And make succession sure. Therefore
Shou'd her Womb prove fertil; the Royal Innocents
Are only Born for Sacrifice these Reasons
Weigh'd as soon he'd give his Daughter
To a Brothel, as the Sultans Arms.



I yield. Let it but provoke him, or his Friends
To Murmur, and I'll strangle Rebellion in their Throats.



Come with me, and attend the Sultan;


As we go, I'll instruct you, how
This Contrivance reaches the Aga, and his Son,
Breaking all their Measures.



I wait upon you.





From troubl'd Dreams my tortur'd Fancy Starts:
Sleep, meant nature's refreshing Friend, sits heavy
On my Soul, as Death her most inveterate Foe.

Achmet! my faithful Boy! art thou there!




Dread Sir the Musick waits without!
Prepar'd by the Italian Masters Their Melody
May Chase these Melancholy Fumes away.





A SONG.IMperial Sultan, Hail,
To whom Great Kingdoms bow,
Whose Vast Dominion shall prevail O'er all below,
Commanding Woman here
An Humble Vassal shall appear,
No thunder in her Voice we prize,
Or Lightning in her Eyes,
When our T•rrestrial God draws near.
Vnder our Prophets Influ'nce Live,
While wondring Nations view
The deeds your Conquering Armies do
And Christians to be made your subjects strive.


A Dialogue Song. Suppos'd to be between an Eunuch Boy and a Virgin. Made for Boyn and Mrs. Crosse.

Written by Mr. D'URFEY.



FLY from my Sight, fly far away;
My Scorn thou'lt only purchase by thy Stay,
Away, Fond Fool, •way



Dear Angel no, no no no no,
Here on this Place I'll rooted grow.
Those Pretty Eyes have Charm'd me so:
I cannot Stir, I cannot go.



Thou Silly Creature, be advis'd
And do not stay to be despis'd,
By all my Actions thou may'st see
My Heart can spare no room for thee.



Why do'st thou hate me, Ah confess:
Thou sweet d•poser poser of my Joys?



The Reason is, I only guess,
By something in thy Face and Voice,
That thou art not made like other Boys.



Why, I can Kiss, and i can Play,
And tell a Thousand Pretty Tales;
And I can Sing the livelong Day;
If any other Talent fai s.



Boast not thy Musick, for I fear
That Singing Gift has cost thee dear,
Each warbling Linnet on the Tree
Has far a Better Fate than thee,
For they Lifes happy pleasures prove,
As they can Sing, so they can Love.





Why so can I:



No no, poor Boy.



And tast Love's Joy.



No no, poor Boy.







Pish pish Oh Fye!



Pray do but try?



No no, not 1.



I know, I know, no reason why?



You know, you know, you know You lye.







 Health to the Ruler of the World;
Success attend his Armies: whilst
His own happy Hours, with surprizing Joys
Are ever Crown'd; and long Life proves
A Seraphick Cordial, without Alloy or Dregs.



May all the mighty •brahims, and
Our Prophet's Foes fall b•neath his Feet;
And every Slave bear a Heart 
Obedient and Fond as mine



As Heaven hath given me a Despotick
And unbounded Power: so shall my Pleasures be.
But oh! the Earth's too little; and its Pleasures
Too few! I cannot keep my mind


In a continued Frame of Joy; tho' the Slaves
That serve me, vie with the stars for number!
Nay, tho' you, my Charming Mistress,
Whose very conceptions, like your Wit, Divine,
And like your Beauty pleasing: tho' you, I say,
Set your Invention 〈◊〉 the Wrack, for my Diversion;
Yet still, to day's like yesterday: tomorrow like to day.
And tho' my Paths lie all thro' Paradise:
Yet being still the self same Road, I grow uneasie.



Alas! Dread Sir! we've been mistaken;
In vain we've search'd Persia, and

Armenia, and Ransack'd Greece in vain;
Whilst •ithin your own Royal Gates
Of this Seraglio lives a Helene, whose.
Lovely Face strikes Envy dumb.
Late I saw her at the Baths;
But, Heavens, such a Creature
My astonish'd Eyes ne're view'd before.
A Skin clear as the upper Region.
Where Thickening Clouds can never mount:
And strow'd with Blushes, like the glorious space
Of Summer's setting Suns.
Her large Black Eyes shot Rays intermingl'd
With becoming Pride, and taking Sweetness.

The Sultan Rises hastily•



 Here in our Pallace impossible
 Of what Name? what Quality? 




Morena, only Daughter to the Musti But
For what cause conceal'd I am ignorant.



Had I Daughter, or Wife, whose Attractions
Cou'd draw the Sultan's Eyes; how quickly shou'd she be offer'd!



By Heaven! I'll see her, see her this very moment;
And if she answers your Description,
She's mine; first with Prayers, and Mildness
We'll proceed; but, if the surly Fool denies;
He soon shall find that Prayers are
Needless, when Power is Insinite.



I humbly beg to be excus'd, because
The Mufti bears me mortal bate.



Come thou, my Shekar, Para,

Thy Eloquence may be useful,
Tho' few perswasions sure will
Prevail, to make a Woman Reign.






Oh! Sir I saw the Sultan pass the Long Gallery.
That parts the Old Seraglio from the New;


And bend his steps directly hither He's 'een at my Heels!



What can this visit mean?
But I am arm'd with Innocence
And therefore know no fear.






Sacred Sir! I am amazed 
At these unwonted Honours; and if I fail
In the expressions of my Joy; let my
Confusion plead my excuse.



'Tis all well, and the visit meant in kindness:
I think when last I saw you,
You asked for Amurat's appearance at our Port 

Selim go thou to the Imperial Camp
And tell the Youth he shall be Welcome
There as soon as he pleases.



Let me kiss your Sacred Robe,
In thankfulness. Oh! mighty Sultan,

Who daigns thus to oblige his Vassals.




Mufti I hear thou hast a Daughter 
Why dost thou start, Old Man? 
If Fame may be believed thou need'st not shame
To own the Beautious Maid 
Send for her hither, for I will see her.



Oh! Pardon me Emperour, the Girl is most unfit
For you to see, Bred up in Cells, and Grotto's:
Tho so near a Court, wholly unacquainted with its Glories.
Heaven not Blessing me with a Male, I have try'd
To mend the Sex; and she, instead of (coining looks)
And learning little Arts to please, hath Read
Philosophy, History, those rough Studies:
And will appear like a neglected Villager
To those bright Beauties that attend the happy Port.



Ha! Is this our entertainment to be deny'd
What we desire! go some of you and fetch the Maid.





Tho' you are Lord of all, and may without controul
Command, yet Emperor, Remember,
My Daughter is no Slave, and our holy Law
Forbids that you should force the free,
Therefore if the unhappy Girl shou'd please,
And then refuse the offered Greatness; our Prophets Curse
Falls heavy, if you proceed to Violation.




Kneel Daughter, to the Commander of the World.



Take off her Veil by Heavens 



Raise thee from the Earth, and lift thy eyes to Glory,
A Crown will well become that Brow; Destiny
Hath mark'd thee for Command I see
Prevailing modesty is in her eyes;
The shining springs are full of tears 
I'll urge to farther now; but leave my

Sheker Para, to prepare for the Excelling honours
I de•n her; Mufti, come you with me, and let us
F•rther consult of this Important business.





Hail! Happy Maid! whom Fate has blest;
Whose Illustrious Eyes have caught
The Monarch of the Earth, Ibrahim!

Companion to the Sun, and Brother to the Stars!
His Sacred presence strikes an universal aw;
And next to the Immortals he is worshipt here.
What a long Train of glory is opening to your view,
Mounting on shining Thrones your beauties Merit!
Whilst thousand ready slaves stand watching
The Motions of your eyes, and e're you form
Your breath into command, 'tis done.



Cease Madam, you use your Eloquence in vain,
Menaces, Prayers, and Promises are lost on me.
Already I have Slaves, who wait on my desires,
And fulfil whatever I command: more is but super•uous;
No Crown I covet, but that which honour gives;
And my Ambition terminates in the contented paths
Of virtue. All your Efforts to alter me,
Like waves against a R•k, will dash themselves,
But •ir not my Foundation.



Why do ye view me with that haughty
Regarole•s Air, as if I were your Enemy?
When I 〈◊〉 long! 〈◊〉 your Friend.



Oh! mistake me not, If my looks
Carry a disdain, 'tis on the Crowns you 〈◊〉;
Not on you, Al•! you only can be my Friend;
And divert the Emperour from the pursuit
Of this short 〈◊◊〉; you do not know
The 〈◊◊〉 cause that will, I am sure,
Inspire me 〈◊〉 to dye than yield.



(aside) Too well I know it!
 If I cou'd 〈◊〉, tho' your desires are strange,
Yet, you have something so ingaging,
If I cou'd, I 〈◊〉, I wou'd.



Oh! 'tis greatly in your power 
Tell the Sultan you have discovered,


As you easily may a thousand Imperfections
That I am sickly, peevish, ill Bred, and
Of a hateful disposition. 



I cannot so deny your Excellencies;
But I will do my best, that you shall hear of this no more.



And now, fair Oratrix,

Who plead'st too well for such a cause;
Apply thy Rhetorick to Ibrahim;

And defend Morena's Life and Honour.



Rest secur'd, I am wholly yours,
Retire fair Innocence, for I see
This surprize has discomposed ye.
The Lively Red forsakes the charming Circle
Of your cheeks, and fainting paleness takes its place:
Retire, and let this Rancontre never trouble your repose.
Exit. Morena,
Poor easy Fool! blush Amurat

At thy ill choice! take me
For her Friend! yes to her destruction
I'll prove a constant one.
Achmet! 







I go to seek the Sultan, chuse some
Of the Eunuchs you command, and fetch

Morena to him, if you meet resistance,
Bring her by force: I saw Ibrahim

Fasten his Eyes upon her, and I know
The present will be welcome, now if delay
The roving desires of that unstedfast Prince
May fix elsewhere, and my designs be lost;
Make haste, her Father is not yet returned,
And you may do it with much ease



It shall be done e're you have time to think the consequence.





Revenge! how quick and lively are thy Joys?
Love is a sweetness, that but tasted cloys;
Love 〈◊〉 be fondled with a gentle hand
Revenge is God like all, and shows command.







〈◊〉 thou believe it Azema 

This crabbed Priest do's in •ffect
Deny his Daughter; curses he denounces
If I compel her will, and seems
To know 〈◊〉 prove un villing.



In this his disloyalty too plain appears
What other Grandee o'th' happy Port
But with open arms wou'd embrace the honour
And lay his Daughter prostrate at your Royal feet.



True, therefore we'll on and fathom
His Designs, the Maidens Beauty
Has inflam'd me who dares oppose
When I resolve Enjoyment?
Enter Shek. Par.

What News, my Sheker, hast thou brought her?



O no! with Roman Courage, and most
Unequall'd Resolution she repuls'd
Whatever I cou'd offer, nor wou'd a Diadem,
Or the Crown Imperial tempt her.



How comes the lovely Maid to bear a Heart
Thus stubborn! and look so sweetly mild?



'Tis her Father who has transferr'd
His own traiterous Principles to her,
Taught her early Disobedience
(That I live to speak it!)
Taught her to abhor your Royal Person.



But your Majesty now may mould her as you please,
Within a moment she'll be here;
I took the opportunity of her Fathers absence,
And order'd Achmet, with his Fellows, to bring
Her hither.



You have done well,
Shall my almighty Will
Which half the Universe obeys,
Without dispute be contradicted
By a Woman?



I hear 'em coming

Achmet brings Morena, who speaks entring.




Do ye drag me, Audacious Slaves
Am I to be thus used?



Madam, silence and awe best becomes
This place which the dread Majesty of all the World contains,
Nay our Law's so strict
That an outragious Noise near the Sacred presence
Is punish'd with immediate Death.



Death I despise as I do thee,
Who art not worth my answering,
But to mine and my Countreys Lord
I cast me with an obedient heart:
Daign Mighty Sultan to hear with Mercy
What your weeping Slave can say!
Far be it from your humble Handmaid
To refuse the vast Honour of your offer'd Love
Thro' pride Oh! no!


Holy binding vows are past already
And horrid imprecations, which if I break,
Distraction despair eternal ruine
Straight will seize me I know
Your royal heart is full of soft humanity
And God like Justice; you cannot take
Anothers right a thousand willing beau ties
VVill with Joy, Embrace those favours
I must ever fly 



If thou hast vow'd, I cancel it,
My Subjects are my slaves, who er'e
Pretends a right to what I desire
Is a Traytor, and shall so be punished
If thus perverse you must be forced
To your own happiness 
 Achmet 



O spare me Emperor! spare me!
And all my future life I'll spend
In prayers for Ibrahim!

Each morning as I bless the rising day
I'll cry aloud, this id'e seen no more,
Had not my God like Master heard:
I'll never eat, nor sleep, nor
Ought of life enjoy, before I have pray'd for
And after praised our Lord!




Achmet bear her to the royal bed.



Hold! yet a moment hold!
I have one thing more to say
As I have often heard my wretched Father tell
 When sierce Morat, your Predecessor
Doom'd his brothers, even all the young Princes
Of the Imperial race, to suddain death,
They dyed: my Father begged for you:
Begged till he prevail`d: Oh! if this merit ought
Punish my disobedience with Wracks with Gibbets,
With any thing but loss of honour!
Tear out my eyes, stab, mangle my face;
Till it grow horrible to Nature
And the amazed world gaze with terror,
Not delight: burn me! heap torture
Upon torture! and if I murmur a complaint
Fulfil the bitterst curse Release,
And bear me to your bed!



Speak Visier, he stands confounded.



Dread Sir, what stops your wishes?
This is nothing but a gust of Passion,
Plain Woman, her will is crost,


And so she raves! e're while you mourn'd
Your pleasures were too much alike;
Fate hath now obliged ye:
This beauteous Maid resists: and all
You ever had before, were willing.



And there may be a new unknown delight
To conquer all these struglings,
Something Poignant, that will relish Luxury 
Do as I Commanded 

1 of the Eunuchs.
Wou`d our worshipt Lord free this
Mourning Fair; Id'e search the
Earth's bounds, to find another,
That might please as well.



Taught by my Slave!
Take that, presuming fool.





What a horrid place is here!
My turn is next 

She catches hold of the Sultans naked Scimiter.


Let go rash Maid, 
Or I shall hurt thee.



Never, never, I'll leap, and
Fix it to my breast, while some kind God
That sees the anguish of my Soul
Shall help my weakness, and send it to my heart!



Some of you unlose her hold 



Then thus I quit it.
Draws it thro' her hands.
See Emperor, see, are these hands
Fit to clasp thee? judge by this,
My resolution death hath a
Thousand doors; Sure Morena, curst Morena

May find out one 



Slaves, why dally ye thus?
By Heaven rage is mixt with love,
And I am all on fire!
Drag her to yond Apartments!



Do Tyrant! but 'tis thy last of mischiefs
If thou dost not kill me 
With dishevell'd hair, torn Robes, and
These bloody hands, I'll run thro' all thy Guards
And! Camp, whilst my just complaints, compel rebellion!



Yet here! force her way!



I will not stir, sixt upon Earth,
I'll rend obdurate Heaven with piercing
Crys; till I have forced their mercy!
Help! help! open thou Earth to hide me!
Have my woes not weight enough to sink me


To the Center? at length 'tis come;
My spirits are decay'd, Oh Amurat!

Where art thou? and where (alas) am I?




She faints, convey her quickly in,
Your Majesty has
Will soon revive her.



Threatning Danger shall never bar my way,
I'll rush thro' all, and seize the trembling prey:
Risle her sweets, till sense is fully cloy'd;
Then take my turn to scorn what I've enjoy'd.






Enter Muft. and Mustap.



IN vain you sooth me with these promises,
I'll tear my sacred Vestments; make bare
My hoary head, and of these Janizaries

My self beg present Aid, was there but one
In all this mighty Empire, chast, and must
The Licentious Tyrant seize her?



I have not flatter'd ye the Janizaries

As one man, are bent to right your wrongs
A moment's patience before to morrow's Sun
The Seraglio's forc'd the Villain Visier
Torn, limb from limb, and the fair unfortunate restor'd
 Ha see where the lovely Mourner comes.




The Emperour hath sent your Daughter back,
You must tutor her better, teach her
A more complying Nature, then
Perhaps he may again receive her.



I lence Pandar! accurst by Heaven,
Hence! left (tho' 〈◊〉) with
My hands I throttle thee •ell
Thy ungrateful Master the saving
Of his life, is well rewarded 
 Tell him I thank him
And he shall hear it l•ud!









My poor Girl! 



Cease Daughter, cease to mourn!
Here are your Friends Friends
That will revenge ye 




Ruine, Despair, and Death's my Lot,



No Morena, No, thy Fame's secur'd!
And succeeding Ages shall as a Miracle
Relate thy Constancy, yes, injur'd fair,
To the last Periods of recording Time,
Thy fragrant Name will bless the World!
Thou, the brightest Star, that
Ever grac'd the East!



Answer me Prophet, Author of our Law,
What have I done, what horrid crimes committed,
That my aching Eyes are punishd
With this doleful sight!



The Grave will hide me, Sir!
Then you shall see this Wretch no more!



Live my belov'd unfortunate!
Let death and ruine fall upon
Those Feinds that thus have wrong'd thee.



The Visier, (my Father)
The Devil-Visier when my piercing prayers,
Seem'd to stop the lustful Sultan:
He blew again the hellish fire 
And with his poisonous breath
Urged the satal act. 



We'll drag the Infernal Dog thro' the City
While, in Howling, he surrender his hated life,
Amidst the Injuries and Curses of the People.
 Dear Friend, haste and encourage
Thy willing Janizaries! lead 'em
To force the Palace
For this accursed; I Authoriz'd
By Heaven will send a Summons to the cruel Emperour;
That he appear before our great Divan
And give account for this unexampl'd
Breach of our holy Law, the forcing of my Daughter.

Amurat, I know will instantly be here 
Come in, my Dear, and I will instruct
Thee to receive him 







Why dost thou sigh? my Son knows
The Heroick virtue of thy spotless Soul,


And will, I'm sure, to death adore thee.



Lend me your hands, for I am weak
And want support: let me look up
And thank remorsless Heaven
That I again behold the face of
Reverend goodness! for I,
(Alas) have been in Hell!






A Bridegroom's haste is in your steps,
And in your Eyes a Bridegroom's joy.
Now we've reach'd the happy place!



The Sultan received me with a Noble
Condescension, yet Skeker Para

That wretch, unworthy of her Sex,
Cast a malicious smile, and perplex'd me
With words I cannot comprehend,
But why do I employ a thought on the
Vile Creature, when I am so near
My own Heaven of Perfection?


Behold the blest Parent of my Love!
At length my Wishes are compleat,
I come, dear Sir, to pay my thankful
Vows, and receive the only valued Treasure
That the Earth contains 
How fares my Goddess?




 Young man I think th'Ambition
That fills thy veins, is only
How to serve thy Master well,
Nor wou'd offer'd Crowns tempt thee
To a Disloyal act 



My Father! to merit this discourse,
What have I done? by all my hopes
I swear shou'd Sultan Ibrahim

Send the Bow-string, Now, Now, when

Pleasure beats thick upon my heart,
And the transporting Joys of yielding Love
Are in my view; yet on my obedient knees
I'd fall; and whilst my breath cou'd form
It self to words; Dying bless the Emperour,
Oh! I know not whether I, the Sultan
Most Revere, or my Morena Love?



'Tis well: suppose then


This lov'd Morena•orn from her
Helpless aged Father's Arms dragg'd to
The presence of your honour'd Emperour,
Whilst his Cheeks glow with Lust 
His fiery Eyes dart on the frighted Maid,
His fatal resolution suppose
Her prayers, her tears her cryes,
Her wounding supplications all in vain,
Her dear hands in the Conflict cut and mangled,
Dying her white Arms in Crimson Gore,
The savage Ravisher twisling his
Iu the lovely Tresses of her hair,
Tearing it by the smarting Root,
Fixing her, by that upon the ground:
Then (horrour on horrour!)
On her breathless body perpetrate the fact.




Chilling Tremblings seize throughout,
And leave my heart as cold as Death:
Oh! Sir! why have you spoke this
Horrid supposition, with such an Emphasis?
 Suppose it true 
Not burning Bulls, not breaking Wheels,
Not all the Cruelties, Witty Tormentors
Cou'd practise with Fire, Water, Steel, or
Poison, wou'd equal half my Wracks.
The Scene draws, and discovers Morena upon the ground disorder'd as before.



Cast thy Eyes that way, and there behold
Thy wretched Fate and mine!



Oh! Friend! Is this the sight
I promis'd are these my
Expected Joys my Eyes!
Fix on the Object you have lov'd
Thus tenderly, and weep till you are blind!
Oh! cruel Emperour! have I for this
Thought toil a pleasure? watching
A delight? Held it a crime to groan
When hundred Aching Wounds were dress'd,
Because I had 'em in thy service?
 And am I thus rewarded? 



At this Scene the Souldier leaves my heart
And I feel the Woman in my Eyes!



Compassion is a grief of little note,


But I have Woes that tear my Lion heart,
And drink the gushing Blood!
 Speak lovely Mourner, speak 
To thy kneeling Slave; Hath Nature
Form'd a Monster, who durst with violence
Approach thy Snowy vertue? which
I with a Devotion pure as that we pay
To Heaven, have ever worship'd?



Oh Prince! No Tongue, no Language,
Not severest sorrow, whose broken accents
Were all made up of sighs, that rend the trembling
Heart which form'd 'em, can express Morena's sufferings,
Forc'd from my Heaven of Peace and Innocence,
Thro' what various Scenes of Woe I have passed?
Raging Seas, devouring Flames, and Pestilential Fires,
May be the work of chance; and Nobly born:
But mine's a Fate strips me of all Patience,
Even of the last, and dearest Comfort, Hope.
Oh! 'tis my Curse that sense remains,
The Dire Vision is ever present with me
On this side ghastly Murder, on that
Rapine dress'd in Pomp, and Power,
Ruinous resistless Power! my head
Grows giddy with the Loath'd Reflection,
Lead me, my Zaida, to Darkness, solid,
Thick, substantial Darkness, where
Not one Ray of the all-cheering Light
May peep upon me, prepare an Opiate Draught
To lull my sorrows, or some desperate compound
That may turn my brain 



Heaven calm these sad disquiets, and •ve
The Best of Women Peace 



Your Pardon, Reverend Sir, and thine I ask
Thou illustrious Figure of unseign'd Despair,
I am not used to rage, my Nature ever gentle
At but the reading of a dismal story,
My Eyes wou'd flow, my Heart wou'd rise,
And sympathetick sorrow reign.
But now I am by wrongs, a Fury grown
Holy Prophet, is it a sin to heave these
Bleeding bands to thee, and Amurat, for Justice?
Yes, yes, it is, for Justice leads to sharp revenge
That to horrid Mischiefs away away 
Give me Death, Distraction, any thing, but Thought.





Revenge thee! yes we'll set
This Royal City in a blaze, till its bright
Flames mount high as thy Chastity,
And reach at Heaven! tear up
The Foundation of this Imperial Nest
Of Luxury; and in its Ruines overwhelm
The World I wilt
Thou not assui•e, Friend?



Whi• I wear this Nor
Shall I fear to purge the contagious
Veins of Majesty in such a cause.



'Tis not by Raving we accomplish
Our Designs; if, for my constant
Friendship, I have ought deserv'd,
In our honourable proceedings you will joyn:
Come with me to your Father who is now consulting
With the Officers there I'll inform ye
Who were the hateful Wretches, that set
The Sultan on to do this fatal mischief.



I go Solyman, fly to the Camp,
And bring from thence my select Troops,
I'll take care at Night to give you safe admittance;
Oh World! uncertain always, false, and vain,
Thro' mighty Toils our wishes we obtain.
And hard we struggle for the expected gain:
But when in view o'th' end of all our care,
Some awkard Fate hurls back to deep Despair.
Thus to th' Abyss, in sight of Heaven, I fall.
And lose my Love, my Honour, Life and all.
Ex•.
Enter Ibrahim, the Visier, Sheker Para, Achmet, who seems talking to the Sultan.



He threatned me with Death,
And said, he'd tell his Wrongs aloud,
Till Neighbouring Nations heard 'em.







How long shall the Imperial Race,
Whilst the mistaken World deems them
Absolute, be subject to the crafty
Pri•sthood? Do at once,
A just bold act, and set by
Your Example the great Successors free,
Send the Executing Mutes, and
Strangle this Ambitious Mufti.




Strangle the Mufti! Oh horrour!



Why thou Viper, whom my breast
Has foster'd, till the rank poyson 
Hath made me all Infectious 
VVas it not you that urged
The cruel Rape I last committed?
By Heaven! The only deed that
Ever moved my Soul to a Repentance!
And dost thou now shrink back?
Thou whose face is stamp'd so plain
VVith Villain, every child may read it,
Canst thou draw thy Distorted features,
Into a look of pitty? and, as if Murder
VVere News, cry out, Oh Horror!
I tell thee, Visier, and mark it well,
Watch the first rising of Rebellion,
For should it grow too high; thou art
The fittest Sacrifice to attone the Popular Fury.



Sacred Sir, you cannot mean the
Cruel thing you say must
My Life pay for my sincere Obedience
To your Royal Will?




A Messenger from the Divan
Rudely presses to your Presence.









Sultan! the Mufti and the
Whole Divan Assembled, have sent me
To thee with the Mufti's Fatfa.
That you instantly appear to answer
The breach our Holy Law has suffered,
In violating Morena, A Free-born Maid.



Is then the Mufti the Dervises, and
All the canting Tribe together met
Hatching Treason, and brooding in
Their lov'd Element Rebellion?
Now every petty Priest struts,
Looks big; tells a long tale
Of grievances, Models Governments,
and Censures Kings let your
Ring leader know, that I despise
His Trayterous Summons, and
Trample it beneath my feet 
Yet, Hold thou art not fit


To bear a Message back from 

Ibrahim, who darest to bring him
Such a one; take hence the Villain,
And strange him immediately.







Away with him! 
Visier, Double our Guards, and
From the Army draw all, whose Loyalty
You think untained be Vigilant 
For on thy Life depends thy care 
Weep not, my Sheker Para 

We yet shall brave this S•orm 
By Heaven! 
I to the Last my glory will maintain,
Or, absolute I'll be, or, cease to Reig•

That easie King, whose People gives him Law,
Flatters himself with Majesty and awe;
The Royal Slave the daring rout commands,
And force his Scepter from his feeble Hands.










WHY Coward dost thou creep thus near me,
Still leaving my Orders 〈◊〉




Oh! Sacred Sir! The Mutinous 〈◊〉

Bar each Gate o'th' Palace, nor can I
Pass with Life!





Our woes redouble with the coming Night,
The Impe•us 〈◊〉 p•ur on us
Like a devouring Flood, whilst your
Faint-he•ted Guards s•rce dare Resist,
Aloud they curse the •fter, and
Unanimously swear his ruine. 



Poor trembling Wizard if thou hast
Raised a Storm 〈◊〉 thy Magick Po•er
To lay, it must over• thee 
Here thr•w to th• Ravenous Hunters
The Baited Prey; and let 'em gorge
Their revengefull 〈◊〉








Stop his mouth, and bear him off.





Cruel Lord! Wilt thou not hear me!




I, stand next the mark of fate!
Evil Councellors the plausible pretence
Of Rebels, colours their Treason 
But 'tis at Soveraign power they aim,
Nor will they cease, till they have bath'd
In Royal Gore; the Victim's seiz'd 
Hark how the Bloodhounds ring his Death!




Oh! That I were a Man to face
These Devils, and save my Lord!



Retire Dear Sir, to some more remote
Apartment, whilst I together draw
Your Eunuchs; all whom Prayers
Or Promises can engage, to save
Your precious Life, tho' I loose my own.



Faithful Achmet! I, who
But yesterday commanded Armies,
Whose numbers outstript Arithmetick,
And left them unaccountable:
Have now but one poor trusty slave
An Eunuch, who for his unhappy
Lord, will venture Life! 





Where is this Barbarous Prince 
I warrant Fellow-Souldiers; Hid
The cruel are still Effeminate:
There's scarce a Man left, that
Asserts his cause, I'll search him out,
And whilst my injur'd friend's preventing
The plunder o'th' City; do a deed,
At which his nicer vertue shrinks.


Ibrahim, and Sheker Para.


Flatterers, that curse of Courts have
Ruined me! thro' their false
Opticks, I view'd my greatness 
And when I thought my self a God;
Am more wretched than my meanest Slave:
Unregarded Now's the Frown, that
Mark't my foe for Slaughter; or the


Gracious smile which gave my kneeling
Supplicant, a Kingdom 
Dis•bey'd, forsaken, friendless, and alone!
Yet the inborn greatness of my Soul remains!
And I will dye with all my Majesty about me,
 Go wretched Woman Herd amongst
Thy Sex, and let that protect thee!



I will a while retire; watch this fear'd event,
And if you fall; boldly come forth and dye.







Eunuch! Pander! dar'st thou stop my way?
That for thy impudence that for the poor Morena!




O Sultan! our Prophet guard thee,
I can no more




What bold slave art thou, who
Throwing off the Sacred ties of Duty,
Allegiance, darst with offensive
Arms approach thy lawful Prince!




Id'e sooner serve a Russian Bear,
Whose inhuman paw, when I was
Most Assiduous, mark'd me still
With Indignation such a Monster
So unaccountable art thou!
Oh! Ibrahim! Didst thou but hear.
Thy long injur'd, and at length revolting
People, how they curse thee, what
A dire Catalogue of crimes repeat:
Hadst thou left one grain of Honour,
Thou wouldst turn thy wounded ears away!
And beg me use my Sword; but talk no more.



Traytors are ever loud 
And to colour their own detested sin
Rebellion; with impudence, and calumnies
Bespatter the Throne, they dare attack.



Was there a Slave throughout thy wide
Dominions, whom blind fate had cursed
With Wealth: His forfeit Head
Pay'd for his crime: Whilst his extorted
Treasure sill'd thy coffers, and supply'd
New Luxury. Did vertue Reign in
Any Man, a life Austere; or active Valour
Like our great Progenitors: Strait you,
And your Minious thought, this lookt


With a Reflecting Eye on your Debauches:
Dispatch'd the pious Wretch, and sent him
To his Friends above; then Women
You monopoliz'd let her be Wife
Or Virgin, fair as Heaven, or monstrous as Hell:
Witness your Armenian Mistress; all serv'd
As fuel to that consuming fire your Lust;
Nay, even the Relique of our late glorious
Emperour, was not free from your Attempt,
But that her Lion Resolution made your
Coward Heart shrink back.




Is there none to secure this Traitor?



I tell thee, Lost degenerate King,
There's not a Soul will move a Tongue
Or Finger, in thy Defence; thou standst
Forsook by Heaven, and Human Aid 
Think now upon the fair Morena!

And if thy heart of Adamant unmov'd
Cou'd hear an Angel pray; if the angry Powers
So •unish'd her spotless Innocence: What
Horrours must remain for thee; who bend'st
Beneath the weight of thousand thousand Ills?



Come on, thou Rebel! 
No Souldier sure thou art!
Thy Tongue's thy sharpest Weapon yet
If thou wer't; and did thy acts excel the
Foremost of my Royal Race; thy Ignoble
Tomb must blush to hold thee, the name of Rebel
Wou'd blot out the H•ro, and leave thy Fame
Detest'd, to the honest World; as thou
Hast Represented mine!



My injur'd Friend, and that unhappy Beauty
Whom thy Lust hast ruin'd, gives Iustice to
My Javelin's point, and sends it to thy heart!




'T has reach'd it too, nor am I far from thine.



Oh feeble Arm! Oh Amurat!


Cou'd I do no more for the•




I am no longer now the sport of Fate,
This Atom which our unseen Rulers
Thus alternately have tost, now will rest
For ever; my first best part of Life,
Even all my Youth, to D•geons, Dark
And Loathsom as my Grave, a jealous
Brother close confin'd: then slatter'd
A while with Empire, Commer like,


I made a glorious dreadful blaze;
Yet thanks to my Niggard Stars, I Prest
The golden fruit of Power, and Drank
The very Quintescence, the Vision
Was too full of Rapture long to last:
In a moment the g•y Scene is vanish'd,
And to my endless Prison, I in haste return.


Enter Amurat, who speaks to his followers Entering.


Sheath all your Swords, here
Let Murder cease; and whilst in sad complainings
I move my Royal Master's heart 
Let no rude breath offend him 
Ha! stretch'd on the sloor! 
My Friend! hast thou done this?




To higher Judges I am summon'd to appeal,
Where I reward or punishment shall find
For this act; which excessive friendship forc'd:
If thou in honour, as in valour still excell'st,
Forgive thy over-loving Friend: and with a sigh
Remember all my faults, and Death.




Ye inauspicious Planets! which at my birth.
Shot your intermingl'd Rays; and on my Infant
Head, dropt the poisonous Influence:
Oh! that I could curse ye from your Malignant
Spheres! Was ever such a Wretch as Amurat?

My Mistress Ravish'd, the cruel Ravisher
My Emperour's dead,
My Friend, the Author; and punish'd too with death!

En•er the Musti and Mustapha, and several Commanders.

See Fathers, see the fatal end of
Our Commotions!



'I was Heavens will, and therefore grieve no more;



All Eyes are sixt on you, nor doth the
Empire yield an hon•ur, which you may not claim.



Oh! mistake not the heart of Amurat!

Think not Ambition led me on! no;
Had not Love forc'd my backward Hand,
This Breast had been a Rampart to Guard.
The Life of Ibrahim; and my Sword
De•roy'd even you, my Father, had.
Ye a•empted it! On the
Illustrious Head of the young M•homet

Let's six the Imperial Crown• May


It be larger, and happier than his
Departed Fathers! and with Hearts,
From whence this Voice proceeds, Ring out
The Acclamation Long live Mahomet

The Fourth! Emperour of the true Believers!



Long live Mahomet the Fourth, &c.

Amurat our great Deliverer!



Bear the Body to the Royal Mosque, whilst I,
With Mustapha, wait on the Sultana Queens;
Dispel their fears, and cause the perturbed State
To reassume a Face serene.







Turn, Traitor, Turn! and here behold
Thy Fate! 'Twas J disclos'd the
Cloister'd Maid, and forc'd her on the King
Th•t good Turn I ow'd for your Disdain.
Then If you loved Morena, wreak
On me your Vengeance; and strike
Your Ponyard to my Heart!



There are things, which by Antipathy
We hate; and such wert ever thou.
The contaminated Blood shall never
Stain the Sword of Amurat.

Live! Detested Creature! Loaded
With Shame and Infamy! Be it
Thy Curse to live! whilst
Pointing Fingers, and busie Tongues
Proclaim thee, if thou appear'st, hunted
Through the City like a Beast of prey;
And shunn'd by all, whoever heard
The Name of Goodness!



Look back! and see! how vain thy Curses are!
Thus! I defie thy Malice!
(Stabs her sef.)
Oh! Ibrahim! if in the other World
The faithful Sheker can be useful:
Lo she comes Disdaining Life
When thou art gone!



Bear the polluted Wretch away,
Whist I seek my afflicted Fair:
And recount the Wonders Revenge has done.





Drest in these Robes of Innocence,
Fain wou'd I believe my Virgin Purity remains;


But oh! Memory the wretched'st Plague,
Still goads me with the bated Image of my wrong.
My Soul grows weary of its polluted Cage,
And longs to wing the upper Air, where
Uncorrupted Pureness dw•lls.
Enter Z•yda.

Come near, my Zayda, why dost thou
Tremble so? Oh! hadst thou known
The Horrours, thy poor Mistriss has,
Thou woud'st h•e left to fear!



Who 〈◊〉 express the Terrours of this dismal Night!
The mad 〈◊〉 aniz• up, and raging for Revenge,
Put private Broils upon the publick score,
Murder and Rapine, with •ury uncontroll'd
Rang through the City, and make the Devastation
Horrible, the mangled Visier they have
Piece-meal torn; nor has their Vengeance
Stopt here: The Life of the Empire, the Man
We worshipt like a God, for whom
We still were taught to pray; even
The mighty Ibrahim is no more!



Is Ibrahim dead? Oh Amurat!

I fear thou hast gone too far; and lest
Our Prophet, shou'd punish thy Disloyalty;
I will, of my self, an Offering make!

Morena, the unhappy cause of all these Woes;

Morena the Atonement 
Go to my Closet; bring from thence
The Golden Bowl This News
Has much •der'd me 
There is in that a soveraign Cordial!
Exit Zayda.

Look down ye Roman Ladies
Whose tracks of Virtue I with care,
Have followed Behold! a

T•kish Maid who to the last,
Your great Example imitates:
Scorts to survive when Honour's lost!
Enter Zayda with the Bowl.
I know my avenging Friends will instantly
Be here gay in their Purple Ruins, thinking to glad
My Soul with the fatal story; but like a sad Wrecth,
Whose loss is inepp•ble, I must never aim
At comfort more! Deeply I'll taste this precious Juice,


And seek that sound long sleep, where sorrow,
Tormenting care those restles• Anxieties
That keep in Dreams the mind awake, approach no more!






Hail my belov'd and charming fair!
Oh! I have bin, where Blood and Desolation Reign'd,
Where horror in a thousand shapes appeared:
But 'tis past: And I am arrived at the desired Land
Of Peace Thou the Dove-like Emblem, whose
Long'd for sight Calms the rough Tempests
Of my Soul, and tunes my Heart to Joy!



That thou hadst stay'd, some moments longer.



Why! My lov'd dear one!



I shame to cast my eyes towards thine
Wherewith such pleasure I was wont to steal
A glance, my Revenge is now compleat;
I know it, and am yet alive 






Death in the Person of my Friend!
Hath toucht my heart too near;
And now, to crown my misery,
Cruelly you talk of yours!




The wrongs that Tyrrannick Ibrahim

Had heap'd on the Sultana Queens
Causes 'em joyntly to rejoyce;
They call you their preserver,
To Amurat.
And send by me the Empire's Seal
With the Title of Prime Visier:

Begging you wou'd protect the Infant
King, whom you have so justly Rais'd.



All Honours, Titles, Glories, at the Feet
Of my Adored I lay, if she will bless me
With the sweets of Love, I am, what
They please, else nothing.



Can the great Amurat submit so low,
To talk of Fruition when 'tis past,
Or to his Arms receive pollution?



Name it no more! The Royal Blood
Of the ossender hath cleansed and washed out
Thy H•nours Stains, and white as thy


Robes, thy Innocence appears.
Shall I forsake the Christal Fountain,
Because a Rough-hewn Satyr there
Has quencht his Thirst? No! The
Spring, thy Virgin Mind was pure!



Talk on, methinks I taste of Heaven,
To hear thee! Let thy kind Breath
Proceed: Waft me from one Paradice
To another!



Distraction seize me! Either
My sight deceives me; or my Love
Looks exceeding pale; she Staggers too!
Help! Help! Remorsless Powers drive not
The Wretch you form'd to the Blasphemous
Sins Dispair a• utter!



My Daughter! what hast thou done!



Oh! my unhappy Mistriss!
I fear th•t fatal Cordial!



Invetera•e Stars! Now ye've stretcht
Your power to the last degree, and
Ye can curse no more!
Oh! Morena! more savage 
Than our Lord! for ever thou
Hast Robb'd my Life of Joy, depriv'd
My Eyes of Happiness; which, till
They close, must gaze on Thee!
What hath my Love deserv'd for such
A punishment? Morena! unkind!
Cruel! unkind!



My Father! draw near; forgive this
First last act of Disobedience!
You taught me. Sir, that Life no longer
Was a good, then a clear Frame attended it;
My Dishonour Rings through the Universe 
Pardon my quitting it! 
Now Amurat! To thee Here will I
Lean a Moment, where I thought to Raign
A whole contented Age I fear the Cordial
Will prove too strong! Antidote the Poison,
And let me live!



Thou shalt live! since this Barbarous
Climate has wrong'd such worth;
I'le Raise another Empire large as this,
And fix thee there! 



Fix me in thy Heart! more dear to me
Than gaudielt Thrones! Be that


The sacred Urn, where thy Morena rests;
Nor ever let the Face of newer brighter
Beauty drive her thence! 
Oh! Farewel! 




Oh! speak! speak once again! 
Open those rosy Doors! Dart from
The fairest Eyes that ever blest the World,
One Ray though 'tis a dying one! 
Oh! 'Tis impossible! Is there
A Dungeon, Galley, Bedlam, can
Produce ought so miserable as Amurat!




Dead, my lov'd Daughter! 
Angry Prophet! when will thy vengeance cease!



Oh! never let it! now let
Earthquakes shake the Basis of this Foundation,
And whirlwinds drive us like dust about!



Have Patience, Son! Honour was
The Mistress of thy Youth! Fair

Morena hath form'd the bright Idea
To the Life, Copy her, and court only Glory.
Now let the great Business of the Empire
Divert thy Sorrow? 



Ye say I am Visier, Guardian to the
Infant King; with Power unlimitted
Command a World, almost as large as

Alexander's Oh! Morena! once my
Living Mistress, now my dead Saint,
My Ever Worshipt Dear: I do remember
What I promised: no Crowns, Lawrels, nor
The greatest height Ambition raises,
Shou'd ever mount me above thy Slave 
Thus thus I keep my word 

Slighting all offers here I prostrately;
No life so happy, as with thee to die!











Where shall I hide me from
This Scene of Woe! No sorrow
Equals that which to the Dead we pay!
Because there's no Room left for
Hope of Friend!



Let's not through grief neglect the publick care
Since in the change we had so large a share;
On the Empires charge let's our sad thoughts imploy,
There must be room for that, though none for Joy.



