




LEd on by your Example and Command,
No Force could the Indaean Armes withstand;
This Victory is to your Valour due;
Your Conqu'ring Arme th' Arabian Powers or'e-threw.
You the Kings Brother at his feet laid Dead;
A Homage to a King severely paid.



Your great Examples made my Duty bold;
None could a Coward be, and You behold:
Nor is there any thing more Triumph draws
Then Loyalty link't to a Monarch's Cause.



Well Valiant Conqu'rors, cease this gen'rous strife:
The Justice of our Cause gave us all life.
Whilst thus our selves we Conquer, and thus Knit;
They embrace.

The fierce Arabians to our Swords submit.



Lead to Ierusalem! the King I'le meet,
And lay my Wreaths at my great Masters feet.




Not all the Laurels Tyridates wears,
Nor Honours growing faster than his years;
Nor Fame that swells a young Mans Spirit high
Do yet clear up my Princes Cloudy Eye:
A misty Melancholly on his brow
Does some more deep, and silent Sorrow show:
Can you Arsanes guess the Cause?



So little, that in all the search I make,
The more I judge, the farther I mistake.
All the Disasters which his House befell,
Did never past a Moderation swell;
His juster Griefs, and those so well-known Woes,
He with a manly Courage did oppose.



How then are now his sorrows greater grown?
Can Herod's Interest move more than his own?



That grief which inward burns must needs consume, 
But 'twill more Airy grow by vent and roome.
You then his Governours may better move,



To know the Cause: He cannot disapprove
That Care in you, nor will your love neglect;
For he has always born you great respect.



On all occasions then we must lay hold,
Love prompted by necessity grows bold.
Exeunt.






I find it is not Bus'ness can reclaime
My lab'ring thoughts from an invading flame;
Nor can the great Employment of the War,
Intruding Loves more fierce assaults deter:

  3Whilst I for Herod with my Sword o'recome,
The Image of his Queen Kills me at Home.
Not all Phraates Cruelties did move
So much my Breast, as does this Tyrant, Love.
Nor all the Knowledge, which I gain'd at Rome

From Stoicks, this one Passion can or'ecome.
How little I a Gen'rals name respect,
Whilst I my Office, and my Fame neglect.
Oh Gods, who now an Heretick can be
Against the power of gentle Love or Thee.
My panting heart, I hold no longer dear
Than whilst I find Mariamne's Image here.
It is my glory nothing could subdue
That Heart (not force of Gods or Men) but You.





Sir, 'tis our Love which makes us thus intrude,
With busie Care upon your Solitude.



In Melancholly Characters we read
Some gloomy mist has your great Heart o're-spread.
Your Aire, and Meine, and Looks more Cloudy grown,
Though you take care to Hide it, make it Known.



We hitherto have shar'd your woes and bliss,
And shall we now both Strangers be to this?
Are we mistrusted now? 





To you, and only you, I dare unfold
That Secret which I here lockt up till now;
And did disclose to none, no not to you;
Because 'tis what your Councel can't remove:
'Tis O that I live to tell it Sir, 'tis Love! 
Look not so strange, you'l be surpriz'd much more
When you shall see her shadow I adore.
Shews a Picture.




Oh Gods! What see I here?   It cannot be!



Is Homage strange to such Divinity?



Sir, Then 'tis Herods Queen whom you adore.



You tell me what I Knew too well before:
I through your Eyes Polites see your fear;
And 'tis but just those Dubious thoughts I clear.
You fear that Noble Vertue is Betrayd
Which rul'd my Actions whilst your Precepts swa'yd:
But though I Love, 'tis with so pure a flame,
As w•ll not Innocence, nor Vertue shame!
To say, I Love her more than Life, is poor,
But I love Mine, and Her bright Honour more.



In Love you to rewards of Love pretend.



No, no: My Love has neither Hopes nor End;
She is a Vertue that no Mortal dares
Pretend to Love; unless he Vertue wears.
Could I transform to any shape; yet she
Cannot be tempted by a Deity.
Lock up this Secret closely in your Breast.



Without your Leave it ne're shall be exprest.



But Sir, does Mariamne know your flame?



My Tongue as yet durst never giv't a name.



Sir, since I doubt, it were in vain to try
To reason you into a remedy:
That which I can't remove, I will defend:
Yet many dangers may your Love attend.

Herod, a Man is of that Temper known,
As Jealous of his Wife as of his Crown.
He spares no blood, that He may this secure,
Think not in Love, a Rival Hee'l endure.



You can't say more than Tyridates knows,
But for her sake I will my life expose.



And we with you will the same Hazard share.



But in discourse I do my Joys defer.
'Tis the highest Tryumph that my Armes obtain,
Ending the War to see the Queen again.
Exeunt.








Mother, the force wherewith you me Invade,
To a Rebellious Thought can ne're perswade.
Though I no Passion for that Tyrant know,
Nor Obligation to his Merits owe;
I by the Sacred Law of Heav'n am taught,
To habour against Herod, no ill thought.



He is a Monster, and deserves that ill.



But yet that Monster is my Husband still.



He then did forfeit both the Name and Place;
When He began to Murder all your Race:
'Tis He that Murder'd the Asmonean Seed;
And the last Relicks of that Race made bleed.
And now He has Imprison'd You and Me,
For what; unless He does our Deaths decree?



Death is the last of ills that he can do.



But I wou'd first that Monsters death pursue;
And have the Pride before my life depart,
To strike my Dagger to the Tyrants Heart.



May Heav'n defend my Innocence from guilt:
His blood alone shou'd by just Heav'n be spilt.
I'le neither act, nor wish so great a Crime.



Who ever saw a Vertue more sublime?



Now He is gone to Rhodes, it is not hard
For you to gain to our just side the Guard.
You in the Peoples Love so great are grown,
That for your sake they Herod wou'd Dethrone:
Besides, We may by speedy Letters send
For Valiant Tyridates, who's our Freind.
The Army wee'l call home, and all those Powers
Will be as well as Tyridates, Yours.



The very hearing this in me's a Crime.



Why then you dote on him, and wish his good?
Can you love Tyrants stain'd with your own blood?



What now I do; you did at first command,
When forc'd by You, to him I gave my Hand.
Whilst that you urg'd no Crime, I did obey:
With me, to Him, you gave your Power away.
These Tears I shed, to Murder'd Friends I owe;
Weeps.

This to weak Nature I must needs allow.



Those Tears th' Asmonians-Valiant-Race disown,
And Mariamne is a Coward grown.
Sit down so tamely with your Sexes fears?
No marks of Courage are those foolish Tears.



Though hateful Crimes I like a Coward fly,
I have a Heart that's not afraid to dye.
Where I may Honour, and my Duty save,
I have a Courage dares the Tyrant brave.





See Madam, one of your Gardians, Sohemus come.



Perhaps he's come to let us know our Doom.



Madam, dry up those Tears, and Weep no more,
Put this Imprisonment on safety's score:
The King a Passion has so great and just;
He dares to none but Us your safety trust.
His Jealousie the issue is of Love.



What act of mine did that base humour move?



Lovers have oft without cause Jealous been.



He might have yet remembred me his Queen.



Madam, you nothing want, but Liberty.



Denying that, what does he not deny?



From guilty Souls, such Jealousies arise;

Herod can't live unless he Tyrannize.




Sohemus knows my Husbands foul intent,
When he his Voyage to Antonius went.

  7And now he is to great Augustus gone,
If he miscarries must he go alone?



Your Pardon Madam, if I tell you more;
Seems to Whisper.

And 'tis a Warrant which he Sign'd before.
He must enjoy you in another World,
Thus into Crimes, by Jealousie he's hurld?



This Jealousie from Malice springs, not Love 



It is your Vertue makes me thus your Friend:
And that you may suppose my Friendship true,
The power of my Head I give to you.
For if this Secret from your Lips does come,

Herod will make me sharer in your Doom.



I weigh your kindness, you shall find me true.




Herod does not mistrust the Queen, nor You.



Why are we Prisoners then? 



It is his Care.
'Twill not be long e're Herod will return,
You'l then no longer your lost Freedom mourn.






Philon, thy looks speak News; what is't?




The Valiant Prince of Parthia comes this Day,
Into Ierusalem▪ 
The City and the Court their Joys express,
To see him come Crown'd with so great success.
With swifter wings arriv'd his greater Fame,
And told his glorious acts before he came.



What are they Philon? 



He has such conduct, and such valour shown;
Those Storms which threatn'd us are all o're-blown:
Th' Arabians are out of Indea fled;
But left behind them 13 thousand dead.
Twice by his Valour, He the Battle won;
And twice unhors'd the King, and once his Son.

  8He brake their Troops like lightening as he flew;
Where e're he went with him, He Conquest drew.
Th' Arabian King from place to place he chas'd,
Till to his Country He return'd disgrac'd.



I have already heard of his great Name.



And yet I speak it lesser then his •ame.



That Princes Vertues I did ever prize,
And his praise now with my own Interest lies:
If to the K•ngdoms Interest I am true,
I must his Vertues Love, and praise 'em too.
Exeunt.










Oh Gods! how can you thus unmov'd behold
The best peice ever made of humane mold;
The work of your own hands, giv'n up to be
A subject for a Monsters Cruelty.
She to whose eyes, my freedom I resign:
And she has right to all the Worlds, as mine.
Can she a Captive be?  



Call in your Passion Sir, and give it Law.



Of Thee Mariamne 'tis I stand in awe.
Great Queen! it is thy Vertue makes me fear 



Sir stop your Passion till Arsanes come.
His news may calm't, or give it farther room.



Now Herod is her Persecutor grown,
I him no longer my Protector own;
His Cruelties my Brothers have out-done;
I from one mischief to another run;
From Parthia bring my Life to lose it here:
And that which is a thousand times more dear.




Herod in your distress has given you ayde.



My Conquests have that Obligation payd.

  9I in Mariamne's wrongs am injur'd more
Then e're his Kindness had oblig'd before.
My thoughts no longer shall my mind divide:
Both against him, and the whole World beside,
I'le draw this Sword in the Queens just defence:
And succour Vertue and wrong'd Innocence.



These thoughts disclos'd, wou'd Sir your self undo,
Bring certain Ruine to Mariamne too.
But see Arsanes is return'd again 
Enter Arsanes.





Quick, dear Arsanes, ease me of my pain.
What says Sohemes, is he still our Friend?



I judge him so, for so he does pretend.
He quickly granted part of your Request;
But a long time he did debate the rest:
He on Mariamnes anger did demur,
Not on the Dangers that she might incur.
At last the Friendship that he had for you
Prevail'd; and overcome that scruple too.
Now Night has spread her Sables, he does wait
Alone your coming at the Castle Gate.



This is a Kindness I can ne're requite;
Assist me Darkness! Loves best Friend, is Night.




Put on this Souldiers Casque for your Disguise;
Thus Habited, you need not fear surprize.
Tyrid. dresses in a Disguise.



Philon is now to his Apartment gone,
And I have newly set the Watch alone.
Wee'l shun the Main-Guard lest your Face be spy'd,
At this back Gate you'l enter undiscry'd.
You two without, for our return must wait,
But at a little distance from the Gate.
aside.




What Tumult's this within my Breast appears!
There is a strugling 'twixt my Joys and Fears.

  10That Heart which Death and Horror did not daunt,
At its approaching Bliss begins to faint.



Let's find some shelter, that's not out of Call.
Exeunt.






Mariamne's discover'd lying on a Couch.
Enter Tyridates.



See where She is! how her affections move!
She thinks on nothing but the Gods above.
What force of Men can such a Pow'r withstand,
Whose Piety does Gods themselves Command:
Tyr. run∣ning to her Kneels.





Defend me Heav'n; what's this I here behold!
One of my Guard so Impudent and Bold!

Tyridates, ha! what does your rashness mean?
Do not you know 'tis Death to see the Queen?



Madam, I do: but dangers I defy,
And I could with them far mo•e great, and nigh.
I no occasion had till now to show
How little I do value Life for you.



Rise Tyridates; I and Herod know,
How great a Debt we to your Valour owe.
But the Kings Cruel humour gives me fear:
Would your Compassion had not brought you here.



That temper your Misfortunes do Create;
I neither with his Love, nor fear his Hate.
He gave me shelter in his Court 'tis true;
But Murders now the Life he sav'd in You.



I know Compassion moves you to be kind:
'Tis the Effect of every gen'rous mind.



Give me but leave, this Sword shall set you Free.



My Thoughts you cannot to Revenge incline;
That is the bus'ness of the Gods, Not mine.



To do you Justice You may me permit.



I Act Revenge, when I shall suffer it.



In Your Misfortunes I a share do Claim.



I beg You won't that Dang'rous Claim pursue;
Lest gen'rous pitty Fatal prove to You.



Ah wou'd the Gods! that Tyridates cou'd
Buy off Your Sufferings Madam with his Blood:
Or end Your Troubles with his Punishment,
By all the Deaths that Herod could Invent.
How fair would be my Fate to pay to You
My L•fe; to whom all Hearts, all Lives, are due:
aside




Sure this from Passion, not from Pitty flowes.
I wou'd not know what now I but suppose.
Sir, Do you well consider what You Say?
to Tyrid.




If my rash Tongue my Passion does betray;
And unawares the Secret has Confest
Which has so long bin lock't within my Brest.
Madam, do you adjudg what paines are Due:
I'le gladly suffer what's Impos'd by You.
Yes, Tyridates does as guilty Plead,
Since in your clouded Brows I Anger read.



You'ld not have licens'd thus your self to tell
Your Folly, had you Known Mariamne well:
I Herods bloody Injuries forgive;
Yet scarce can pardon this Offence yet Live
Exit Mar.




Stay Mariamne! Gods! What have I done?
Tortures! To what Confusion am I Run!
She pardons me! And yet pronounc'd my Death!
She bid me Live, Yet Kil'd me with that Breath.

Herod, who blushes with her Kindred's Gore,
With all his Injuries ne're mov'd Her more.
And is't not hard that th' oversights of Love,
To Anger more then Cruelties should move?

  12My Rashness has my blasted Joyes o're thrown,
And my distemper'd Soul melts at her Frown.















LEt it Pheroras, be your chiefest Care,
That Noble Sosius be respected here
With the same Homage that is due to Me.



I have no Title to such Dignity.



Sir, of my Friendship I wou'd give you Proof.



The Glory of your Service is enough.
It is my Duty, that I you Obey:
To whom Augustus such respect did pay.



I will not be, Kind Sir, asham'd to own;
It was your Friendship did support my Crown.
I great Augustus's Anger did subdue,
Not so much by my Merit, as by You.



My Acts, great Sir, you praise too much.





But see, another Guardian of my Throne,
Valiant defender of Iudea's Crown.
The Arabians dread great Tyridates name,
Embraces.

And Rome has heard already of thy Fame.
The Laurels always must adorn that Brow:
And you participate his Glories too.






The Obligations you have on me laid,
Can never by such Services be paid,



Your Worth by Modesty does higher grow.



Sir, I my Life did to your Bounty owe.



This Prince begins to make my Envy boyle;
For to his Lustre we seem all a Foile.
Aside




Let us no more thus Modestly contend;
You are my Crownes Protector, and my Freind.





How Vertuous he seems
And cunningly disguises his black Crimes?
Like him I'm forc'd to Flatter with my Tongue,
Whilst my wrackt Heart resents Mariamnes Wrong.




How does Your Charge?



Great Sir, She's safe, and well.



Does not Restraint make all her Passions swell▪
And doe not Curses sit upon her Tongue
Against my Life?



You do her Vertues Wrong.



By Heav'n I think you are Enamor'd too.



Because I've Acted what you bid me doe.



It is my Passion, Philon, I forget.
But with what Words did Alexandra Threat?



She took it Sir as Women use to doe,
An angry Tear, and a sharp Word or two.



Affaires of State have smother'd up my Love,
But now warm Sparks about my Heart-strings move.
Spight of my Fury and my short-liv'd Rage,

Mariamnes Eyes those Passions soon asswage.
To her that hates I'm kind: They Gen'rous prove
Who without hopes of Loves reward can Love;
Ex.









What is become of all that Beauty now
Which once made my Alexas Heart to bow:

  14But sure these Eyes have lost their powerful fires,
And now my o're-blown Beauty none Admires:
Else had those Snares, I there so often spread,
Caught that great Heart, I wou'd my Pris'ner lead.
False Glass   I am not what I was before.
flings the glass away.

Thou Ly'st, and thou shalt flatter me no more.
Else could not Tyridates so despise
The Charms, this Face once had, the Pow'r these Eyes.
So Ignorant, Alas! thou can'st not be
As not to understand both Love and Me.
What various, Thoughts now wrestle in my Breast,
Loves Pleasure never equals its Unrest.
The busie Contest does like Billows rowle,
Beats this way now, and that way then my Soul.
Like Duellists, who struggle for their Fate,
Now strive with various Chance my Love, and Hate.
The Prince must know't, if then my aymes I miss,
What my Eyes can't obtain, I'le gain by This.
Draws her Dagger.

Thus I will go an Arbiter of Fate 
Life I dispence if Love Death if I hate.








Madam, thus Low I to your Empire bow:
I, who have Conquer'd Caesar▪ stoop to You:
Though I that gain the whole Worlds Love beside,
Am yours (to which I have most Right) deny'd:
Yet see my Passion: Let this Action prove
All Passions else stoop to the greater, Love.



Sir, I'm your Pris'ner, and must you Obey.



O no Mariamne; here you still bear sway:

  15Oh do not at this small restraint repine.
Thou art no Pris'ner; but 'tis I am thine.
I now have nothing else I can subdue:
Fortune bows down to me; yet I, to you. 
And in the greatest glory of my Pride
Can Love and see my self of Love denyed.



We do believe you Herod, 'tis enough.
That you are kind, this Prison is the proof.



Your words too lavish were, when I was by,
For me to trust you, when I was not nigh.
I here secur'd you in my absence; true.
But it was done in Courtesie to you.
Lest a Temptation to Assault my Crown
Might make you, on your Head, pull Vengeance down.



Then our Imprisonment's a trick of State.



Wisemen fore-see, and often Master Fate.



I'm glad I know that Herod is so Wise.



But you the Jewel that I only prize,
to Mariam.

Above my Life or Crown, lock't safely here,
Trusted to those, you had no need to Fear;
Have yet less Cause to Murmur or Repine,
Knowing my Life depended upon Thine.



You may with me do what to you seems good;
But you might yet have spar'd Hircanus Blood:
Sure your affection's built on a strange gr•und,
Which on my Kindreds Graves it self does found.



From that old Root, such Branches wou'd have sprung,
Who from my hands my Scepter would have wrung.
And I should both my Life and Crown Betray,
Had I not par'd th•• dang'rous Root away.
Necessity thus forces Kings somtimes
Crimes to commit, to hinder greater Crimes:
And Murther a••, that they may Mu•thers save▪
Pitty does Ru•• Kings, and Lands Enslave.



I never knew Foundations lay'd in blood,
Whose Superstructure ••e continued good!



Let us Mariamne leave those things to Fate,
And to our Councel, all Affaires of State:
We will retire my heart brooks no delay:
I fain wou'd Homage at Loves Altar pay;
Where am'rous Flame the Heart of Herod burns.



And my sad Heart with hidden sorrow Mourns.
aside



Herod leads the Queen out. Exe. Omnes.








What cloudy Blacks my Heart and Visage wear,
And Love it self's scarce greater than my Fear.
To mighty Love all Passions else submit,
Grow calme, and are to Tempests rais'd by it.
So it Usurps the Empire of the mind
And Governs there, as o're the Seas the Wind.
Whilst it blows gently, Seas as Gently lye;
But when it Storms, they Storm and Rave as high.





I will not lose the occasion now 
Stay I'le advise, first what I have to do.
Oh Heavens, must then this great Heart stoop so low;
And must he from my Mouth my Passion know.
Vertue, where art thou? or where art thou Shame?
Tush Shame's for Maids Vertu's an empty name.
I Love, and I am scorch'd so with the fire,
That all things now must yeild to my desire.
 Vertue, and Honour, all things else lye by.
'Tis Love o'recomes, and I must speak, or dye. 



My Passions did disturb enough before.
Aside.

Thy Company will yet disturb me more.

  17I cannot shun her.





I did not think such happiness so near!
I doubt I on your Privacy intrude.



I am not busie, Madam!



But I am Rude.
What were your Thoughts?











I view'd those Artfull Pictures on the Wall.



Their Story, Sir, you may not understand:
I will Interpret them Lend me your hand;
Such a Commanding awe hangs on his brow
Aside.

It daunts me, and my Tongue does faulter now.
The World here Tyridates found its Grave,
And none escaped, but what that Ark did save.



We by our Stories, Madam, understood
The World once suffer'd by a general Flood.



Here is the man, who did our Nation Free
By Miracles from Aegypts Slavery:
See there what Vengeance he on Pharoah throws;
Though all his great Magicians do oppose 
See where the King pursues him in his Pride.
Here, at his Word the Seas themselves divide:
Here Pharoah still pursues them with his Host. 
Look there the King, and all his Army's lost. 
Has not the Painter here expres't his skill?
How well in Death he Frowns, and Threatens still.



Madam! I doubt I too much trouble you 



I take delight in't Sir, in Truth I do. 
When I look on him, all my Courage fails:
Aside.

And o're my Resolutions fear prevailes.
Your Eyes a little on this Captain lend:
He Conquer'd first this Land, you now Defend.
The Sun stood still, and did his Word obey;
And gave the World a most Prodigious Day.



Will none come hither to Release me yet? 
Aside.

'Twill take up too much time to view'em all.



One or two more; you needs must see you shall 
Oh that I had my Story once begun!
Aside.

See here two Kings, the Father and the Son:
That's David, the best Captain of his Time:
This Salomon, whose Wisdom was sublime.
Wise, as he was; yet that Wise Salomon

Did not disdayn to put Love's Fetters on:
And to that Queen which hangs close by his side,
No coldness shew'd, nor Love, for Love deny'd:
His Fame far off had kindl'd am'rous fires;
He Lov'd, and satisfi'd her warm desires.



It was but just; and to so Fair a Queen,
He would have otherwise ungrateful been.



Whilst thus you pass your judgment Sir on them;
Consider that your self you do Condemn.
You to a Princess have appear'd too Rude,
And for true Love return'd ingratitude.
Though she has left no Realms to visit you,
Yet that which is more hard, she does pursue.
She treads on Dangers, and for you she dies,
And Liberty more dear then Empire flies.



I may believe my Miseries might move
In tender Breasts some Pitty but not Love 
I am an Exile, no Retreat do know
But what I to your Brothers Bounty owe.
That Princess then in Herod's Court may see
Objects more worthy of her self than Me.



With willful blindness You Obligements slight;
That you may shun occasions to requite.



My great Misfortunes Madam, make me blind.



No Tyridates, 'tis Disdayn I find:
And you are too clear-sighted not to know,
That you are Lov'd, and who 'tis Loves you too.

  19No Soul, but Hers, could have endur'd that pain,
Caus'd by the Tyranny of your Disdayne.



Such worth I dare not to my self apply,
Nor look up at a Fortune that's so high;
And though your glorious Beauty shou'd descend,
To grant me all the Charms that Love can lend:
My mind does under such misfortunes bow,
I could not have the power to taste them now.



You for your coldness have a fine pretext;
You'l be no more with such Discourses vext.
And since you with affection are opprest,
That Importunity shall be redres't:
Fury's the steps of incens'd Lovers guide;
And Love converts to Hate, with scorn deny'd.
Ex. Salom.




Thy Love and Hate are both alike to me.
What difference 'twixt Mariamne is, and Thee?
I her denyal better do approve:
Which less torments me than thy proffer'd Love.
Her Anger looks with so much Innocence;
That though it kills, it cannot give offence.
And were not Love by Vertue clear'd in Me,
I'd hate the name of Love, as I do Thee.


Would you had come sooner 
All that Misfortune that I so much fear'd,
Just now with Impudence enough appear'd.
For Salome her self, the secret told.



But I perceive your Answer was but cold.



That Coldness has incens'd Her; for but now,
We saw a raging scorne inflame her brow;
With all the marks that do on Fury wait.



It is not Love, but Lust that turns to hate.



The King's return'd, and will this Night be seen
In publique t'entertain his welcome Queen.



What, then the Queen's Releas't?



Yes Sir; 'tis true.
And Herod•eems enamour'd now anew.
He gazes on her with Affection still:
You'd think 'gainst her he never dream't an ill.



Thanks Fate! I'le be my self a Guest to Night:
And at her Eyes direct my wondring sight.
What Nobler Object to exalt my Joy?
Unless my Envy does my Joyes destroy:
Of what I wish that Tyrant is possest?
I can but gaze on Banquets where he Feasts.
Exeunt.






'Tis done I am resolv'd I'le Love no more 
But Hate as much as e're I Lov'd before.
With what kind warmth does now my Anger move?
And dear Revenge tasts sweeter far then Love.
The Poets say that Love in Heav'n does dwell;
If so, then there more Pleasure is in Hell.
For though the Furies whip and lash my mind;
Yet in that Rage I secret Pleasure find.
Thou at my Feet shall unregarded lye,
Who with disdain a Princess •ould'st deny.
I Tyridates, will pluck down thy Pride:
Let Hell and all its Furies be my guide.





Madam, The King and Queen's already sate,
They and the Revels do your presence wait.
Your place stands Empty 



Revels are a sport
For Loving Fools: Blood is the Mirth I'le Court:
I'le follow; Rage has so posses't my mind,
I no Diversion but in that can Find.
Exeunt.













IMportant Bus'ness calls me now away;
But You may longer in the Garden stay.
Prince Tyridates opportunely met,
May on my Queen with your permission wait.
Kind Tyridates, here, whilst I go in,
Herod offers the Queens Hand to Tyrid.

Try to divert my Melancholly Queen.



In Storms at Sea, when Death and Danger's nigh
aside.

Men wish for Land, and yet from Land they fly:
Whilst Trembling at the Object, I admire,

Queen gives him her Hand. Ex. Her. &c.


Fear keeps me from the Blessing I desire.



Had Herod known, you did my Love pursue,
He would not now have given my hand to you.
And since you did to me your Thoughts commit,
I ought my self too, to have hinder'd it.
But that I judg'd I might without offence;
Either to yours, or my own Innocence.
Did I believe you harbour in your Breast
A thought to my Dishonour, I'de Detest
You as a Monster, and my Mortal Foe.



And I am willing that you should do so.



Think not, because, I not for Herod burn,
I'le my affections on another Turn:
Not the Remembrance of his Wrongs to Me,
Shall make me of his Crimes partaker be.

  22Could I be false so to my self and him;
I were unworthy then of your esteem.



That gen'rous Bounty flowing in your Breast,
Has Me great Queen with Confidence posses't:
To speak, and to believe you'l hear me now.



Speak; but what strictest Vertue may allow.



If my rude Passion harbours a Design
Against Your spotless Innocence and Mine.
You then may justly Me and that Despise,
And hate without a Crime what Vertue flyes;
Use then your Thunders; let the higher Powers,
To make me Wretched, joyn their frowns to yours.



Look on this Passion as an Enemy
That will at last destroy both You and Me.



Not if that flame which does inhabit here
Inspires my mind with what from stains is clear:
All Worshipers at distance may admire 



Oh call the Greatness of your Courage home,
Let Tyridates now himself o're-come. 



Madam, the highest favour I dare Crave,
Is leave to bear your Image to my Grave:
Thus on my Knees I beg 






Although your Love were yet more Innocent.
Rise Tyridates! Salome is neer 
I fear she saw you Kneel, let us withdraw.



That Womans sight I hate 







Madam, that Secret I'le relate.

Ex. Tyr. & Mar.




Was it not Tyridates that I saw
Kneel to the Queen?
Oh Heaven! this Chance unseals my blinded eyes,
And plucks from them their so long close disguise.

  23Slighted I thought was a sufficient Curse;
But slighted for another is yet worse;
Swell high the Tyde of Rage; boyle up my Blood,
Be to my Vengeance an eternal Food.
Is it for this that Mariamne flyes,
The Kings Embrace? and does his Love despise!
I have a Rival on an equal score,
The Queen a Husband has, and I no more.
I'le watch each motion and each look they throw,
That rage and Jealousie may higher grow:
Their hearts will shake when they shall understand
Like Fate, their Lives I carry in my Hand.
Exit.






Are you so Cruel then to Ladys grown!



The Law of Love permits to Love but One.



And ought not I your Passion to decline,
When you despise anothers Love for mine?
That sin which you in Salome condemne;
Would you Mariamne, should in you esteem?
Does not she Loving you betray her trust?
How can I yours permit then, and be just!



Oh Madam! You injurious are to joyn
That spightful Ladies Vicious Love with mine.
Mine is all Innocence!



But the World may not know your Innocence.




I by my silence keep it from their Sence.



Though that has kept it yet from Herod's Eye;
Yet 'tis what Salome will soon descry:



Wrapt in my Vertue, I my Fate despise:



But more then Life, at Stake, our Honour lies.



When that I injure, may 






The King is come!



And I unwillingly must give him room!



What to the Office of a King is due,
I've soon dispatch'd to come, my Queen, to you: 
But such short Intervals of Absence prove
As blasts to fan the Ardent flames of Love.



Sir, Kings their Modesty are wont to show.



And Modest Queens not answer with disdain.




Herod, of that you ought not to complain.



Oh Heav'n! and must my Passion thus be met,
And all my Kindness answer'd with regret?
Hence scornful Woman, from my Presence go:
Since not your Husband, you, your King shall Know:
Your Fathers Destinies you do forget.



No Herod! here they are all Written yet:
Ex. cum suis.




What Roman Courage in that Breast does lye?
And dauntless Power sparkles from her Eye!



Your Subjects Sir, may well cease to obey,
When your own Queen to Subjects shews the way.



What Tortures rack my Breast! must I be Dumb!
This is a Task too hard to overcome.
Exeunt.





I now can tell what is black Envies Food,
Man's Heart's her Meat, her Drink his Vital Blood.
I feel the Viper gnawing in my Breast.






What, my Alexas, musing all alone.



No, I have Company, though you see none.








Salome! they are in my Breast.



What, with some busie thoughts you are possest?



Yes, such they were.



Must I be Ignorant?



No Salome! I dare trust you 
Me-thinks that Stranger Parthian grows too tall.

I do not love him 



Nor would if you knew all 

I hate him too 



And have you Reasons too 



Some small ones; but no matter what have you?




Herod's too lavish of his favours there.



Now he has rid me of my Jealous fear,
aside.

I doabted lest He had my Passion found,
But he on Envy does his Anger ground.
And is that all? But I could tell you more 
But  



But what? Come tell the Truth 



But you shall Swear you never will disclose, 




I freely Swear all Oaths you shall impose.



Hark in your Ear he would have 
Whispers.




How my Wife! And can I hear such out-rage!



Hold Sir! he in his Passion is unwise
Who does his Soul discover at his Eyes.
Cloath every thought in Darkness, wear a Cloud,
As may if possible Heaven's eye delude.



What if I should declare it to the King?
Into Disgrace this wou'd the Parthian bring.



With your own mouth you wou'd divulge your shame;
To Do and to be Tempted is the same.
We must be free from scandal as the fault.
Men judge the strength of Vertue by th'Assault.
This would Mens thoughts divide; for 'mong'st the Throng
Right seldome has more Voyces than the Wrong.



Dearest I'am convinc'd: Thou art a Gem,
Which I can ne're sufficiently esteem.



Doubt not but I severe revenge will take,

Alexas, both for thine and honours sake.
Be Mute for I have thought a Stratagem 

Herod grows Jealous of the Queen and Him.



O my Wise Princess I your Wit adore 
See; there's the King! 







Alexas! be you gone 
I'le take this time to talk with him alone.



That project's done, now to the King.

  26No man stands so secure, but he may fall,
When he has once stir'd up a Womans gall.
The King is bigg with somthing  




How much I am disturb'd you cannot see.



Your Soul with some great Passion struggles 




And I to calme this Tempest come to you.
My Queen has met my Love with such disdayn,
That she has turn'd the Stream: My Passion grows
Enrag'd, and o're the Banks of Reason flowes.
Can She not Love?



No doubt Sir, but she can.



Why does she not?



She does! but who's the Man?



Oh Salome! you raise the Tempest; hold,  



You know not Woman, Sir, so well as I.





I know her Vertue, and she first would dye.



You know she Loves not you.



All that may be 
She'l Love no other tho' she Loves not me;
And that proud Heart which does a King oppose,
Can never with a meaner Object close.



Love, had it Eyes, might soon 



Oh I am rack't.
Spake Salome, and make my doubts more clear.



What makes the Parthian Prince to linger here,
Whom great Augustus does invite to Rome;
And offers Armes his Brother to o'recome:
He slights not these great offers without Cause;
No, here's attraction Sir, that stronger draws.



Thy words have let ten thousand Furies in.



Sir! 'tis too plain now to be blind's a sin 



Thy words have clear'd the mist before my eyes;
Before Truth's Son the foggy umbrage flies.



See with what draughts he sucks the Poyson up! 
aside.

The Quiet of your Court made me Conceal
What now I only to your self reveal.



That Mariamne Loves the Parthian Prince,
Her hate of me my Reason does convince 



'Tis not her Kindreds Blood moves thus her mind,
No; her disdayn is of another kind.
To you a Rock she unrelenting stands,
Yet Tyridates's Love, her heart commands.
Alas! He Loves with better luck then you:
An Exile does more than a King can do.
But first their glances, looks, and actions weigh;
Perhaps I may have err'd in what I say.



Oh my dear Salome! it is too plain!
A Thousand things to my remembrance fly
Which I before had pass'd too slightly by:



It bravely works! good Sir, have farther proof:



What needs there more? alas, I have enough.



He is indeed ingrateful




The refuge that I gave him in his flight;
He flyes a Cruel Brothers rage; I guess
He will not find a Jealous Husband's less.
My Anger shall like frightful Thunder move,
He pays his head for his presumptuous Love.



Stay Sir let reason in this great affair
As well as Rage and Jealous Passion share.

I would not have you Tyridates save;
Your resolution is both just and brave.
Yet for his Life, pray venture not your Crown,
Nor hazard for his wicked head your own.

Augustus Sir, is Tyridates Friend,
It's dangerous Augustus to offend.
And lose the favour which you gain'd so late;
Act not in Fury, let your Rage abate 



What, shall he live then?



No: he still shall dye.
But 'tis not you shall strike the blow but I▪
Leave it to me 



But give your Justice wings:
Revenge that brooks delays too mean for Kings.
At my Queens head shall my next Thunder fly,
Who could not live and Love by Hate shall dye:
Her forfeit-head, and her declining Crown
Shall feel the rage of Monarchs when they frown.
Exit.




Boast not Proud King of what your frowns design;
A Womans Rage shall be as great as Thine:



〈◊〉 Vengeance is all a Kings Rage can do,
A jealous Woman is a Monarch too .
Exit.









You had been freed durst you my Councel use.



Such Councel, Madam, I agen refuse.



Your Dagger in his Heart had eas'd your fears.



Such Crimes are stains my Innocence ne're wears.



Woman thou art 
Exit.




What I will ever be
From all the guilt of your Reproaches free.






I that with horrid thoughts of Rigour came,
Am on a suddain, how I know not, Tame.
Sure 'tis not I I am no Lyon now 
The Furies humbly to that Sweetness bow 

I am not Angry now  I will renew 
Offers to Em∣brace her▪





I will accept no Kindness Sir from you 




I will not be deny'd 



But Sir, you must.
For my Resentments they are great and just.

  29This Heart cannot Dissemble King like You 



Will neither Anger nor my Kindness do?
So now I feel the Floods of Rage return,
And I a-new inflam'd with Anger burn.
Thou to thy Husbands Kindness false art grown,
And Love, my due, is on a Stranger thrown.
Has Tyridates 
Are you Surpriz'd! has Guilt lock't up your Tongue?



No Herod, 'tis the greatness of the Wrong.



Traytress, 'tis false 
But to my Wrath he shall a Victim fall;
And you shall quickly follow too you shall! 




Herod, believe all that you please; the worst
I've born already by thy Kindness Curst.




His Ruine shall begin your Punishment.



If you on Blood and Murder thus are bent:
If Rage no otherwise appeas'd can be,
Seek out no other Sacrifice but Me.
Resolve my Murder, but his Ruine spare,
Who has in my Imputed Crimes no share:



To such a height it seems your Love is flown,
His Life you value, though you slight your own;
In Tyridates thou shalt tortur'd be,
Before thou know'st what I resolve on Thee.
Ex.




Death thou art Welcome: come when e're thou wilt,
Those Souls fear not thy Dart who feel no Guilt:
Yet Tyridates, Thee I wish remov'd,
Because your greatest Crime is that you Lov'd.
Exit.





Tyridates, Pheroras, Alexas, Attendants.


Fill my Bowl full; I the Kings health begin!



What is't that makes thee shake! hast, give me mine!
To the Attendant that fills the Wine.
Long live the King, and whilst the Health goes round,
Command without that the lowd Trumpets sound.






Pardon my hast, Sir, and vouchsafe your ear.







Discover'd too I fear.
Let us not stay 



The King will Orders give,
Though this Plot has not took, he shall not live!

Ex. Alexas & Pheroras.




That Rudeness Sir I acted with my will.
For it was Poyson that I made you spill!

Philon by chance behind the Arras got,
Heard Salome and Alexas lay this Plot.
He told the Queen, whose Kindness sent him strait
With this, to let you know your Threaten'd Fate.
gives a Letter.


Pheroras and Alexas Sir are gone,
And they by this themselves have Guilty shown.
Leave us 
Exit Attend.




See here Arsanes what the Queen has Writ, 
She bids me quickly save my self by flight.
Nay, instantly I must be gone to Night:
Or else so closely they my Life pursue;
The Sword will act what Poyson cannot do.
I know not which more Joy or Grief does bring,
This Favour, or the baseness of the King.



Sir, do not trifle thus away your time,
To make her Warning useless were a Crime:



What wou'd you have me doe?



O Sir, be gon!



That thought's too hard.



Sir; if you stay, her Kindness you neglect,
And pay to her Commands but small respect.



'Twas her compassion of my Life took Care,
She did not know her Presence is more dear.


Must I my Life, or Mariamne quit?



Yes Sir, 'tis but too certain, and your Flight
Must speedy be, or else you both will lose.
Consult no further, Her Commands obey:
For know that her you Ruine, if you stay 
Therefore no longer on your stay demur;
This rising storme does rather threaten Her.
But She in your Escape, Preserv'd may be
When you remove the Cause of Jealousy.





O Sir be speedy in your flight I hear

Alexas, and the Kings Life-guard are neer.



Good Sir, make haste.



There's hardly time for Flight.



But we may now be favour'd by the Night.



Well! must I goe? Oh Queen, when I obey,
I'm only by your safety forc'd away.
Exeunt.







The Traytors gone! but yet he can't be far;
You soon his passage in the Streets may bar:
Go light some Torches, search out every where:
Who finds him first, shall of my bounty share:
This Sword then Tyridates shall pursue
Thy Life, and take what Poyson could not do.
Exeunt.










Yeild Tyridates, or thy Life is lost!



That thou took'st it away, thou shalt not boast!
Take that for thy Wives Treachery.






Though I am wounded! Soudiers follow still.
You dye, if him you neither Take nor Kill.
Polites falls.





Farewell, thy Friendship does my Love out-vye;
Thou hast the Honour in her Cause to dye.




Arsanes come! Let us Revenge his Blood,
And take the Fate which cannot be with-stood.
Fight a∣agen; some of the Souldiers are Slain.














I'le think that Heav'n does joyn against me too,
If neither Poyson, nor the Sword will do.



It was but chance, or he had drunk his last.



I hope by this time that his Life is past.
I bid Pheroras bring the welcome News,
But his long stay my Patience does abuse.



What Devil was it mov'd Arsanes so,
The Bowl, the Wine, and Poyson to o'rethrow. 

  33Between that Draught and Death he should have known,
I rais'd that storm which hence his Life had blown.
'Tis not Revenge, at least not half so sweet,
Unless he knows that I the Conquest get.
And if he Falls now by Alexas hand,
My fatal Anger he will understand:



But here's Pheroras now 



How dy'd he! say?



His Valour Sir has rather won the day 



Hah! What not brought with thee the Traytors Head!
How durst thou say to me he is not dead!
What Legions had he to defend his Life?
Or fought my Subjects for him in the strife?



I saw Alexas Sir, his Life pursue!
But what is't Valour in Distress can't do?
Surrounded by the Guard he bravely fought,
And to the ground Alexas bleeding brought.



What said you of Alexas?








At him the Guard with all their fury run.
But like a Heroe so unmov'd he stood,
That all around the place he stayn'd with blood.

Polites Slayn, with noble Anger stung,
He flung himself to dye amid'st the Throng.
There he such Prodigies of Valour shew'd,
The Guard not him, but he the Guard pursu'd.
Prest with their number, he at last had dy'd,
But that Arsanes an advantage spy'd.
The Sacred Temple being nigh, 
To that Asylum both yet fighting, fly.
And spite of all those Swords which did oppose,
There they escap'd the Fury of their Foes.



O Heavens! escap'd me thus. 
Thy Blood yet Tyridates must asswage
The vehement Tempest of my Jealous Rage:

  34I'le to the Temple, and my Wrath shall make
The great Foundations of that Structure shake.
Exit.




What Stars Protect this Man?
His Valour moves me so, I love him still:
But he Dispises me; that thought is Hell.
Yes, thou shalt dye!
My hand shall more then his, thy Life pursue,
And shew what Woman in Dispair can do.
Exit.






In which is discovered, as within the Gate, the Priests, Tyridates, and Arsanes.



We do not Sir enquire of your offence,
No Criminal is ever forced from hence.




You are both safe and welcome 




Both to the God you Worship, and to you.







Sir, Though a King, keep back: 'tis just that you
Bring that respect which to this Place is due.



Give me that Traytor then; this Place nor you
Cannot protection to such Crimes allow.




O Sir! you know the Priviledge of this place.
We should our Honour and our Laws disgrace 



Then I will force him hence.

Offers to draw, Pher. stays him.






Great Sir, let Rage to Reason once obey:
All the whole race of Priests wou'd rather dye,
And you, although their King, to death defie,
E're they would suffer this, besides the Jews
Would run into Rebellion at the News.
Try if you can perswade, but do not force.



I must but yet I first will try that course;

  35Put forth that Traytor, and you will do well;
You ought not to protect an Infidel.
His very presence does the place abuse;
It is a Refuge only to the Iews.





We dare not Sir, they would us Pa•tial call.
This Temple does a Refuge yield to all.



But that Barbarian durst violate
The Rights of Hospitality and Faith;
Ancient as Fanes themselves. 
Return him fairly forth whilst I entreat,
Else I will execute more than I threat.




First for his safety we our Lives will pay.



Rather then you shall suffer, I'le not stay:
No: let me fall a Victim to the King
Rather then Ruine to your Altars bring.



O Sir! what do you mean.




You will do worse,
You on our Altars will pluck down a Curse.
Let the King raze our Fane: our Bloods be spilt.
'Twere better to fall Pure, then stand with Guilt.



Let me speak to the King. 




So you no further go.



King of the Iews,

I am a Prince, and meet you without odds,
For I know no Superior but the Gods;
I scorne to justifie my self to you,
Who thus ignobly do my life pursue.
A Life which from thy Sword and Poyson flyes,
Here at the Altar thou would'st Sacrifice,
Against all R•ght, both Humane and Divine.



Yes, I will have thy Life, though I lose mine.



Not the most faulty of my thoughts e're meant

Mariamne or thy wrong, thy Innocent
And injur'd Queen I as the Gods esteem,
Can that wear any Title to a Crime?



In idle words I'le lose not breath nor time▪



I speak not this thy Fury to asswage,
Or with design t'escape thy bloody rage;
Or to delay the Death thou threaten'st here.
No Herod; I can dye, but cannot fear.



No, no, false man! thy artificial words
The Temple nor 100000 Swords,
Shall sheild thy Life from my armed Anger now.
Thee and that Traytress both to death I Vow.



Involve not yet in my imputed Crime,
An Innocence which wholly is sublime:
If thou before these Reverend Flamines here.
Wilt Solemnly at the high Altar Swear,
I shall thy only mark of Fury be,
And thy blind Rage extend to none but me:
I'le leave this place to which I now am fled,
And to thy Vengeance render up my head.



O Heav'ns, for him she wou'd have Life resign'd,
And he again for her has Life declin'd:
They Love Oh Rage 
stamp.

No Traytor, thou shalt me no Council give;
Nor you, nor She  whom thou woud'st save shall live.







Hold Herod, hold, I in Augustus name,
Do for the Parthian Prince a freedom clayme;
He not thy Subject hither fled for aid,
Must not by thy blind Fury be betray'd:
In this I Justice, Honour, Friendship show
To Tyridates Vertues, and to you 



Friend! hear me first 



I am by Honour swayd;
And in great Caesars name must be obey'd.



You are a Friend to me, and I to you.



I for no Friendship will injustice do:

  37I bear a Romans Vertue in my Breast,
Friendship not linck'd with Vertue, I detest.
And Tyridates you must ye•ld to me  



Where I find so much Vertue, I agree.




Herod! your unjust Fury now asswage:
I here my Honour for you both engage;

Herod your Life by no Plots shall betray;
And you t'increase his Fury shall not stay.
You from Ierusalem this Night shall go,
And leave within 6 days Iudea too:
Who breaks his Word, begets a Foe of me,
Makes Rome and Caesar too his Enemy.



I will comply, though death I'd ki`ndlier choose.




Sosius alone could my just Vows oppose:
I see my Fear is greater then my Rage;
I in this quarrel dare not Rome ingage:
Nor dare to my yet tott'ring Fortune trust,
But I must rule by seeming to be just.
Exit. omnes.












THen Heav'n has heard my pray'rs, and now I find,
Though I deserv'd it not, He has been kind.
If Heaven permits me but to fall alone,
My Breast shall not emit one sigh, or groan:
Now Tyridates is from Danger free,
I do not care what he decrees of Me:

  38Fly Prince from hence into a kinder clime,
Where to be good, and Vertuous is no Crime:
Enter Sohem




Prince Tyridates by the Roman Legat freed
And by him safe without the Citty led,
From his freind Sosius has made escape,
And is come hither in a borrow'd shape.



Just Heav'n forbid: I cannot see him: Go,
And tell him so. 
His Folly would his Certain Ruine bring;
His Death would now be Justice in the King.



Madam; all my perswasions can't prevaile,
He onely beggs to take his last farewel.



This may some blemish to my Honour give 



Madam, his Thoughts from such pure Fountains flow;
They on your Innocence no spots can throw;



Without your leave he durst no nigher come,
But stayes without, and there expects his Doome.



Well call him in   and pardon me this time:
For he shall never more repeat the Crime.
Sohem. steps to the Dore and brings in Tyridates


Philon and you Sohemus watch hard by
And give us warning when that danger's nigh.
Exeunt. Phil. and Sohem.
Ah Prince! consider what you make me do
Tyrid. kneels,

Hazard my Life and Reputation too!
Have I thus long my life with Caution led
The very shadow of all Courtship fled.
Now at the last to make my Honour bow!
By Night, and in disguise, to talk with You!



Though my Intents with Innocence are clad,
The ills You suffer by them make em bad.







Can I fly and leave you here,
Expos'd to Herods Rage, and jealous fear?
I'le break those Chaines my heedless Passions drew  
With such a black Ingratitude on You.

Herod, by Sword and Poyson sets me free
From all the Tyes of Hospitality!

  39I this without Ingratitude can doe
I owe not now my Life to Him, but You.
Reject not then the succour I propose,
Whence to You freedome, to me, Glory Flowes.



I will no longer these Discourses hear.
Urge me no more. This Answer take for all!
Vertue shall ne're be blemished by my fall.



Then give me leave to Die   I cannot see
You still have Fetters on whilst I am free.



But whilst I thus my Innocence keep white;
Me-thinks I feel as yet my Chains too light.



But I can never go.



I for one boon must sue,
And sure I cannot be deny'd by you?



'Twere impious to disobey that breath,
Though the Commands were to meet Wracks, or Death.



But this performance must be bound by Vow



By all the powers to which men kneel, and bow.
And what's as Sacred, by your self I swear 



She craves one boon who never begg'd before:
Sir, I intreat you ne're to see me more.
Call your Obedience and your Courage up,
And the Carrere of your blind passion stop:
My Life and Honour both at Stake do lye,
And suffer, if you either stay, or dye.



Can you condemn me, most Unfortunate,
To Banishment for ever, and not hate?



Perhaps th'affection that I'ave shown to you,
Has not been such as you pretended to.
I to your Merits always gave their due,
As far as my Condition would allow.
Had I been free, and at my own dispose,
I before all had Tyridates chose.



Oh all ye Gods! how dubious is my Fate!
At once how Glorious, and how Desolate!

  40I have now, 'tis true! no Reason to complain;
Yet in my former Wretchedness remain.
Those eyes must never more upon me shine,
Yet I can neither murmur, nor repine.



Pitty begins too much to move my heart,
I find by these it is high time to part!
Mar. Weeps.


I, Tyridates have some weakness shown;
And your Misfortunes move more than my own.
Let Mariamne your Example be,
Do you assume your Courage now like me:
Insensibly I do not part with you,
Yet dauntless act what I resolve to do.
If o're your Spirit any power I have,
Let it be shown be patient and be brave:
And let this act of your obedience prove
The Candor, and the Greatness of your Love.
Take now my last Farewell.
Tyrid. kneels.


 One kindness yet 
When you remember me, this fault forget.
Exit cum. Cleop.


gives him her hand to kiss.


Oh Gods! is there no other way to prove
The pureness and the greatness of my Love.
Must I to this hard Doom subjected be?
Yet 'tis a Just and Vertuous Cruelty!
Yes to remember Thee, I'le take this way,
I'le dye for Debts I cannot live to pay.
Exit.









What sting is this to an Imperial mind,
Thus in his will and power to be confin'd?




Herod's a King, and does Iudea sway 
But he's no King, who others does obey.



Though many Passions grow within your Breast,
I see Ambition's greater then the rest.
And fear to lose your new acquired Crowne
Th' aspiring boldness of the rest pulls downe!
This made a Monarch to a Romane stoop,
When the whole Forces of his Rage were up.



'Tis Wisdom to submit to greater Powers:



None should be greater in your Realm then Yours;
You this affront in Wisdom may put by,
Sit tamely downe   But King so will not I!
For he shall fall my Victim, and in this
I will perform what Kings but faintly wish  
But How,
Do You proceed with your ungrateful Queen?



I've sent for Her.



To ask her Pardon.




But that her Doom she from my Breath may Know.


What says our Haughty Queen?



She'le wait on You,
When she has first paid to her God his due.
She's busie yet.



At Prayers: Yes, and 'tis time.
But Heaven may stay, her absence is a Crime:
Bid her make hast, and let her Understand
I now no more entreat Her, but Command.









This was like Herod and a King;
But yet I fear her Eyes such Forces bring,
Which she still manages with such an Art,
They will regain your undefended Heart.



No, Though tame Love did once my Heart engage,
I have now resign'd this Royal Seat to rage!





She's here I must retire.

  42Thy Lover Queen shall share thy Sufferings,
My Jealousy can kill as well as Kings.
Exit.




See with what Noble Pride she steps? That State
So like a Queen, as yet I cannot hate!
Not all the marks of Anger that I bear
Can shake this Womans Soul into a fear!
I must no longer pause  
You had obey'd us straight,
Had you not been retarded by your hate.



Any to hate the Laws of Heaven forbid!
Else 'twere but Justice Herod if I did.



You Queen have yet no Reason to complain,
My Love it is that proves your greatest pain.



What are those Signalls of your Love you boast?



The World the Greatness of my Love can Read,
In that you still proud Queen do wear your Head,
After your Love to Tyridates shown,
And his to you so publiquely made Known.



My Innocence still wears a Robe so White,
That I esteem Your Accusations light.



I say that you still Live shews Love enough.



But of your Love I have another proof:
You can't forget the Compliment you sent
When You to Antony and Caesar went.
You sent me Word, with Grief you left me   true  
For had you Dy'd I must have follow'd too.
Was this th' Effect either of Love or Hate,
That both our Lives must have an Equal Date?



I am Betray'd! Undone!
Those who my Trust into my Bosome drew,
Forsake me and betray my Secrets too.
To what Extremities am I reduc'd,
By Slaves and a Disloyal Wise abus'd:



I by Imprudence now have rais'd a storm,
aside.

I doubt my Philon and Sohemus harm.



I my Intentions never will deny;
I did intend  if I did you should dye.
It was excess of Love 



Of Jealousie and Hate! 



Those Traytors who my Secrets did relate,
Did not for nothing so great hazard run,
Expose themselves by m• to be undone;
And buy your favour with their Lives expence,
If you had not propos'd a Recompence:
Which seem'd so great and glorious in their eyes,
They to obtain it, me, and life despise.



What recompence had I to give?




No gifts could ever undermine them so:
Such mean things never could their Faith surprize!
No Traytress; by the Charmes of those false eyes,
They were seduc'd 



I will acquit them, they are Innocent:
'Twas Heaven reveal'd to me thy black intent.



Thou usest thus thy Lovers to excuse,
And dost thy Husbands Love and Bed abuse!



Believe what e're thou wilt against me now,
The baseness of your Soul and Birth you show.
I scorn thee now so much that I disdain 
To stoop so low, to speak to thee again:
Or any more my Innocence defend
Against th'unworthy Crime which you pretend.



'Twould be in vain I now will Justice do,
Yes! you shall suffer, and your Lovers too!
If all the Torments of the Rack will do?
Truth by that Tryal quickly will appear;
What do you smile? my Guard without there
Enter Guard.


Safely the Queen to the great Prison bear.

  44On pain of Death, away.



Touch not my hand,
I willingly obey his kind command.
Exeunt Queen & Guards.




Still the same Queen! still the same port she bears,
And not one look of fear nor horror wears!


My Fatal Love thus long has made me blind,
And with false Errors preposses't my mind;
But her high Pride shall feel: Pheroras haste!
And make you Ioseph and Sohemus fast.
Let them be Rack'd till they the truth declare.









Hold! Ioseph from the Rack we spare:
We will some method in our Anger take;
He's Marry'd to our Aunt, and for her sake,
Let him escape the Rack, but Strangl'd be;
Be gone let it be done immediately. 



Sir, seize on Philon, he knows her Intrigues;
A great Contriver in her amorous Leagues.



See He be tortur'd too 
And forc'd by pains the hidden Truth to tell:
I to the utmost will my Wrath pursue.
After they're Rack'd let'em be strangl'd too.
Away: let it be done before you sleep.






O Sir! I see 'tis difficult to keep
Our selves with all the helps of humane Art,
From those misfortunes Heav'n will still impart▪
Appearances delude a humane sight,
But Treason cannot always walk in Night.



This Woman to my mind distraction brings;
And on the Rack my tortur'd Soul she flings.



'Tis plain! no small things could their Faiths remove,
They could not stoop at ought below her Love.
But were this Amorous League a dubious thing;
It is enough! she dares affront her King▪

  45In that unlawfull Love which she dares own
To Tyridates. 
But where's that height of Pride she did pretend,
When she can to a Subjects Love descend.



What shall I do?



'Tis fatal Love, your troubles does Create:
O Sir, but strip your Princely Soul from that
Which with dark shaddows over-hangs your mind,
And makes you to your chiefest Interest blind;
You soon will be from all Vexations freed,
When Traytors justly for their Treason bleed.



Yes, Mariamne soon should lose her head,
But that I Caesar and the People dread.



Never let that keep your great Soul in awe,
Salve it with Justice; let her dye by Law:
Let there some Process be against her fram'd:
Some Reverend Judges in Commission nam'd.



I am resolv'd now  and the way is good,
It is the Law, not Herod, spills her blood.
She, who reduc'd me to this shame and fear,
Shall as a Subject at the Bar appear!






But here comes one! though often Proud and High,
Falls down as poorly in Adversity.
You'l not be mov'd with Tears!  



No, nor with Prayers.



But I'le be gone Their Lives my Joys debar:
Revenge to thee! to thee! I'le Altars rear.
Exit.


Alex. kneels and weeps:



O Sir! take pitty, I your Grace implore;
Deny not one, who never Kneel'd before.



Peace! 'tis in vain; nor Tears, nor Words shall do,
And you deserve to share her Ruine too!




I will not rise unless you grant her Life.



No more! She is a Disobedient Wife.



I'le grant it yet some mercy show.





  46No Tears; nor Prayers shall my arm'd Justice stay 



I'le follow you 



My Guard without there! here!
Enter Guard.

This Woman quickly to her Chamber bear,
And keep her safe.



O see: I beg agen!
kneels.

I do submit 



Hast, quickly take her in.



O Jealous Husband! O thou wilful Wife!
'Tis cruel Death I see must end this strife.
If thou had'st but Obedient been to me,

Herod had had that Death he gives to Thee.
Ex. with Guards.




Still! still Confusion in my breast does roll,
And I feel mighty struglings in my Soul.
The Queens Death only satisfies my mind:
And yet in that Reluctancy I find.
Exit.






Are the Kings Orders then obey'd?







This hast bespeaks your Loyalty and Care.







Tortures made them tell
What they before could by no force reveal.



Not the great danger which they ran could move,
No Obstacle could blunt their sharpen'd Love.
The Queen and Tyridates met this Night.
Reads.

O here is Argument enough for spight.
This, this will do what though Mariamne dye,
It Cures not quite! the Prince must fall, or I:

Pheroras; it is late; the King possest
with Rage, is gone to try if he can rest:
To morrow Morning I'le these Papers show,
And he by me your Diligence shall know.
But much of this must not be seen by him:
They justifie her more then they condemne!

  47In mid'st of all their Torments they seem bold,
And have the Truth to her advantage told.
But say Pheroras, dy'd they all like men?



They dy'd as if they were to live agen:
And did with so much Courage yeild their breath,
As made me almost too in Love with Death:
If any sorrow in their Looks were shown,
'Twas for the Queens hard fate, and not their own.
Exeunt.












TO Rome I now my wand'ring steps must lead;
I've sworn, and my great Saint must be obey'd:
Doom'd from her sight, he now Iudea flyes▪
Who in Devotion to Mariamne's eyes,
Liv'd an Adorer, and a Pilgrim Dies.
But what high Bliss my Vowes to me deny;
Hast my Arsanes, to the City fly.
Enquire her health; I fear she's in distress,
The trembling of my Soul her ills express.
By secret Concord Lutes when tun'd alike;
One trembling moves, if you the other strike.
Thus my tun'd Heart by sympathy of Love
Does at those ills she feels, though distant, move.
Not Death, nor Herod's Cruelties I fear,
But the Queens last command that keeps me here.



I'le put on the Disguise I have within.



Here I will lye till you return agen;
And with my own sad thoughts I will converse,
Whose Clouds the Queens Health only can disperse.







This is the place I'm sure; hither last Night,
I'm told he and Arsanes took their flight:
Blest Chance! yonder he is! Revenge arise!
And make to thee and Love one Sacrifice.



What man is this? I'le ask him whence he came?




So, so! I have already rous'd the Game.



Sir, from the City came you?











'Tis a bus'ness strange and new.
The Queen  



Oh that blest name!



Has found too late 



You raise my fears.



A sence of her hard fate!
Though from her kindness you did once receive,
All that so strict a Vertue had to give.
Yet; 
With a Womans kindness sh'has a Womans fear,
And dreads her Dangers now she finds 'em near.
And though a while unmov'd;
She stood the Tyrants first, and easier frowns,
Who floats above weak streams, in rougher, drowns.
Her nearer Ruine (though no doubt she still
Esteems yee) does her breast with horror fill.
She raves, and wishes that black hour accurst,
In which she saw, and knew, and lov'd you first.
And all that storm still falls on Cruel you,
Who her to these unjust Misfortunes drew. 

  49She wishes you 



Hold! here's enough to Kill.
Since I am curst by my fair Queen! yet still
She's just, were she more cruel 




She undergoes by you, has brought me here;
That since such Beauty suffers for your sake,
My Sword may of your Crimes expiation make:
Draw and defend your Life 



No, kind Sir, I
Have guilty liv'd, but will not guilty dye.
Should I defend that Life which she condemns,
I justifie her sufferings, and my Crimes.
No, grant one Grace, the greatest man can give,
Here let my Breast that welcome guest receive.



This I expected 
aside.

Oh my hand does shake;
And foolish fear doe my Souls fortress take!



Why are you slow? dear Sir make hast 



Base fears be gone Well, now I am prepar'd!
Against Revenge in Love there is no guard.










Why do you stop that hand that is so kind,
Sent by the Queen, who has this grace design'd.



Oh Gods! your Passion Sir, has made you blind.
He's some Impostor would your Life betray 
You nothing of the Queen in this •an see,
Nor with her Vertue does this act agree.
I the Imposture quickly will explain.

offers a pass at Salome.




Hold, hold! 'tis not by thee I will be slain.

I come not hither by the Queens command,
Yet still this Traytor falls by my just hand.
By Princess Salome I'm sent 




  50Her and her Brothers honour I must right:
It is in both their Causes that I fight.



Why from the Queen did you pretend before?



The Prince I knew did her so much adore,
That calmely then he would his life resigne,
And so I might take his, not hazard mine.









Stay! the Cause is chang'd, and I'le dispute my Fate;
And give you what you ask; Herod I hate,
But Salome much more 



Hates he her more 
Then Herod?  my Revenge swell'd high before:
But now to kill or dye's an equal part:
False & Perfidious Traytor! at thy heart:


Her Perriwig falls off in making a Pass at Tyrid.


Ha! 'Tis her self.



Oh Curs't discovery! yes Sir! 'tis I,
And once again I thee to Death defy!



What Vision's this? you have disarm'd me now.
Why, Madam, all this Cruelty from you?



Oh my false Heart! I feel my rage expire,
At one kind breath my new-blown Love takes fire.
Sir, I'le forgive, if you'le return and Love,
I Herod's wrath, your dangers will remove,
And bring you back agen to his esteem.



Yes, I will Love! 







My Charming Queen 



Your Charming Queen! your Charming Queen shall dye!
I instantly will to her Tyrant flye:
Accuse her of all Treasons, false, or true;
All is too little that Revenge can do:
She dies to Morrow, nay to Night, to Day:
I cannot soon enough her life betray.
And since no other way will do't, I will
Torment thy Heart through Mariamne still.

  51And thou shalt live to hear this news Proclaim'd,
She's Dead: and if my pow'r can do it, Damn'd.
offers to go.




Stay, Salome; dear Salome!








If blood's your ayme; here Tyridates kill,
Let her but live 



No, loving Fool, she dies.



Oh thou black malice! wert thou but a man,
I by thy Death would my Queens safety gain.
But Curse she is a Woman! oh 'tis hard,
That Justice should by honour be debarr'd:
The greatest weakness is the strongest guard.



Sir, 'Tis not yet too late your Queen to save,
Could you but 



But what is it you would have?







Love, Madam, has Variety!
What Love is't you would have? to what degree:



I'd have you Oh your blindness and my shame!
Can you not guess the thing without the name?



Ah, Madam! if you Lawless thoughts pursue,
The ills you save her from will fall on you 
Horrors will haunt yee! 



You do not understand
A Lovers sence. In Love we are not pain'd
With th'ills we've acted, but in those we miss.
Repentance there's less Torment, then a wish.
Try but to Love me, 'tis an easie grant:
Speak some kind things; or if new words you want
T'express a Passion by; oblige my Ear,
And repeat somthing that you said to her.



Madam! what would your abused fancy get
If I that do not Love should Counterfeit.
The first I cannot, and the last I scorn:
My thoughts are never in Disguises worne.
I cannot tell yee 



No, nor can I hear?

  52I've said too much for a return so small:
But here once more my Fury I recal.
Since Plots on Tyridates vain do prove,
To take away thy Life, or gain thy Love:
Thy heart I yet have one way left to break;
My Vengeance at the Queen its ayme shall take:
There I will stab thee in a tender part,
And through her Breast strike thy ungrateful heart.






Thy kindness and thy threats I both despise;
But oh her rage at Mariamne flyes.
I'le to the Court, and instantly informe
My Queen, and be her guard against this storme.
What if I'de sworn a thousand Oaths and broke
Them all, her certain Ruine to revoke?
Yet Perjury's no sin in such a Case;
Kind Salome! thy Malice is a Grace:
Thy Cruelty has done an act so brave,
It gives me pow'r my Queen to see, and save.
By such a hand so great a Bounty given!
An Instrument of Hell has lent me Heav'n.
Exit.





Mariamne lying on a Couch sleeping, Cleophe by.





See where she lies; her eyes chain'd up with sleep:
The Graces in her Face a Guard do keep:
With what serenity she does appear:
How calme her Soul is, not disturb'd with fear.
While mine feels horrors! Oh my heart! I must
Withdraw, least to my self I prove unjust.
For those almighty Charms her Beauty wears,
Spread for my Anger, and my Justice snares.
stands aside.




O Cleophe! my Rest hast pleasant been,
Awakes.

In sleep I have a blessed Vision seen!

  53Souls undisturb'd when they lye down to rest,
Are often with such fair Idea's blest.
I find Heav'n may in Prisons be; whilst Hell,
And all its Furies in the Pallace dwell!
Wipe off your Tears, and be not so unkind!
Your weakness Cleophe disturbs my mind.
Let Death and Fortune threaten if they will:
What though I fall? I am above'em still.







Oh thou Heroick mind! not startl'd yet?
See how she does unmov'd, undaunted sit!




Madam! by this Commission we are sent,
In which we obey our Royal Kings Commands 
You are accus'd by Him 




Me-thinks you are too insolent and bold!
A Princess of my Birth, your Lawful Queen,
Heir to the Crown, and stoop so low?
Can you be Subjects and my Judges too?




We from the King, Madam, this power receive!



The King himself has not so much to give.
For He can never make my Spirit bow
To such a base submission crav'd by you.




'Twill be your Glory if you're Innocent.



My Soul ne're knew what to be guilty meant!
Excepting Heav'n I other Judges scorn:
But chiefly you, who are my Subjects born.
Therefore forbear  





What to your Birth and quality we owe:
Which hitherto we with respect have paid.
The King on us has this Injunction laid:
To whom it is our Duty to obey;
And you as well as we should homage pay:
You'l guilty seem, if you do this refuse.
Queens ought to clear themselves when Kings accuse.



But I from his Authority, and yours,
Appeal to Higher and more Righteous Powers.




Our Conscience guides us, and the Law.




All these Formalities to make me dye?
My Friends to Death without these shows were sent.
May not I tread the Path my Kindred went?




Madam! of you the King has greater Care,
And by your Tryal, hopes to find you clear.



Though his high Cruelties I must confess,
Have justly made the Wifes affection less:
Yet my firm Duty never can decrease.



I can no longer hold 



I'le not believe but you are Guiltless too!
No memory of my Banisht rage shall stay,
All my suspitions Love has blown away.



Hold Cruel Man! let Justice have its course:
My Judges I dislike, but thee much worse;
Beyond the bounds of Cruelty they fly,
Who torment those, who are about to dy.



Oh you mistake me, for I come to save 



Her Life who hates it, and desires a Grave.
But what's your right, to give or take my Life,
You know you are not King but by your Wife.



Thou try'st by all extremities to move
My long-kept Patience, and provoke my Love.
To that alone and that thou too well know'st
The Life thou yet enjoy'st! Proud Queen! thou ow'st.



Nor thy Caresses, nor thy Threats shall move,
Thy Threats are yet less hateful than thy Love.



Since you my Love with so much scorn deny,
Thou shalt have thy desire yes, thou shalt dye,



Perform that Charge I formerly did give,
And if you find her false, let her not live.
Let not the Name of Queen, keep you in awe:
Nor yet Divert the Justice of the Law.
Exit. Mar.




You see your Champion's gon; you may with-draw;
I am your Queen, above you, and your Law.
Exit.




She has a Soul no Power on Earth can tame.




We may return as useless as we came.





But why so weak! what shifting Passions move
His Soul? now mad with Rage, now fool'd with Love▪



But once again I am my self become,
And will an inrag'd Monarchs power assume.
Such high and lofty Pride swells her great heart,
That 'tis high time that and her head should part.
What now?




She treats us Sir with such disdain and scorn,
As if she were more than a Princess born.



She's guilty then, who dares not thus be try'd.



I doubt there's somthing in it more than Pride.



O Heav'n! pull down your Thunders on my head,
Pluck up those roots of Love, or strike me dead.



Why make you thus your self unfortunate!
To rage for her that pays your Love with Hate.



I know she hates me, and I know it well;
And yet I can't her Image hence expel.
But I will hear no more what Love can say:
Yes, yes, Mariamne, thou shalt Dye to day.
I'le start not from what I resolve to do,
Though whilst I take her Life, I lose mine too.



Sir, you with Passions have so much been sway'd,
You never ask'd whether you were Obey'd
In your commands last Night: but you will find
delivers him the Papers.

Somthing in these will satisfie your mind.



'Tis true I had forgot.
Reads to himself.




See! how it works?
Poison I hope in their Confession Lurks!
See how he swells!

  56It will burst out anon:
He likes not what he Reads, yet must read on.



How! when I was to Caesar gone, the Queen
reads.

Was privately by Tyridates seen!
Oh Heavens!
Last Night for all the Danger he was in,
Return'd and privately met her agen.
Disguis'd alone by Night ah this does prove
The strength of his and her unlawful Love.
Are these men Dead? hah! 



They have receiv'd a just reward of Treachery 



Yes! here's enough to satisfie my mind.
Now Justice to my self, and thee, I am kind.
For she shall Dye, and like a Traytress too.
Do you my Orders instantly pursue.
Do it before my fit of Love return. 



If that get in, it will my Rage remove.
I must keep this Storm to keep out Love.
Exit.









Leave weeping Cleophe, I pray forbear;
Is it the mark of sorrow, or of fear?



Madam, I doubt your spotless Innocence
Against the Tyrant will be small defence!
You know he spares no Life when Rage bears sway:
And now I fear least it take yours away. 



I prithee neither fear, nor weep for that,
'Tis Death alone can make me fortunate.
That will my Soul from Chains of flesh unbind,
And give unbounded freedom to my mind.
This Soul that's fetter'd here, when I shall dye,
To an Eternal Liberty will fly:

  57And what's contracted in this Body now,
Shall like a mighty Circle endless grow.
How Cleophe, can I your tears approve,
Who weep the fate I both desire and love.
If thou lov'st me, shew an unclouded eye,
I am resolv'd, and am prepar'd to Dy.
'Tis guilt alone disturbs a Soul with fears,
And foolish weakness vents it self in Tears! 






Madam, I am sorry that 'tis I must bring
So sad a Message from an Angry King.



Speak it Pheroras, and I'le bless that breath,
That greets my Ear with the kind sound of Death.



Nothing can your unhappy Fate put by,
His resolution's fix'd, that you shall dye 
And all things do without already wait,
Therefore prepare your self for this sad Fate.




Pheroras, call't not sad; I n'er till now
Receiv'd a Message half so kind from you.
Let Herod know his present I receive
As the most pretious thing he had to give.
And with my thanks Pheroras let him know
This to my memory, and my blood I owe:
I n'ere did derogate in all my Life
From th'Honour and the Vertue of a Wife.



Oh would the King your Loyalty believ'd,
Or were by some kind Angel undeceiv'd!



The blood of Philon and Sohemus shed,
Will pull down Vengeance on his guilty head:
And if my Death is stain'd by any guilt,
'Tis 'cause imprudently their blood I spilt.
For Tyridates, I confess 'tis true,
I render'd what was to his Vertue due.
Acknowledgments and Innocent esteem,
And that was all I ever gave to him.

  58I shall not rack your Patience by delay,
However I a little beg your stay.
Whilst I retire to banish from my mind,
All those Ideas I must leave behind.
That my wing'd Soul prepar'd for her high flight,
May shake off Life and Crowns to mount more light.


Ex. Mar. & Cleop.





All things are ready! where's the Pris'ner gone.



She did desire some time to be alone.




But does her haughty mind continue still?




Death will affright her sure, or nothing will.




But how did she her Sentence Sir, receive?



She seem'd not to Rejoyce, nor yet to Grieve!
She heard me speak unmov'd and without fears
When I my self could scarce refrain from tears.
She whom Friends Deaths has into Passions thrown,
Calmely receives the Knowledge of her own.
And as her tongue did from reproach refrain,
She shew'd it was below her to complain.
She spake! would Herod had himself been by,
And unconcern'd, prepar'd her self to dye:
Enter Mar. & Clophe.

But see she comes; her Eyes no grief betray:
She is Tryumphant on her dying-day.



Come Friends, let's go! conduct me to the place,
Whence I shall follow all my Noble Race.
What means that Cypress Scarse?



To blind your Eyes,
Death will be gentler when it does surprize!
Nature will start else in her own defence.
The stroke is suffer'd best, whilst in suspence.
You must not see the Blow!



Lay that Scarfe by.
I am a Queen, and like my self will dye.
It is not Death can overcome my heart:
Nor at its blackest horrors make me start.
No, I'le look thus, thus Fate despis'd I'le meet:
'Tis they smile best, who death thus kindly greet.
Exeunt.







The Pulses of my trembling Soul beat high,

Mariamne's dead, or is about to dye.
Disturbing fancies aggravate my fears,
And Ignorance does but increase my Cares.
Such horrid Visions fright me from my rest,
My interrupted slumbers they molest.
In vain all day her safety I enquire,
For none will satisfy my just desire.
Minutes seem days, and every hour a year,
Whilst I am rack't thus betwixt hope and fear.
O Cruel King! with Torments thou dost kill:
The fear is always greater then the ill:

I once agen to my rough guard will sue;
Gold may do more then Tears or Prayers could do.
Exit.





What ayles you Sir?



Did not you hear the Musick? see, see, what's there?



Sir I see nothing that should cause this fear.
He is distracted sure?



See, see, what sight my Eyes invades▪
See Aristobulus from the Neather shades!



Sir, I see nothing, 'tis your fancy sure.




See the Queens Brother comes to fright me too.



Look calmer Sir! your fancy is disturb'd!



See Old Hircanus risen from the Dead!
See Salome how he looks and shakes his head?
See Ioseph, Sohemus, Philon! see where they go.
They are all risen from the shades below.



Sure it is Madness that disturbs you so!



Oh the Queen, the Queen, the Queen! Oh she is dead!
See Salome: stay, Mariamne stay: she's fled.



Pray Sir settle your disturb'd mind! 



Stay Mariamne! dead, dost fly from me too?
No Jealousy nor Rage can reach you now.
Exeunt.










The general murmur which assaults my Ear,
Speaks the sad Truth of my unhappy fear.
I dare not ask, and yet I fain would know,
Suspence! alas! does but intangle woe.






Sir, here's Pheroras that can tell you more.



Tell me Pheroras, may it be believ'd
The Queen is dead! I hope I am deceiv'd?



Yes Sir, she's dead, and all that glory's gon,
Which with such Lustre in Iudea shon.
Like a bright Star dropt from the Firmament;
She's fallne, and with her all the light she lent.



O Cruel King! I wish! but 'tis too late!




I need not tell what brought her to this Fate.



That's too well known; but tell me how she dy'd.



O Sir, the Queen such manly Courage wore,
As you or Caesar could have shown no more.
Unmov'd, and without sign of discontent,
Unvail'd she to the Fatal Scaffold went.

  61There of us all she kindly took her leave,
Some Jewels then to Cleophe she gave:
And made the Guard to bear her Weeping thence,
Because her pious Tears gave her offence,
Whilst she discours'd, our Tears run trickling down,
And no Eyes there were Tearless, but her own.



The highest Vertue's fled that ever shin'd!
O Cruel Tyrant! to the World unkind!



O Sir! the King does want your pitty now,
I left the Pallace Sir to seek for you.



What then it seems he does repent too late.



Yes Sir! he now repents what he has done,
And calls on Mariamne, now she's gone.
The Furies sting his Soul with such remorse,
He now his Servants, now, himself does Curse.
He threatens Death and a Revenge on all.
But yet the storm seems on himself to fall:
Just now he's gone, and none did dare withstand
Wrath in his Eyes, a Dagger in his hand.
Distracted thus, he towards the Prison made,
Where her dead body back they have convey'd.
'Tis you alone his Fury can asswage,
No other dares oppose his fatal Rage.



Come! let us go! lest we should come too late:
I must avert, though he deserves that Fate.
Exeunt.









So much Confusion I meet every where,
I have no doubt for my increasing fear.

  62See there's the Cause. Alas! this dismal sight
O'rewhelms my sence with horrours dark as Night.
Nature's too strong,
And keeps my Soul in Prison here too long.
But I will give no Rest to my sad mind,
Till I a way to Death, or Vengeance find.
Tyrant, at thee, my just revenge shall fly;
And then contented with my Fate, I'le dye.
Exit.






See where she lyes Arsanes! see she's dead!
And my enfeebled Soul is with her fled.
Here I my grief will forfeit at the Eye,
And gazing thus upon this Object, dye.
I feel the little blaze of Life decrease,
And yet my mind enjoys no kind of Peace.
I would have time
With my own hands to tear his heart away,
Who could such Innocence to Death betray.
But ah my Soul is flutt'ring to be gone,
And leaves Revenge to the just Gods alone.



Oh Sir, your Courage should support you now.



My Life Arsanes to the Queen is due.
Was't not enough, (Oh aggravating thought!)
That the Queen dyed, and dyed too by my fault!
I caus'd the Cruelties she did sustain;
After all this, can I behind remain?
No, I would strike a Dagger to my heart,
Had not my kinder grief perform'd that part:
My juster sorrow sudden death affords,
Without the help of Poyson, Wound, or Swords:

Arsanes help, remains of Life are small:
At my ador'd Queens feet direct my fall.



Shall grief thus overcome?



O yes, I find
Deaths kind embraces all my sences bind.

  63The world turns round, and by degrees I gain
A kind of Resurrection from my pain.
Farewell my kind Arsanes.








Accept dead Queen, this Homage which I pay.
At my approach be not offended now,
The strictest Vertue may this grace allow:
Thy Vow to Herod's Cancel'd here, and I

Now gain that Bliss you did in Life deny,
And we may now come nearer when we dye.






Where is the Queen! Oh she is dead; she's dead 
Thou lyest it can't be yet from me she's fled.
See there she lyes, Murder'd by my Command;
Here I alive, her Bloody Husband stand.



Thanks my kind heart! my blood new Vitals takes;
Rows'd by that form my drooping Spirit wakes.
draws.










Tyrant, art thou here?



Usurper, how darest thou invade this place?
If Life thou lovest, take hence thy hated face.
So great a Passion none but she e're gave:
I'm Jealous of that Beauty in her Grave.



Monster, when by my hand thy blood is spilt,
To meet Damnation equal to thy Guilt;
At that blest minute thy black Soul shall flye,
May Heaven but hate thee half so much as I.




Have at thy heart, thy fury I defy.
Two fiercer Foes, Fate on one Stage can't bring;
A desp'rate Lover, and a Rival King.


They make a full Pass, and both fall; Tyridates at Mariamnes feet.



Revenge, thou'st done thy part, now Love go on;
And finish what Mariamnes Eyes begun.

  64Though it grows dark, my Ghost shall rove about,
And never stop till it has found thine out.
To do thee Homage, when in Heaven we meet,
There as on Earth I'le fall before thy feet.
dyes,




Ha! into what Confusion am I hurl'd,
Hee'l be my Rival in the other World.
If Souls can fight, I thee to Battle dare,
And mine shall hence only to meet thine there.
As my blood cooles, my frighted sence looks home
On my past deeds, and what I have to come.
Here stand my Crimes, and there Eternity;
Men take the largest prospect when they dye.
Just Souls may mount, but mine I fear descends,
Dyes

There Love, there Jealousy, here Tyrant ends 



A Roman Courage in my breast I find,
And a disdainful scorn to stay behind:
But I must live in kindness to thy name,
And keep my hated life to speak thy same.
Exit.






All dead! and all my Trophyes! work for Graves!
Ruine and Death, ye are obedient Slaves,
Stars boast no more, the rule of humane fate,
No threatening Planet like a Womans hate.
I fround, and Ruine darted from my Eyes,
Doom'd by my hate, this blasted greatness dyes.
If Kings are next to Gods, what then are they,
Who at their feet such mighty Victimes lay!
Oh Jealousy! Oh Glorious Woman-kind!
But thy chief Conquest Salome is behind.

I know I for their deaths accus'd shall be;
And the dull Gown must of my head decree.

I scorn to such mean Judges to discend:
No, I began with this, with this I'le end 
draws her Dagger.

They the best Courage show, who with a frown
Give others death, and smiling give their own 
Stabs her self.




Ha! must my death admit of Lookers on!
Tares open her Bosom, and stabs agen.

Dull Life make hast, & tardy Soul be gone.
So, now 'tis done 
falls.

Death ends both scorn and pride:
And I may dye by Tyridates side.
Though love once made me fire, Fate sets me free,
And in the Grave makes me as cold as thee 
dyes.




Come let us from this dismal place be gon,
Where Cruelty and Love so much have done.



Love, Jealousy, and Spight, conspir'd thy fall:
But thou, great Queen, hast over-come them all.
Faire Innocence, how e're supprest, will rise;
And Vertue, though she suffers, never dyes.




