



A Very Pleasant place this, Pedro.



Ay, Sir, and a very Pleasant Journey you are un∣dertaking,
never a Penny of Money in your Pocket,
and Heav'n knows how far you have to Travel.



Nay, the Truth is I am like a single Man, set a float in the bare hulk
of a Vessel; and have no other Pilot than Providence to Guide me.



'Tis a hopeful Condition indeed you have brought your self to, a
Plague of the Dice, I say, here have you cast away 500 l. a Year, only for the
foolish diversion of shaking your Elbow, and putting your self out of Humour
every Night.



What the Devil shall I do now Pedro?



Do! hang your self: For you have made Venice too hot to hold you;
I never knew you rise in a morning of late, but your Levy was more crowded
with Dunns than a rising Favourite's with Solicitors for Preferment.



I would very fain know now, what Course I wou'd not undertake, to
Live by Robbing is quite out of Fashion, for those that are worthy Money
now travel with so little, that the Imployment of a Thief here brings as small
Gains, as that of a Clipper does in England.


Artan, a Spirit rises in the Habit of a Scholar.






The like to you, Sir.
What a Pox did he come here Invisible?
I'm sure two minutes ago I saw no body within two Miles of me.



'Tis a Sign he's no Creditor, Sir, If he were you wou'd have spy'd
him sooner.



Pray, Sir, which way do you Travel?



To the Devil for ought I know.



Ay, Sir, If you'l be pleas'd to bear his Charges, he's in the right
road, he needs no Guide, Sir.



No Faith, I'm in as Direct a way as I cou'd wish, for I have Poverty
and Dispair to lead me to his Worship, and in my Opinion they are as suffi∣cient
Guides as any man can desire.



Are you in want, Sir?



Yes, to my certain knowledge, Sir?



What's that to you, Sir.



May be I wou'd assist you, Sir.



Comprehend me in the Treaty, I beseech you, Sir.



Gentlemen, it was always my temper to assist men in Distress, as I
suppose you are.



By my troth your supposition is right, Sir: For my Master has been
so very much oblig'd to the Bitch Fortune, that out of 500 Pounds a Year,
he has not one poor Groat left.



And yet he seems to have a Noble Spirit.
Why do you not attempt to take Revenge on those that have undone you.



Revenge, O'ons, a fellow without two pence in his Pocket, pretend
to take Revenge of a Lawyer and a Userer.



How can I take Revenge?



You may with Ease.




There are not two such Crafty Villains Living.
I defie the Devil himself to be too hard for 'em.



I would not have you think so, take my Councel, you shall your self
have Power to serve your Friends, and plague your Enemies.



Gads-bud, take him at his Word Master, and if he keeps it, we'll Cut
out the Lawyers Tongue, and Plunder the Usurer, that's the best way to
be reveng'd on them.



Pray Sir, what am I to do to deserve this mighty Favour?



A triffle, if you will consider it.
You shall have Power and Wealth at your Command, the Choicest Beau∣ties
shall obey your Will, fresh Honours every hour shall Rain Down on you:
And in return, I'll ask no more than this, give me your Friendship.



Is that all you ask?



No, one thing more, but mark me e'er you grant it, Here is a Paper,
it Contains few Words, sign that, and the Great Duke himself shall be
Slave to thy Command.



S'life, Sign it, Sign it Master, be it what it will, 'tis not the first Bond
you have set your Hand to, that you never design'd to Pay.



Let me Consider, I believe I have Guest what his business is. No
Money, no Friends, nor no Credit, nor no way of getting Money, unless it
be upon the High-way, which if I undertake, I may very Decently be taken
and Committed without Ceremony, Tryed without Dispute, and Condemn'd
without Favour, Hang'd without Mercy, Die without Repentance, and
  3
Damn'd, without Profit: No Gad, since my Condition is so, that I must go.
to the Devil, I'll get something by't I'm resolv'd on't.
Well, Sir, before I enter into my League with you, you shall grant me
these Demands.
First, I will want no Wealth, but lest I shou'd be Questioned how I ga∣ther
up my Riches, I will have Power to Cure the Feeble Wretches of all Dis∣eases
they linger under, so by my knowledge in that wondrous Art, none will
suspect, nor envy me my Fortune; Consent to this, and I'll sign my Papers.











It is not in my Power:
But thus far I'll Comply with your request, tho'we cannot Controul the
Destinies, and give those Life who fated are to Die, yet shall your Art ex∣tend
thus far, to give immediate Health to those who are to Live.



Hum, why that's something truely, but with your Favour, how shall
I know who is design'd for this World, or who must take a Journey into your
Large Dominions.



Search in your Pocket, you will find a Herb, and in your Man's ano∣ther,
by their Virtue I appear visible to both, but they, who want'em can∣not
view my airy form: If at the Bed's head you behold me stand, the Pa∣tient
Lives; if at the feet, he Dies.



Hold, Sir, let me have one word with you, I beseech you, since my
Master has pack'd up in order for the taking of a Journey to Hell, and that I as
his Faithful and Dutiful Servant must needs follow, I think it is but reasonable
we shou'd know what Company we are to keep there, and be acquainted with
their Manners and Religion, that we may avoid the Scandal of having but a
short acquaintance with the Devil.



And withal to satisfie me whether or not you have the Power to make
good this large Agreement.



You shall be satisfied in all your scruples, and think not you will see
ought terrible. You shall have prospect of the Elessan Shades, where you
shall view the Joys of Happy Lovers; The ancient Hero's that disdain'd to
live, after the loss of Fame; there you shall see mad Lovers, Jealous Hus∣bands,
City Wives, the bawling Lawyer, and the griping Userer, Courtiers,
Physicians, such a Tribe of Knaves, our Consines are scarce large enough to
hold'em.



He waves his Hand, a Simphony of Musick, as
it is playing the Scene Changes to a Beautified
Garden with Orange Trees of Each Side, and
at the end little Cyprus Trees, Several Fi∣gures
rise up, just as he Describes in his
last Speeches. After the Symphony is Play'd
a Man and a Woman Representing two happy
Lovers come forward, and sing this Song.


HOW Calm Elisa are these Groves,
How sweet to Entertain our Loves
Free from Sorrow, free from Care.
Jealousies and black Dispair,
In these sweet Elesian Groves
Calmly, we Enjoy our Loves.



In these sweet Elesian Groves,
Calmly we enjoy our Loves.



Here no busie Noise of State,
Comes to Interrupt our Joys,
No Ambition to be Great
Does our Halcyon Peace destroy.



In these sweet Elesian Groves
Calmly we Enjoy our Loves.



Pray, what were these when living.




Crost by unnatural Parents in their Wishes,
Who when they found they cou'd not live together,
Took the last Cordial Death, and now are Happy.



But pray, Sir, what is he?




That broke his Wives Heart with his Causeless Jealousie,
And thinking she'ad too little Plague on Earth,
He followed her to be her Torment here:
See they Come towards us.




Sings. Why, ah why, does Fate Decree
That I still must Wretched be?
Must my Torments never Cease?
Can the Grave afford no Peace?
Must I, must I ever be,
Plagu'd with Causless Iealousie?
Pray now Husband Pray be gone.


What You'd fain be left alone,
You thought your self safe when you Quitted your Breath,
But Spouse you and I must not part;
As I watch'd you in Life, I'll watch you in Death,
And keep Horn free in spight of Art.


Pray what have I done?


Nay, that you best know.


I never yet injur'd you?


But you may do;


Indeed you Provoke me,


Indeed Wife I can't,
Old Men are too Feeble, 'tis young ones you want.


She's a Fool not to make use of 'em then.


I see you intend I never shall have Rest.


I see you intend me two Horns for my Crest.
But faith Wife I won't be made such a Beast.


I will not stay, base Man farewell.


I'll follow thoughthou Lead'st to Hell,


But Pray, Sir, what is he that Looks so pensive?


His Story, I am sure must move your Pity:
There was a Lady, whom he long had Lov'd
And she return'd it with an equal Ardor:
The Parents were agreed, the Lovers pleas'd;
But on the very Day they shou'd have joyn'd,
Crossing the River, to her Longing Bridegroom,
Was by an accident or'e turn'd and drown'd;
Upon the News, his Senses quite forfook him,
And in few days his Life.



A SIMPHONY.Sforsa Comes forward Softly in a Mad Posture and Sings.
Sfor.
PEace, Peace, no Noise, you'l wake my Love,
Oh! softly, softly, Let us Move.
Yet I'am affraid
The Charming Maid,
Forgets it is her Bridal-Day,
Or sure she'd hast to come Away,
Oh! Sleep, thou Envy'd Rival hence,
Resign to me this Beautious Excellence▪

Orpheus haste, Employ thy Charms,
Wake her softly to my Arms,
Bring thy Sweetest tenderest Strains,
Love will pay thee for thy Pains.
A Symphony of soft Musick here. Mean time Sforza stands
fixt as if he Look'd on some Body.No more, no more, 'tis all in vain,
For poor Arena ne're must wake again,
Her pretty Soul is Fled before
On Wings of Angels Mov'd,
To tell how Sforza did Adore,


And how Arena Lov'd.
But I in Gloomy Shades alone
Must live, 'till he return:
Yes, yes Arena, since thou'rt gone

Sforza shall ever Mourn,
In Caves fill'd full of Dead Mens Bones
Henceforth I will remain,
Where I will end my Life in Groans,
For Peace and I must never meet again.
Here follows a Dance between a Lawyer and a Poor Clyent, a Courtier and
a Lame Soldier, a Userer and a Prodigal, a Physician and a Fool.After the Dance, Simphony of Pleasant Musick: And then the two
Happy Lovers come from their Bower and Sing.
Damon and Eliza

AH! How blest, how sweet it is,
Thus to Live in Endless Bliss,
Whil'st poor Mortals, Sweat and Toyle
All our Care's to Love and smile.


Here we rest secure from Fear,
Whilst on Earth all pains they Bear,
Ah! how happy then are we,
Who from all those pains are Free!



Here we Rest secure from Fear,
Whil'st on Earth all pains they Bear,
Ah! how Happy then are we,
Who from all those pains are Free!


Changes to the Grove that stood at the beginning of the Play.


Now, Sir, what think you? Now?



Why I think 'tis wonderful: And I'm amaz'd why men shou'd fear to
Die, when after Death they do enjoy such Pleasures.



Hark you, Sir, if you have ever a Blank about you, here's a poor
Friend of yours has another Soul at your Worship's Service.



Well, Sir, some other time I'll talk with you; Now hasten to the
City, there we'll fix the Agreement, and before the set o'th▪ Sun, Riches
shall flow into you; you need but name the man you wou'd have Sick, and
Health shall quickly leave him: Lets away.



But, Sir, if I shou'd at my Entrance be assaulted with Dunns, I hope
you won't be backward in making Patients of 'em.



Fear not, but follow me.



Now I shall once again appear in Splendor: View the bright dazling
Beauties of the Court, and laugh at them who made my fall their Sport.



But don't forget to the Devil for't.







SingingTEll me no more there must be something in't, Sirrah, Sirrah, I say
you do Love her, Sigh for her, Whine for her, Pine for her,
Die for her, Lye for her, and all that Sirrah; what a Pox you Rogue, do
you think your old Father, that has been a Whore-master from his Cradle, does
not understand the Language of the Eyes, you Ogling Rogue you.



Well then, suppose I do, sir.



Why then, if I were worth one Groat in the world I'd disinherit
you, you Dog• o•: But you know I'm poor Sirrah, my Poverty and In∣dulgence
is the occasion of your Sawcy Disobedience.



Sir, you • my Father, and I know so well, the Reverence I owe
your Sacred Name, That the North Star shall sooner fail the Sailer; The
Pellican forget to feed her young ones, than I forget the Duty of a Son.



Why look you now, Sirrah, you will perswade me after all this,
that you are not in Love; What the Devil, but that Damnable Distemper
cou'd have provok'd a Man to the making so many Similies. But Iemmy,
prethee Iemmy tell me truth, are not you Damnably in Love with this
Old fellow's Daughter.



Sir, I wou'd Scorn to tell a Lye to any one, much more to my
Father, therefore in few words, I Love her so I cannot live without her.



Well, but you must not Marry her Iemmy.



How, Sir, not Marry her.



No, no, by no means Iemmy, what Marry the Daughter of a
Muck-worm, a Rogue that has ruin'd your Poor Old Daddy, and swallow'd
as much Land in a Twelvemonths time as has kept our Family these 300
Years.



Sir, might I'speak my mind without offence, 'twas not the fault
of his Frugality, but your Extravagance that ruin'd you.



Why you Cursed Cons med Hellhound, dare you call your own
Fathers Management in Question? But hark Iemmy, suppose I shou'd be such
a kind tender hearted Fool to Comply with you in this business, how are you
sure her Father will be willing?



What need of his Consent, since we're agreed? His rigid Na∣ture
can't call for Duty; by Heav'n, the difference 'twixt her Soul, and his,
wou'd almost make me think she's not his Daughter.



Why then thy Mistresses Mother was a Whore Iemmy; Ha! and
if the Daughter provea Chip of the old Block, thou may'st be a Cuckold, my
little Iemmy Boy: But that's no great matter Child, here are things of more
moment to be consider'd on, if the old Hedghog do not consent, how will
you come by her Portion, you little Matrimonial Prig you?



I have her Love, that's all the Wealth I Covet.



Her Love with a Pox, must your Father and your Friend have her
Love too insteed of Board-wages, what an ungracious Rogue have I unthink∣ingly
begot here! Sirrah I Command you upon my Blessing, unless you can
get her Money as well as her Love, never to think of her.







No, Sir, no, Sir, what a Pox, I'll see who's Father you
or I.



Sir, I have been born to many great misfortunes,
But none e're touch•d me like your fall from Virtue.
If Wealth can win you, sir, take all I have,
The little Fortune that my Uncle left me.
Give me but your Consent to Wed Serena;

(For I will Dye rather then Wed without it)
If not I'll wander to some Distant Cli••e,
Where I will Curse my own Unhappy Fate,
But Bless my Mistress, and my Cruel Father.




Hold, hold, come back, Iemmy.

Come back my dear, dear, Iemmy, thou hast melted my stubborn heart;
thou hast thawed these frozen Fountains mine Eyes, and the spring of my
Tears shall water thy youthful Checks, thou •halt not go, thou staff of my
Age, I will lean a little longer upon thee, thou shalt marry her (Crying)
Thou sha't lye with her, (a little louder) and thou sha't beget what
thou can'st upon her Body. (Crying very loud) But when thou hast marry'd,
shall that 300 l. a Year thy Unckle left thee be all bestow'd upon old Iemmy,



With greater Joy than e're I did receive it.



Ah thou tender Lamb, thou sha't have a Wife my Dear Iemmy,
so farewel, farewell, thou Flower of thy Age, thou faithful Lover and o∣bedient
Son.
(Going,
Turn back Crying a little.
But Iemmy, my poor Boy, my darling Child, what ready
Money hast thou about thee Iemmy.?



Faith, Sir, but very little.



Well said Iemmy, a little with Content is a Feast for thee and
me Boy, how much is't my Precious?



About Ten Pieces, Sir.



Poor little Rogue, and shall we spend it all to day Titte, •all
poor Daddy put five pieces of it in his Pocket, to make a shew with my little
Pig•nye.



Ay, Sir, I'm happy you Command me.



Shall my little Iemmy, by my Jewel, thou sha't have her, b•
my Tit-mouse, thou sha't be marry'd to morrow-day Sirrah, by my Lovee.

Sings. Young Jemmy is a Lad,
My only Ioy and Honey,
He Loves his Poor old Dad,
And lets him want no Money.
Toll, Doll, Toll, Doll, &c.





Was ever Man so wretched in a Parent, he that shou'd teach me
the true Rules of Honour, and guide my youth in the strict Paths of Virtue
holds to my weak and unexperienced Eyes, the cursed mirrour of destroying
Vice. Ah! poor Serena, Partner in Affliction, whose Father's sordidness af∣fects
thee more than the Extravagance of mine does me.
Enter Hernando, Pedro and Artan Invisible.
My dear Hernando, I've been seeking thee, they told me at thy Lodging
thou wer't gone, with a resolve n•'er to return to Venice.



Why truly my Friend Gusman, I was so determin'd, but fortune has
been pleas'd to turn her Wheel once more to my Advantage, and tho I am
return'd to Venice as poor as I went out, viz. without one Farthing in my
Pocket, yet before many hours are past, my Gusman, thou shalt behold me in
that prosperous Station all Venice, shall admire and enjoy me.



You may assure your self I'm pleas'd to hear any thing that re∣lates
to your good Fortune; I will not ask you how your Fortune's chang'd,
but must rejoyce it's turn'd to your advantage.



Sir, Sir, stand upon your Guard, here's the Usurer with a whole
tribe of Rogues at his Heels; Mercy upon me, if the Devil shou'd fail us,
  12
what an excellent Physician will my Master make coop'd up in the Beggers
Hospital!




Gone from his Lodging, say you?



Yes, Sir, this morning early, and they told me he took his
leave of them, with a design to return no more to Venice.



Bless me, what an unfortunate Man am I, I tell you what, Mr. Delay,
I lent 300 l. upon his bare Bond, besides what I had lent upon his Estate.



Well, Sir, but the Estate no doubt is sufficient to make it up, and
leave you a Considerable Gainer too.



Ay, that's right Mr. Delay, but if I had been so discreet as not to
have lent that 300l there still had been so much more in my Pocket, my
Wise Lawyer.



Ah plague o' your Conscience, you hear Master?



What think you of this Fellow.



I shou'd think him a Villain, were he not Serena's Father.



Friend, let me beg you'l leave me here a little, I know his meaning, but
have a way to frustrate all his Malice; prethee leave me.



You must excuse me, I'm too well acquainted, with his pernicious
Temper to Expose you to what his Avarice leads him, I will stay with
you.



Well, do what you think fit. Save you Mr. Bond.



Ha! Mr. Hernando, bless me what a lying Messenger is this report!
why it has been all the mornings talk on the Rialto, that you had left your
native Country, and wander'd to seek your Fortune in foreign Parts.



You have done your best endeavour, Sir, to force me: Thou slave to
Muck, thou sordid •ump of Earth, thou Cannibal that swallow'st up Mankind,
when will the Widows Cries, and the Orphans Tears, the Mourning Heirs
thy villany has stript naked, find softness in thy barbarous Flinty Bosom.



Why how now, how now Mr. Hernando? in my opinion you give
your Tongue a greater priviledge than your wants can bear, to justifie it in:
marry come up, you have great cause to complain indeed, is this the thanks
you render me for my Civility, in being so long out of my Money to do
you service?



To do me Service, no thou Cormorant, it was to Glut thy own in
Insatiate Maw: Thou do a Service! Thou Relieve Mankind! yes thou wilt
feed 'em as the Indians do, to make 'em fatter for thy own devouring.







How, be Calm my Friend Gusman; no, while I have a Tongue,
I will Imploy it, in Curses on this Mis•reant, this Catiff, Diseases gnaw
thee to the very Bones, Blindness and Lameness, with the want of
Hearing, Gout, Stone and Ptissick, all at once assault thee, and when
thy hated Life must have an end; the Gibbet and Hangman bring it to
thee.



What a vain of Cursing my Master's got into, 'tis a sign he has
sold his Soul to the Devil.



Why really, Sir, your Tongue runs on at a wonderful rate,
and I can't tell when that's weary, but your Hands and Feet may be in
the same Humour, therefore it behoves me in what in me lies to pre∣vent
it. Officers, do your Duty.



We Arrest you, Sir, at the Suit of Mr. Gabirel Bond.



Why you eternal Bloodhound, won't my Estate make good all
that I owe you?



Officers, you know your business, Bayle, Jayle, or Money,
thats all I'll hear of at present.



Hold, Sir, I'll be his Surety.



With all my Heart, I desire no better, if he wants three
Hundred Pound more, upon your Bond, he shall Command it within
this half hour; wou'd I cou'd get him in my Clutches once, I'd ham∣per
him so fast he shou'd never have power to Court my Daughter.
Well, Sir, you'l pass your word for his Appearance.








Well then Officers, you are discharg'd.
(Exit Officers.

Artan Striks him with his Wand.
Bless me, what's that Mr. Delay, did you see any one Strike
me?



Not I upon my word, Sir.



Mercy on me, I felt something come as cold cross my Stomach,
as if Death had laid his Hand upon me.



So, so, they say the Devil's a Lyer, but I find he keeps his
word with my Master.



O help me, help me, Mr. Delay, I faint, my breath's gone, I'm
Dying, that Rogues Curses I'm afraid has had power over me; Mr. De∣lay,
Draw up a Bill of Indictment against him, and if I do Die, see him
hang'd I beseech you.



Bless me! what a sudden alteration's here, how do you Mr.
Bond? Alas he's Speechless, pray Gentlemen come hither, sure he's
Dying.



Hold, let me look upon him, hold him up, and if 'tis possi∣ble
to recover him, spight of the Injur•es he has done me, I'll do
tha•〈◊〉 Office.



Now Blessing on you, 〈◊〉.



Let me see, oh, he's at the Head, all's safe, (Aside▪) Open
his mouth and pour this Cordial down, now give him Air, see, he
begins to stir.



How do you Mr. Bond?



Who's there Mr. Delay? O Lord I have been a Dead Man,
How in the name of Goodness came I thus recover'd, so well, so
lusty.



Really, Sir, you are beholden to Mr. Hernando for it, you were
stone Dead till he with a Rich Cordial he drew out of his Pocket
recovered you.



How, Mr. Hernando, forgive me that I shou'd harbour so
Inhumane a thought of him as I did: Dear Seignior Hernando, forgive
me I beseech you, and Pray, Sir, accept of my thanks; you know
Money's a scarce Commodity, and I have had many losses of late, but
upon my word I will withdraw my Action, and every Tenant of
mine that salls sick and does not Imploy you, I'll seize upon his
Goods, and put you into Possession of 'em.



A very honest and charitable reward, I must needs say.



Sir, I expect not a reward from you, take but this thought
with you, and I am satisfied, think but how poor a benefit is Wealth,
a thing most vile and useless without Health: and by your last mis∣fortune
you may find, you toyl for that which you must leave
behind.
(Her. Ped. Gus. Exit.




T•at's right, but by his favour I shall make bold to reap the
bene•it of it while I do stay, and not like such young Prodigals as
himself, live to see other mens Sheep devour my Pasture.






Seignior Gabriel, Save you.



Your Lordships humble Servant, I come this morning on the
Rialto, according as your Lordship ordered by your Messenger, but
was not so happy as to see your Lordship there to receive your
Commands.



Sir, I suppose you have heard the Duke's Decree, the
Governour of Dalmatia being Dead, you as the Worthiest for that
great Imployment, are by the Senate and the Duke thought fit to take
that Trouble upon you.



Trouble, Sir, I shou'd be mighty willing to undertake the trou∣ble,
but mercy on me, does his Grace consider the Charge 'twill put me
to, 4000 pounds a year expence at least; Bless me where does the
Duke imagine I shall pick it up.



How Seignior can you call your self of Venice, and stop
at any thing to serve your Country? your great Abilities are too well
known to be put off with frivolous Excuses, here's your Commission,
if you dare refuse it, you forfeit your Estate, that's all the Penalty.
(Exit. Senat.



All in the Devil's name, harke'e Lawyer, is there no way to
avoid swallowing this damnable Choak Pear.



You know 'tis impossible, if the Duke and Senate think you
sufficient to bear the Charge of the Imployment, you have no
Remedy.



Prithee good Mr. Delay, go home, turn over your Law Books,
find me out any Cranny that can afford me room enough to Creep out
of this damnable business.



I will do all I can, Sir, but I'm afraid 'tis to bery little
purpose.
(Exit Dela.



Why what an unlucky man am I, who the Devil wou'd take
pains to get Money, that must be imployd for other peoples uses:
but hold, let me Consider, the Law, if I mistake not, says, the Go∣vernment
of Dalmatia, shall be conferr'd on one that has Wealth and
  16
Health, but he that is Defective shall be incapable of bearing that
Office.
Defective, O that I had been born without a Leg or an Arm, what
a deal of Money might I have saved: But hold, I have it, I will be
Blind, 4000l. a Year is worth any Man's shutting his Eyes for.
But then, if I shou'd chance to be discover'd, my Estates forfeited,
but who the Devil shall discover it, unless I tell tales my self? no,
I'll be hang'd first, tho I get by the Government, I'll take care the
Government shall never get by me.

Let others Sweat, and Fret, and take much pains
And Toyl for Honour, while I reap the Gains.








WHY faith, new acquaintance, this Imployment was worth any
ones taking notice of, I have cur'd more Patients within this
two days, than an English Quack Kills in a twelvemonth.



Faith, Sir, and that's no inconsiderable quantity, I have known,
when I was there, the Bell tol'd thirty times in three days, for only one
man's handiwork.



But, Sir, what Rumour's this, of the Dukes illness?



He's Sick beyond the Po••• of Art to help him, you will be
sent for to the Court with Speed, and great Rewards will be offer'd
you to save him, but 'tis impossible, his time's expir'd, and at his Feet
you will behold me standing; you can do nothing but pronounce his
Death.



I know my Duty, and I shall observe it.



But, Sir, have you heard the News of Seignior Gabriel Bond?



No Pedro, prethee what is't?



Sir, he has lost his Peepers.



His Peepers, prethee what do'st thou mean?



Mean, Sir, why he's taken stone Blind.







So he reports himself, but 'tis all false, the Government of
Dalmatia being offer'd him, he takes on that Defect to save his Mo∣ney:
But see here comes the Messenger from Court.




Seignior Hernando, we have been seeking you, the Duke and
all the Court commend 'em to you. The Duke who stands in need of your
Assistance, hearing the wondrous Cures your skill Performs, does by
the advice of the drooping Senate, Implore your kind ass•stance.



My good Lord, I shou'd be happy if my little Art coa'd serve
to help his Grace; but this I will assure you, if his Distemper will ad∣mit
of Cure, he shan't want it long, but if the Fates have Decreed his
Death, we must submit with Patience.



We know we must submit to Destiny, but Art must be apply'd.



I'll try my utmost.






Come my Child, comfort thy self, don't Weep for what
can't be avoided, 'tis a Great Misfortune 'tis true, to lose that preci∣ous
Jewel sight, but since Providence has left Life and Health, time
may wear off the other unhappiness: Here my dear Child go to the
Dukes Neice, deliver her this Commissi•n, and beg her to acquaint her
Unkle and Senate, with your Father's sudden misfortune.



I will obey you, Madam.
(Exit Serena.



Well, I am a very wicked Woman, for I cannot avoid rejoyc∣ing
at this accident, now shall I have the opportunity of entertaining
my dear Monsieur, without the fear of being seen by that Argus that
was. Oh! here he comes, now must I be teaz'd with his nauseous Com∣pany
day after day, for I am certain he'll never let me be from him, but
'tis no matter, since he can't see what I do, I'll take care his Sence of
Learning shall go but a small way towards a discovery of any of my
Actions.




Where is my Wife? pray lead me to my Chicken, the only
comfort left me is to hear her talk, I was once delighted to look on
her, but that Blessing's taken from me, where art thou Honey?



Here my poor unfortunate Love.



Have you sent to the Dukes Neice, as I instructed you.



Yes my Life, your Daughter's gone.



That's well, reach some Chairs Peter, come sit down my dear.
Peter.







You may go Peter.



Oh my dear Child, this is a great misfortune, but we must bear with pa∣tience,
trouble and vexations must be expected while we live in this
transitory World.



Indeed my dear, I can't chuse but rejoyce to see you bear so
great an Affliction with so much Christian Patience: I have sent for a
Famous Physitian, and Oculist, that has not been long from France, an
Admirable Man, and if there be any remedy I'm certain hee'l apply it
to you.



Ah Lord Child, Doctors Art will signifie Little to me, mine's
a just Judgment, for my wicked Extortions, and Cruelty to the Poor.



But my Dear, we ought to use our utmost endeavour, and not
rely all upon Providence.





Madam, there's a French Gentleman below enquires for you▪



Wait on him Peter, come my Dear, comfort your self, I can
assure you, he•• a very able Man.



If he shou'd discover my rognery, I were in a very sine condi∣tion:
But hang't, if I swear I can't see, who the Devil can say any
thing to the contrary, let 'em guess and be Poxt, I'll be wicked before
I'll part with my Money.





Monsieur, you're welcome, Peter go down, and shut the door
after you, here's a cold wind comes in.
(Exit Peter.

Come Monsieur, pray be pleas'd to sit, I writ you word this morn∣ing
of my Husband's misfortune, and hope you will use your utmost
endeavour to recover him.

(All this Speech after Peter's going
off, the Monsieur is kissing her
hand very Eagerly.


Madam, you sall command me, hold up your Head Monsieur,
Garzoon, he be very much Blind.



That's a Lye, a Plague of your skill, I find my Wife has a
greater need of this Physitian than I have.



Hark ye Madam, you must put him presently to Bed, and me vil
clap someting to his Head sall do him ver much good.



Yes, a plague on you, I do believe you will clap something to my
Head with a Vengeance to you, I shall be made a Cuckold before my Face.



You hear Husband what this good man says.



Yes, yes, (and see what he does too, make me thankful, I
don't much care, with the Gentleman's Favour, to tamper much, but as
  20
Providence sent it me; e'en let Providence take it from me, I'll make
use of no other Physitian I assure you.



Nay pray, my Lamb, be rul'd by the Gentleman, indeed you
must, if you know the Affliction I suffer to see you thus, you wou'd
not be so obstinate.




Ah this dissembling Limb of Lucifer, how concern'd she is
that I won't like a good natur'd Husband, give her a private oppor∣tunity
to make me a Cuckold!




Will you go and lye down my Buddy.



If I do I suppose you won't be long after me Buddy.




What sayst thou my dear Heart?



Why, I do say I will have nothing to do with your Oculists
and your French Connundrums, I am very well satisfied, no Art can
relieve me, and I will not be at an unnecessary Charge: The Devil set
his Foot between you, how the Serpents twine about one another!



Garzoon vat doe see Monsieur a moy, to believe me vil take
a de muck de mony.



I see in you; what the devil can I see in you, that can't see whe∣ther
it be day or no.



You must excuse him, his affliction and pain together makes
him talk something extravagantly. Who's within there, Peter?


Bring in a Flask of white Florence, I must beg you to drink one glass
to my poor Husband's recovery before you go.





Madam, vid all mine art, and but dat you are de very good
Lady, me wou'd let him walk vid de Dog and de Bell all his Life time,
but for your sake, me vil take care to make him de Grand Cuckold be
garr:





Set it down Peter, will you drink a glass my dear, it may per∣haps
cheer your Spirits?





Ay, ay, with all my heart, give it me Wife, give it me, since
I pay the Reckoning, 'tis but necessary I shou'd drink in my turn.




Come Monsieur, pray be pleas'd to pledge my Husband, 'tis
right O palatable.

(Puts a handful of Gold into the Glass.


O Lord! O Lord! I shall run mad, I shall forget my self, and
discover my falacy, what an Extravagant Generous Strumpet is this
Buxom Wife of mine to her Stallion, a whole handful of Gold, by the
Curses of Matrimony.




Madam, Avousante Monsieur, to your good recovery.



Ah the Devil set his Foot after it, choak him, what a charge∣able
spic'd Cup has he swallowed for a mornings Draught!



Indeed Monsieur I'm infinitely obliged to you for this Care you
take of my Husband, pray see him often, and try what Art can do to
help him.

(gives him a Gold Watch.


Oh Death and Furies, I shall be ruin'd, why this is a very hard
case now, that I must be oblig'd to be Dumb as well as Blind.
(Aside.
Hark Wife, I think you may as well dispatch the Gentleman, that you
and I may have some discourse in private



I will my dearest: Monsieur you see my Husband is uneasie un∣der
his unhappiness, therefore for this time we'll take our leaves, but
pray come and see how he does in the Evening, I beseech you.


him a Diamond Ring.


Hell and the Devil! I can't bear it, why at this rate shee'l give
all I'm worth in a days time, I had better by half stood Governour of
Dalmatia, twou'd have cost me but sixty thousand Crowns, and I cou'd
have cheated the poor of half the Money, like an unthinking Blockhead
as I was. O Blood and Fire! I cannot, will not bear it, come what will
on't.

(They are kissing all this wh••e, stamp•.


Bless me, what's the matter Husband?



Oh Wife! I have such a miserable pain about my head, that I
am not able to bear it, lead me in, and lay me down, that I may have
nothing to do but die, and wish you at the Devil.




Well my Dear, I'll go with you; Mo•sieur, your Servant, you'l
be sure to give us the happiness of your Company in the Evening.



Ouy Madam, me sall be sure to wait upon you.



Nay, prethee Wife come away, come away, for this pain is
intolerable, I cannot bear it.

(As he is going off, hitting his stick upon the Ground,
he hits Monsieur over the Head, who is making love
in dumb show to Mrs. Bond, she squeaks.







Hah! what is the matter Chickin, what dost thou cry
out for, has any thing frighted my Buddy?



O Lord Husband, you have almost knoc'd the poor Monsieur
o'the Head.



Marry Heaven forbid, oh dear, Sir, excuse me, my miserable
pain made me strike any where, but I hope you'l not take any thing i•l
of a poor old Man, who has neither Sight nor •ences.



But you have de very good feeling for all dat.



Pray Monsieur excuse this misfortune, and be assur'd, nothing
shall be wanting on my side to make amends for this accident.

(Gives him another Purse.


Oh the Devil! why I had better not break his head, since I
find I must pay so much for a Plaister.



Madam, me am your ver humble Servant, and me am satisfied.



A plague confound you, well you may, since you have had such
a plentiful parcel of s••art-money.
(Exit Bond and Lucy.



So, begar dis be de ver good salve for mine broken Pate, but
garzoon's me must make o my market quick for fear she shange her
inclination, derefore if me can perswade her to Rob her Husband, and
intrust me vid de money, Jerny me vil ver fairly make a Journy to
France, and leave her and her Cuckold to starve togedar.
(Exit.


with several Nobles by him.


How fairs your Grace?



Near to my Journeys end. Say, is that man of skill yet
come to Court.



Not yet my Leige, but we expect him hourly.



It matters not, for Art will prove but in vain, no bars
can stop where Death resolves to enter; I feel him like an honest just
Physitian, who when he finds all remedies are useless, he shakes his
head over the lingering Patient, advising him to mind his better part.





See, Sir, your Neice.



Come hither my Marcella, nay, prethee do not weep my deaest
Child, death cannot say he makes a Conquest over me, for he has seiz'd
on 〈…〉•atter'd Fort, that was at first design'd to be his own.



O! can I think what I must lose and live, the careful Guardian
of my tender years, whose Pious Counsels and Indulgent Care instru∣cted
me in all the Rules of Virtue.



Thou need'st no guide, thou art thy self a Pilot able to steer
all our Venetian Dames through every Coast of Honour.



Look up my Lord, the man of Art is come.



Enter Hernando, Pedro and Alonza, Artan unsec•.


He is most wellcome. O, Sir, if your Art can reach so far to
this Noble Life, all Honours that Ambitious minds can covet, and
Wealth as much as Greedy Minds can covet, shall all be yours, with
thousand, thousand Prayers for your desired Success.



Prayers! Oo'ns what a F•e has she found out for a Physitian.



Come hither, Sir, I will add one reward, but I unst first ask
your Consent Marcella; say, will you give it?



Tho it were to Die, this moment to Expire before your fee•,
I'd fall most willingly.



My Child, I thank thee, not that I •ear dying, but for my
Countries fake I fain wou'd live, therefore restore me once more to
my Health; and beside all that Wealth and Honour promis'd, I give
this Jewel to you.



What said he? ay, there's a reward indeed, what Wealth what
Honour can he equal to it? his Dukedom, were the Universe in Bal∣lance?
By Heaven, Swear her Beauty wou'd outweigh it.



Good, Sir, speak Comfort to us.



O my Fortune, why is this wondrous blessing offer'd me, or why
have I not power to make it mine! it is impossible, he's rooted there;
Ha! I have found the means, by Heav'n I'll dot: Now Madam, you
shall see a poor man's Art, save the Dukes Life in spight of Destiny.







Stand all clear from the Bed: no, I am going to pronounce
his death, (to Ped. aside) but if you shou'd not keep your stand I am
ruin'd.



I swear by and all the Destinys, by Earth, by Air,
by Water and by Fire, I will not stir, go boldly speak his doom.











Take hold here, and when I stamp turn round as quick as thought:



What the Bed, Sir.



Ay, the Bed, Sir.



What the Devil does my Master mean?





(They turn the Bed.


Night, Earth and Hell, what has the Villain done?



Nay, nay, keep your place friend of mine, you are sworn to't.



By Hell, and all the Fates the Slave has fool'd me, and fixt me
by an Oath against my self, to cross the Destinies, and save the Duke:
  24
Go doting fool, thou sha'• a while keep Life, to end thy aged days in
Blood and Sorrow: And wise Physitian look you'r Guarded well,

For by Death's sl•shy Scull, and Sable Dert,
When •e meet next, we never more will part.





So, so, I •ind my Master's a piece of a Lawyer as well as a
Physitian, for he has tricks enough to cheat the Devil.



Fill me a Glass of Wine, here my Leige, take, this drink it off.
How fayres your Grace?



Like one waked from a Trance, I cannot think I'm perfectly
a•ake, methinks I feel new Heal•h and vigorous Strength, my Pulse
beats strong, and with a lively motion; sure I cou'd walk, pray raise
me from my Bed: O my Marcella, what a Change is this, snatcht from
the Grave to Life and perfect Health.



O! 'tis a happy Change indeed, happy for Venice, but for
me, most happy I'm doubly Blest, my Souls brim-ful of Joy; O! let this
day forever be remembred, nothing but mirth be seen through all the
Court: Rejoyce you Senators, your Duke's restor'd, the Father of his
Country Lives again.



Hold my dear Child, we first must pay our thanks, to this
Great Builder, who repair'd the ruines: Here, Sir, receive the Great
reward we promised, and with her all the Wealth you can desire, and
all the Honours that the State can give.



O! don't talk of Wealth or Honour, Sir, you have given me
all the Riches I cou'd with for.



To morrow then the Priest shall joyn your Hands, and Heav'n
send showers of Blessings on your Heads, this night shall be devoted all
to Mirth, for Sorrow has too long poss•ss'd the Co••t.

Come my dear Neph•w, none will sure repine
At your Content, since you were cause of mine.








You tell me Wonders, that so suddenly such an affliction
shou'd befall your Father: I have deliver'd the Commission safe into the
Senate, and it is b•stow'd on Old Corvina, the Rich Florentine.



I thank you, but I have yet another grief, which I must tell you,
for alas my Love, I have no Friend but you I can complain to.



If thou hast anything that troubles thee, it were unkind not
to make me thy Partner: what is't that disturbs my dear Serena?











I blush to name her: Takes this advantage of my Father's
Blindness, to entertain a Gaudy Fluttering Frenchman. I formerly
knew they had private meetings, but now she brings him home to her
own House; I stood co•ceal'd, after she had sent me forth, and saw her
give before my Father's face so many kisses, and such Sums of Gold; I
thought him happy that he wanted sight, for had he seen, 'twou'd have
distracted him.



I knew the Slave in France, he was a Lacky, and forc'd to
fly for robbing his Master: We must be careful, since this Step-Mo∣ther
can entertain a wretch so vile and sordid. I know, my dear, thy
Father seeks my Ruin, yet (since 'twas he gave Life to my Serena) I
will not rest till I have preve••ed this.


How now Pedro, where's my Friend thy Master?



My high and Mighty Master is with the High and Mighty Duke,
where he is high and mightily entertain'd, and I am sent in mighty hast,
to desire you to come to him, for he longs mightily to see you.



Do you know the business Pedro?



Mighty well, it is known to most men, that about some three
hours since, the Duke was in a fair way to be made Worm's meat of, But
my Master being a good Cook, as well as a Phisician, has now drest him
up, and made him sit to appear again at a Court Table.



Is then the Duke recover'd, and my Friend the happy man,
that wrought the wondrous Cure?



Look ye, Sir, your Friend with some of my help, has set the
Duke upon his Legs again, let that satisfie you, my Master for his reward,
is to Marry the Dukes Neice, and I have petition'd my gratification
may be, to be overseer of the Kitchin, during the Wedding Festivals.



A very reasonable request I must needs say P•dro.



Truly, Sir, I love to bear a Conscience in all things, but, Sir,
my Master desires you forthwith to come with me to Court, where there
is to be such Singing, Dancing, and then he has such things to say to
you, that mercy on me, if you don't make haste you won't have time
to hear the tenth part of 'em.



Well, I'll but wait upon this Lady home, and then go
with you 〈◊〉: Come my Love, early •'th' morning I will visit thee,
mean time my busie thoughts shall be imploy'd on methods to prevent
thy Father's ruine.

And for reward, from all his mighty store,
Let him but grant me thee, I'll ask no more.





the Duke Sitting in State, on his Right hand
Marcella, on his Left Hernando, Several Lords and
Ladies on each side, while a Simphony of Trumpets,
&c. is Playing. Gus. Iunior, Enters: Hernando
rises, and after a Complement, Seats him by him.
After the Simphony, Fame•omes Down from the top of the Stage to
the front and Sings.


HAST Quickly, take the Wings of Fame,
Through all the Vniverse Proclaim,
This Happy, happy day,
Which has Restor'd,
Your drooping Lord,
And fill'd your hearts with Ioy.
Come, Come you Nimphs, come all you Swains,
Leave, leave your Solitary Plains,
Come Damon and Phillis



Come Corydon, with thy Brown Dame,
Come Bacchus resort
To this Happy, happy Court
And bring here thy jolly, jolly Train.



Enter on one side Corydon, with Country Men and
Maids, on the other several Nymphs and Shepherds,
and in the middle Bacchus with his Train.


WE come old Fame, what news hast thou to tell us,
I'm here with all my Iolly, Iolly Fellows,
Who rise with the Sun, and Ransack the Vine,
And when we no longer can stand Sir,
For fear we profanely should leave any Wine,
We agree to take Six in a hand Sir.



And here's poor Corydon, with Margery and Jone Sir,
With Hobbee Bristleface, to know what you'd have done Sir,
We cannot boast of tippling off good Wine Sir,
Because you know there is but little Coin Sir,
But if this Drunken God will please to pay the Shot Sir,
Heres Hob and Little Corydon, will make him a meer Sot Sir,
And when old Tunbelly lies Snoring in his Bed Sir,
We'll sober be Enough to get a Maiden-head Sir,
Chorus of Clowns.
And when old Tunbelly, &c.


A Dance of Clowns and Country Maids.
A Dialogue between Phillis and Amarelli•


PRithee tell me Amarellis,

Why each night you Sigh and Groan.


If you'd know the Truth my Phillis,

Tis because I Lye alone:

  28Damon he falls off from Wooing,
And I'm very much affraid
Spight of all we have been doing,
I shall Live and Die a Maid.


My Alexis too grows Cold,
That was once so full of Fire,


Surely Phillis we grow Old
Or they Longer wou'd Admire.


Old Amarellis, pray what do you mean,
You know your own self, I am not Thirteen:
If he looks for a younger Wife, e'en let him find one,
And if he proves surly, I'll seek out a kind one:
I'll not sigh for Men in a place where there's Plenty,
'Twill be hard if I find not One Lover in Twenty.


'Tis bravely resolved, I'll follow that Rule.
And let silly Damon alone,


Nor shall Coy Alexis find me such a Fool,
To Love when I find he has done,


Therefore we'll Resolve no longer to Pine,


Not I by my troth Amarellis;



If Strephon Loves better then Damon, he's mine;


And he that Loves me shall have Phillis.
A Simphony of Flutes.A Shepherdess comes forward and Sings.
Sheph.
HAppy we who Free from Love,
Have no cares to break our Sleep,
Who these Pleasant Medows rove
Watching our harmless Sheep;
When we feel the Evenings Air,
And the Night invites us home:
To our Cottage we repair,
Where Content delights to come,


Here follows a Dance of Shepherds and Shepherdesses.
Fame.
HAppy Days, Pleasant Nights,
Wait upon this Royal Train
Endless Ioys, and Sweet Delights,
May that Lovely Pair obtain:
Iealousie be far Remov'd,
Sweet Content rest over there,
May they Love and be Belov'd,
And be Happy as they're Fair.
Cho. Happy Days, &c.


'Tis well perform'd, now let us to the Banquet, then every
one prepare to think of rest, only the Lovers, Joy will keep them
waking, and expectation of a future Bliss will shut out sleep to night.



My Leige, I beg your Favour, to this Gentleman my Friend.



A Friend of yours need never doubt my Favour:
He that has given me Life must sure receive
All Favour he can ask or I can give.









I Tell you nought but Truth, upon my Honour he's no more
Blind than thee or I, 'twas policy to save his money made him
turn Imposture.



I'm glad to hear it, and with your assistance I'll make his
folly turn to my advantage, you know the Story of his Amorous Wife;
I must prevent the mischiefs threaten there too; But you must lend me
Pedro, he'll be useful.



With all my heart, but you'l excuse me Gusman, I stay too long
from my approaching Bliss: Lovers you know are restless, froward
Creatures, when expectation burns 'em; O! the transports this happy
night will yield me! ha, what's this, a sudden damp strook cold upon
my heart: What need I fear, the Demon has no power over me yet,
my time's not yet expir'd, or if it were, Repentance may prolong it.
That Soveraign Clam will heal the greatest Sore.
And Cure the Wounds my Crimes had made before.
Exit Her.




Well Pedro, as thou hast been an honest and just Servant
to thy Master, so I hope thou'lt prove a trusty Friend to me, and be
assur'd your Service shan't go unrewarded.



I'll warrant you, Sir, if there be any Pimping in the Case, let
me alone, I had once an excellent hand at it, my Master knows it,
but since he turn'd Physician, he has been so taken up with Practice ano∣ther
way, that I have almost lost my abilities, in that honourable, gen∣teel
Courtlike Science.



Well Pedro, I shall have no occasion to imploy your Ta∣lent
that way at present; the occupation you must undertake to serve
me, must be that of a Physician.



A Physician! there you hit me to a Hair, for a neat turn of a Bed
let me alone.



Turn of Bed, what dost mean Pedro?




A Term of Art my Master and I use, when we have a mind to
set •ck people upon their Legs; the Duke has found the benefit of it.



Well, Sir, I'll not dispute your Terms of Art, only giv
you some few directions, and leave the rest to your own management.



Well, Sir, what you think fit.



I need not tell you, that old Bond only Counterfeits Blind∣ness,
for that you knew before me; but I wou'd have you take on the
Grave habit of a Doctor, I have it already prepar'd for you, by that
means to make him confess himself really an Imposture.



Let me alone, Sir, I'll make him Confess he can see, or I'll
make him Blind in Earnest.



But hark'e Pedro, 'tis ten to one but you find a French fel∣low
there, that pretends to be an Oculist, but is indeed a Scoundrel,
prithee take care to keep him in discourse till I come, for I'll be there
within less than an hour; and let it be your care to deliver this Letter
to the Daughter.



Why look you now, did not I tell you there wou'd be something
of Pimping in the End of this business: Well, Sir, let me alone for the
performance of all.



Go make haste about it then; you'l find your Equipage at
my Lodging.



I go, Sir, your humble Servant Pimp and Physician.
(Exit Ped.




Now Fortune, if thou wou'dst befriend a Lover, smile on this
just design, to make me happy: Ha! who comes here? by Heaven my
Father, there's no avoiding him, bless me how he reels!




And he, he that is given to doat
On Womans inconstancy,
I wou'd not be in his Coat
For a great deal of ready Money.
Well said, old Iemmy, merry be thy Heart old Boy, who the Devil
can pretend to be happier than thou art? Now have I a Head as full as
any Plotter's and a Pocket as Empty.



So, so, I'm like to have a very fine time on't, s'life, I must
find some way to get from him, I shall ruin my whole design else.



Who comes there, what are you a Turk or a Christian? are
you for Bacchus or Mahomet, ye Dog you?



I am for any thing that you are for, Sir.



Who's there Iemmy, my nown Boy Iemmy, come hither
sirrah.







Look'e, I am your Father, sirrah, and you my Son, sir∣rah,
and when you are married to old Bond's Daughter, I shall have
300 l. a Year, and you never a Groat, sirrah.



No faith, nor you neither in half a Year's time, at this
rate How the Devil shall I get him home?




O Iemmy, I have been very unfortunate to day, I pick'd up
a couple of Grave F•iars, thinking to have spent the day so sober, and
as Gad shall save me, one borrow'd my Money, and t'other left me in
pawn for the Reckoning.



Really Sir, I am very sorry for your misfortune, and wish
I cou'd perswade you to go home and sleep.



Sleep! why you Whelp and Bacon, do you take your Fa∣ther
for a Sot, Sirrah? I'd have you to know Rogue, I understand
better things than to go to Bed before the taste of my Wine be out
of my mouth: Besides, who gave you Authority to give me Rules to
walk by, i• you go to that, Hangdog.



I hope you are not angry, Sir.



You Malapert Rascal, how dare you take the Priviledge of
hoping any thing: I say, I am angry, damnable angry, and he that dare
say to the contrary, is a Son of a Whore, though born of my own Mother.



I am very sorry for't, Sir, if you are Angry.



That's as I shall think fit too, Sir, for I will have none sor∣ry
when I am glad, nor no Man glad when, I am Joyful.



Good Sir, go home.



Ay, into your Guts if you pretend to give me Council any
longer, Sirrah: Get you gone out of my sight, you young Phlegmatick
•uppy, get you gone.



I shou'd be loath to disobey you, Sir.




Hold, Jackanapes, come back again, did not I tell you Jacka∣dandy,
that I was left in Pawn at the Tavern, and did not I give you to
understand, that I had not one souse in my Pocket? there's five Crowns
to pay, Sirrah, how the Devil do you think I shall be able to pay it?



How wou'd you have done, Sir, if you had not lit of me?



Why Sirrah, I wou'd have gone back again and drank 'till
some Soldier under Bacchus Banner had come to my relief, you Scoundrel.



Well, Sir, there's ten Crowns, and I hope you'l be so
Careful of your Reputation, as to go back immediately and pay it.
I have a little earnest business, or I wou'd wait upon you thither.



No, no, 'tis no great matter Iemmy, I can go very well my
self: Well, I swear Iemmy, thou win'st my heart more and more e∣very
hour: Bu'y Iemmy, go about thy business Child, be sure don't
stay out late, and pray my Child come home sober, for there's
nothing recommends a Man more than a good Reputation among.
his Neighbours.



I shall take care to follow your instructions in that point,
I assure you, Sir.
(Exit Gus. Iun.



So, now am I pretty well stock'd for to morrow, but how
the Devil shall I dispose of my self, 'tis too soon to go home, and
besides, I shall never Sleep well, if I go to Bed sober: Let me see,
I have not done a Pious Charitable act this great while, I will begin
just now, and go visit this blind Puppy that has lapt up my E∣state,
if I should chance to find him making his Will, who knows but
 Lamentable Condition, it may peirce like a Spear through
the tough hide of his Conscience, and make him leave me something to
drink to his good Passage: But for fear the dismal Object should
make me Melancholly, I will Sing all the way, to keep my self in good
Humour.

(Sings.) There was two Cats sat on a Well,
The one Cat she fell in,
But the Cat that sat by,
Wept bitterly
Because that Cat was the t'other Cats Cousin Germin.








So Peter, set me down, give me the Keys, you are sure all the
Chambers are lock'd up.



Yes, Sir, and there are all the Keys except my young Mistres∣ses.







In her Chamber, Sir.



Bid her come down to me.



She can't go out, Sir.



Not out, Sir, why so, Sir?



I can't tell the reason, Sir, but my Lady lock'd her in, and took
the Key with her while you were asleep, and went out to fetch the
French Doctor to you.



What the Devil, have not I Servants enough in the House, but
she must needs go her self?



Sir, she had sent them out of several Errants before, there's
none left in the House but me.



O Lord, O Lord, here's some damn'd design or other hatch∣ing,
I shall be robb'd: Peter, take this Key, and bring that Cabinet in
that stands in the next Chamber.








I'll take care to prevent her making you any more Presents,
I have sent my Gold to the Bankers, that's safe enough I'll warrant
her; why what a miserable Condition have I brought my self too, I
dare not pretend to see e'm, for if I do, they'll discover me to the Duke,
and then all I have is forfeited, besides five Years Imprisonment, and
the cunning Devils are so subtle in their Discourse, that there's no∣thing
to be gather'd from that: If it were possible I could but a∣ny
ways make an Interest now with Seignior Hernando, my business
were done, but that can never be, for a Pox on him he's my sworn E∣nemy
 and then too, he'll expect his own Mortgage back again,
which is almost as bad as t'other•
Enter Peter with a Cabinet.
Who's there, Peter?




Yes, Sir, 'tis I.



Hast thou brought the Casket, Peter?







Set it down there then: Well I'm resolved here will I sleep,
will I can find some way or other to secure my self. (Knocks at the door.Peter, Peter, go see who knocks.



'Tis my Lady I suppose, Sir.



Pray go let her Ladiship in then.




Sir, here's one come from the Duke to speak with you.



How, from the Duke, bless me, what can his Message mean.











I have something to say to you in private, Sir.




Peter, go down and look after the door.
(P. Exit.

Now, Sir, your business.



Do you know me, Sir.



Not by your voice, Sir.



Do you know me by sight, Sir.



I Don't know what I might do if I cou'd see, Sir.



See me, Sir, why, what the Devil are you blind?



Blind! why, Sir, are you come of a Message from the Duke,
and yet ask that Question.



Look ye Seignior, I am very well satisfied, that his Grace
does believe you can't see, but then again he has nothing but
your bare word for't: I that have made the business of the Eyes my
study, have obtained a Commission from the Duke, to make an Ex∣periment
upon you, and by that means satisfie him whether you can see
or no.



See or no, why, does his Grace imagine I take a Pleasure in
walking in the Dark, when I have had the Blessing of light so many
Years?



That you best know, but in the mean time I must follow my
Commission.



Why what do you intend to do with me?



I am order'd to take out both Eyes, and dessect'em, if you can∣not
see they'l be no loss to you, if you can, you deserve to be so serv'd
for offering to trick the Duke and State.



Bless me, Sir, both my Eyes?



So my Commission runs, but because I'll save you a great deal of
pain, and my self a great deal of trouble, I'll be contented at present
with one, only for an Experiment.



Mercy on me, an Eye.



An Eye, ay, a Nose, if I thought there was any defect in't▪
Come, Sir, are you ready?



Ready, Sir, I'll not part with my Eyes as bad as they are,
I can't find by what Law the Duke can send for my Eyes out of my
head.



What, Sir, will you dispute the Duke's Commands?



Ay marry will I, in this case, Sir; What a pox, at this rate I
shall have the Duke send for my Teeth out of my Head, and so starve
me. (Knocks at the door) Ha, Heaven be prais'd, some body's come to
my relief, I hope: S'heart the French Doctor's an Angel to this Fel∣low.





Bless me, Mouns. what shall we do, this Fellow will certainly
spoil our design.



Me vil cut his Trote first.



Who have you got with you there Husband?



The Devil I believe, my dear, prithee look if he has not got
Cloven Feet and Sawcer Eyes.



The Diable! Hark ye Monsieur, vat are you?







And dat be next kin to de Diable; but come, vat is your bu∣sinss
here vid mine Patient, Monsieur Diable Physician?



Sir, I am sent from the Duke.



He lies, he lies, don't mind one word he says, he would have
cut my Throat and Rob'd me.



O wicked Villain, lay hands on him, Peter.



Lay hands of me, you Scoundrels, (Peter and Mouns. seize Pe∣dro)
What seize the Duke's Physician? Harkye Rogue's, you'll all be
hang'd, that's certain.



Come, come, bind him fast.



Help, help, murder, murder.



O by gar me vil stop your dam bawling presant: Here put
dis into his Mout.








Aw, aw: The Devil aw you, he's put me into such a trembling,
I shan't recover it this Twelvemonth.



Come, my dear, will you lie down upon the Couch, the Mouns.
is come to apply something to your Eyes?



Prithee my dear, don't talk on't, I have been frighted so ter∣ribly
with that damnable Fellow there, that the very naming of Eyes,
goes to the Heart of me.



Indeed my dear, it must be done. Peter, go you to the Rialto,
tell the Senator Mountano, I'll wait upon him immediately, and d'ye
here, stay with him till I come.








What the Devil is my Wife's damnable design in clearing the
House at this rate.



That's the Casket where his Jewels are, there's to the value
of 60000 Crowns, his Gold is all in his Bankers hands, but there's
enough to do our business, while I hold him in discourse, do you slip
away with that, I'll meet you in less than an hour at the Ship, and
then hoist Sails to a new Plantation.



Let a me alone, and by gar when we have got from your
sight, de gran Daible take me ven you see me next.




Well, my Chicken, I have perswaded the Mouns. to forbear
you till to morrow, seeing you are not in a Condition to have any
thing done to you to day, he's gone away, but very sullen to see his Art
so neglected.

(While this is speaking Mouns. gets the Cabinet and is going off.


O bless me, deliver me, I can
hold no longer, Help, Murder, Murder.

As the Mouns, is just at the door, Peter
rushes in and throws him down, being
followed by Gus. Sen. with his Sword.


Mercy on me, what's the matter?



Why, Madam, just as I open'd the door to go to the Rialto as
you had order'd me, that Drunken Russian rush'd-in, and if I had not
been nimbler than he, I believe he wou'd have stuck me.



But what made you cry out so Husband?



O my dear, I had something of a sudden so offensive to my
Eyes, that I was not able to bear it. Heaven be prais'd Providence is
of my side, and has sent fresh succour to my relief.



Well, Mr. Royster, what's your business here?




Sings. I have a Mistriss that is Fair
And as sweet as Sugarcandy,
Had I ten thousand pounds a Year,
I'd give her half a Pint of Brandy.



And let me tell you, Madam, King David cou'd not have
made a better Present to the Queen of Barsheba.



'S life, Monsiuer, we must serve him as we have done the t'o∣ther,
or we shall never accomplish our designs.



Let me alone, Monsieur pray put up your Sword, be gar it be
noa like the Cavalier to fright de fair Lady.



Put up my Sword, well, Sir, so I will, what a Pox I hope
I understand when to sheath my Weapon as well as another man, as
old as I am. But where's old Cupid, where is that little notable blind
Archer?

Sings. Little Boy, Pretty Boy, what's thy name term'd,
That thou dost wear a Bow and go so Arm'd?



Monsieur, me must beg your Pardon, me must intreat your
absence for some time.



You intreat my absence, what are you, you French Puppy
you? Sirrah, you are one of those bloody-minded Rogues, that murder
poor Protestants, and put'em into Powdering tubbs, you Bitch you.
But hark'e old Sophister, how the Devil came you in this pickle, like
the Picture of Hom•r.



Ah Seignior, this is barbarous to triumph over my misfortunes.



Why this is all along of your Roguery, if you had not given
your mind to cheating such honest fellows as my self, you might have
had the pleasure of seeing your Money still, for that's all the use you
made of it,



Ah, Seignior, I know, I have been to blame, but for pitties
sake, let me hear no more of it.



Peter, you may go where I order'd you, I find this old Fellow
has more Drink than Harm in him.





Well old Beetle, I will spare thee, and to shew thee that I
have a heart full of Compassion, since thou hast neither Eyes nor Moisture,
I will Mourn and Weep for thee.






(Monsieur trips him up, and binds his hands
behind him.


Hey day, what's the matter? What the Devil am I enchan∣ted,
I came in with two hands I'm sure, what ever is become of 'em?
Well, 'tis no great matter, I'll e'en go to sleep, that I main't think of
my loss.




Garzoon, now be my very good time.



O Lord, he's going, he's going, I'll hang rather than lose a
100000 Crowns: Stay thou Villain, thou Miscreant, thou common
Highway-robber.




What I find you can see then Husband?



Yes, thou eternal she Devil, I can see, as you shall find to
your sorrow.



Alas, I knew it, and made use of this way on purpose to try
your Patience.



No, no, thou intire piece of Whores-flesh, that shan't serve
your turn; the Law makes it Death for an intention to Steal, and I'll
take care to hang you, whatever becomes of me.



Nay begar, if you proclaim open War, have at you, garzoon.








Stop his mouth, stop his mouth, Mons.



O dear Wife, save my Life, and take all I have.



Bind him fast Monsieur, bind him fast.



Ah, Jerny, let me alone.




O Madam, undone, undone.







I had no sooner open'd the Door, but there rushed in a Gentle∣man,
with a whole train of the Dukes Officers, and are just coming up
Stairs: See they are here already.



Enter Guz. Iun. with Officers.


Seize on 'em Officers.



Oh Monsieur, we're undone.



By gar me have de Halter about my Neck, O Morblew, vat
a sad spectacle sal I make.







Bless me, what's here to do, unbind 'em quickly; who's
this that sleeps so sound, by all that's good, my Father, how in the name
of Goodness came he here?



Ah you French Dog, let me come at him, let me come at him.



Hold, hold a little Pedro▪



A rogue, I'll talk with you presently Sirrah, and here's ano∣ther
old Rascal too, that pretended himself blind, and can see as well
as I can.



How! can you see, Sir?



Yes, that he can, he own'd it to us •ll just now, I'm resolv'd
I will have some revenge however.



Indeed, Sir, I can't deny but I lost my Eyes to save some Mo∣ney,
and if I had not found 'em again, I had lost all.



Nay, that you will however, you are not ignorant what
punishment the State has provided for Impostures.



Ay, Sir, I am too sensible of it, but, Sir, pray one word in
Private, you have often pretended Love to my Daughter, and I have
as often rejected it; I know you have an Interest in Seignior Hernando,
and he can do what he pleases with the Duke, do but contrive that I
may obtain Pardon for this offence, and I will not only give you my
Daughter, with the Portion her Grandfather left her, but I will freely
surrender back to your Father the Mortgage of his Estate.



I must confess you've touch'd me now indeed, where is your
Daughter.



Peter, run, break open my Daughters Chamber door, bid her
come hither presently. (Exit Peter.) That admirable Mother-in-Law
lock'd her up, I suppose with a design to rob me, murder her, and
so march off with her charming Monsieur there.





O my dear Gusman!



My beloved Serena: now, Sir, your promise; give this
Jewel to me, and I'll engage your Pardon from the Duke.



I do it with more pleasure than I shall take to see those two
I•satiate Devils walk to the Gallows together.



My Dear, let me intreat my Mother's Pardon, tho she be ill,
she is kin to me.



Canst thou ask any thing, and be deny'd• she shall not
suffer, but must be conte•ted, to end her days in some Religious House.



Where I will spend my time in Cursing you.



But for this fellow, he shall have pleasure, to tug an Oar,
the Gallies want such Vermin, look to him Officers.
(Exit led off.



Pray, Sir, let me have the Charge of him, I'll hang for him
if he escapes me.



Sir, Sir, how can you sleep midst so much Joy, Sir, Sir.



Let me alone, I am resolv'd never to wake till you give me
my Lands again.



You have 'em, Sir, pray wake.



Cud's me, and so I have, who's there Iemmy, prithee how
cam'st thou here, and such a Crow'd about thee? Heyday, with thy
Mi••ress too, what art thou Married Iemmy?



We are joyn'd by Heaven, and by her Father, Sir, and
now desire your Blessing.



Heav'n bless thee: But don't forget the 200 l. a year
Iemmy?



You will have no occasion for it, Sir, your own Estate will
be surrender'd you.



How! my own Estate, what my 1500 a year?



Ay marry shall it, Sir, here's my hand for't.



Why then Heaven send thee thy Eyes again.



I never was without 'em make me thankful.



Nay, nay, thou wer't always a cheating Rogue, that I must
needs say for thee.



Come my Serena, now I'm truly Blest, let's to the Priest,
and when our hands are joyn'd, I'll to my Friend, and get thy Father's
Pardon. This is the happiest day of all my Life.



And mine thank Heav'n, for I have lost my Wife.


The End of the Fourth ACT.
  41ACT V. SCENE I.
SCENE, a Garden: Enter Hernando.



THe Court is full of Joy, Mirth flows about, Masques are pre∣par'd,
and every one seems Happy, but I who ought to
have the largest share, sit like a sullen Fiend 'mongst Choirs of An∣gels,
as if I envied 'em their vast delight, what can this mean, my Soul
is on the Rack, and yet I cannot give a reason for it. Where are
those mighty pleasures I propos'd in the Embraces of the Charming
Bride? they're vanish'd, I have lost the glittering dream, and walk to
Horror and Eternal Darkness.
Lightning from under the Stage, and a Fiery Figure •lies up.
Ha! what was that, something went glazing by me, it had the Form of
Artan wrap'd in Fire? Oh, that cursed Fiend, 'tis he disturbs my Joys,
that fatal Contract ruins soul and body; what have I done, why, why
did I marry, why have I made the Innocent Mercella a wretched part∣ner
in my World of woes? see where she comes, that pretty blooming
Flower, whom I pluck'd untimely from the stalk, and now 'twill drop
and perish.





My dear Love, why have you le•t the Company so strange∣ly?
why when the Court seems nothing but delight, when every one
is wrapt in Joy and Pleasure, do you, the happy cause of all our
Transports, fly thence as if you envied us the blessing?



Why dost thou wrong me? by my Love I swear, I have no
Content, but what is placed in the•, and sure hereafter I shall find
no pleasure greater then I possess in these dear Arms.



Pray do not flatter me, you cannot Love me and be thus sad
upon your Wedding day; may be you are troubled that you are match∣ed
so high, and think perhaps my birth will make me proud, indeed
I'll be a very humble Wife, or if you think I marry not for Love
  42
but only in Obedience to my Uncle, I will convince you by such
tender proofs, you shall acknowledge none can Love beyond me.



Otender Innocence, I do not doubt thee, I know thy Beauty
cannot shrowd a falshood, where is my Royal Uncle?



In the Garden, viewing the Fountains that are newly made,
and waits for you to see 'em.



I'll go with you: O my Marcella, prithee do not chide me.
There's something troubles me, a heavy load lies on my heart, but
by thy Charming self, I cannot guess from whence the cause proceeds,
unless the sudden Joy I find in thee, has overpowered my Spi∣rits.

(As they are going off, Artan rises in a horrid shape, Her. starts back)


Why do you start my Love and tremble thus? What is't
your Eyes are fixt on?



I had forgot; I cannot go with you, 'tis near the hour I am
to make a great account with Heaven, and sollitude is fittest for
Devotion, that done, you shall behold me full of Joy, or everlast∣ing
Sorrow, prithee leave me.



I know my duty and I will obey you. But stay not long.
(Exit Marc.




Not long, unless for ever. Tell me thou Gorgeon, that has made
me stone, whence or what art thou?



















To inform thee, this moment is thy last: You must with
me.



My time's not yet expired.



Deluded Fool, thou had'st no time but what was in my Will,
I might have cut thy Brittle-Thread of Life the very moment that
this deed was sign'd; look there and see what time's allowed thee, and
Curse thy self for thy unthinking folly.



May I believe my Eyes, O wretched Fool, how hast thou plung∣ed
thy self into perdition, this was the fatal blow my heart pre∣saged,
and this the wretched end of all my Joys! O dismal Mar∣riage
night! Unhappy Bridegroom! must then thy Bridal Bed be Sul∣phurous
flames, and Fiends perform thy Hymencial rites? instead of
my Marcella's soft Embraces, must I ashing Furies Clasp me in their
Arms? O thou great injur'd power I have Offended, strike, strike
  43
me to the Center, and make my Soul as Mortal as my Body.



Leave off your Idle Prayers, or by that power I serve, and
you are ty'd to Worship, thou sha't not tread the Earth a mo∣ment
longer.



Fiend thou li'st, thou that not dare to touch me, what power
hadst thou to Buy or I to Sell, that which was none of my
own, I had no Soul at my dispose, for it was bought before, bought,
at a Rate so high, that the whole World weighs not a Grain of the vast
price was paid for't.



This will not save you, since you have free-will, and by that free
will thus, as'twas sign'd to me. I do expect performance of the Deed.



Shall the bare setting of my name condemn me? how many
Wretches, in their Lust and Riots, have made a gift, seal'd firm
with Imprications? Wretches for Perjury, and foul Extoration, make
by their Crimes a Deed as strong as mine: Nay even the murderer,
whose purple stains fix to his Soul, and mark it with. Damnation,
and true Penitent Tears, 'tis Cleansed and Whiten'd for a brighter
Being.



Fool, I'll not give thee Leisure to Repent, nor sha't thou have
a moment more to breath, by all the Ashy Treasuries of death, I
have not power to stir, what can this mean, he bears some holy re∣lick
sure about him, or he is fix'd on Consectared ground. Come
from that place.



No infernal, never, perhaps the ground is Sacred that I tread
on, if so, I will not stir, but rooted fast, I'll stand a Monument of
true Devotion, and here exprie in prayers.



Slave, I'll blast thee.



Thou art the Slave, not I. A Sacred inspiration fills my Soul,
and bids me dare thy worst, ha! Let me think the very day, on
which my Father dy'd, his Confessor, Physition of his Soul come
to me, and delivered me a Paper, which I have wore ever since next
my heart: My Son, said he, take this, and when thou find'st thou art
upon the very brink of ruin, open that Paper and thou'lt find in∣clos'd
that which will make thy Enemies fly from thee: now is the
time, I'm just upon the Brink, and here before me stands my great∣est
Enemy; thus then I break the seal, and thus unfold the Sacred mi∣stery.



Tempest, Lightning, Thunder, Plagues seize thy Marrow,
give me back the Contract.



No, I will tear it to as many peices as thou hast ruin'd Souls.
Avant cursed. Tempter, hence to thy native Hell, and howl in
flames.



Perdition, Furies, why am I thus fool'd, I shall be made the
sport of every Fiend, and hooted through each Region, they will make
me the very Owl of Hell, to sculk in Corners, and every meager Ghost
will Chatter at me. I cannot bear the thought, Convulsions gnaw thee,
Aches contract thy Bones, that thou may'st know
As great a Plegue above as I shall find below.




'Tis done', the Victory's obtain'd at last, and I will bravely keep
the field I've won, I'll fix to this Sacred standard on my heart, and
never fear success under this Banner.







Nephew, have you got done your Contemplations? you look
more Gay and Lively than you did, I do suppose it was your excess
of Joy, that over-power'd your Spirits.



I confess, my breast is full of Joy; O my Marcella, forgive me that
my Soul could harbour sadness upon this day, but I'll convince my
Fair one, that I had than as great a cause of Sorrow as now I have
for Pleasure.



My dear Lord, my Joy or Grief does all depend on you, and
when you're Pleas'd I'm Happy.



See Nephew, here's more visitors to see you, and one that
has but newly found his Eyes, he took a happy day to make his
Peace in thee, which at the intreaty of your Friend I have Gran∣ted.



Your Goodness makes me more your humble debtor; my Friend
I wish you Joy, for I perceive a cheerfulness, that says you have gain∣ed
your wishes.



I have gained all I wish.



I have got my Estate again, and now I want nothing but a
longer Lease of Life, that I might have time enough to spend it a∣gain.



Seignior Bond, I hope you'l live hereafter with more Justice,
believe me, 'tis the surest way to thrive. There's a small reckoning
betwixt you and me, but I forgive you freely.



Sir, I thank, and will make it my whole Life's study to de∣serve
your Favour.



Now for thee, honest Pedro.



Good lack, I was afraid you had forgot me. 'Tis a Plaguy trick
you Courtiers have got never to Remember past services.



Fear not Pedro, I'll see thee prefer'd.



I thank your Grace.



Come Nephew, seat your self, and you his Friends, the Masque
has waited for us.



We attend your Grace.


The Sc•ne changes to a Beautiful Garden, &c.

ENDIMION The Man in the Moon.
A MASQUE.
A Scene of Fountains.

ENDIMION Sleeping on a Bank.

Menalcas, Dorus, Damon, Alexis with other Shepherds and some
Shepherdesses are discover'd, and some of them Dancing.


COme Shepherds, 'tis Night, and our Flocks are in Fold,
Come Dorus and Damon, we'll haste from the Cold.
To Coridon's Cottage we'll go,
There the Liquor does merrily flow.



Stay Menalcas, prethee stay,

Endimion us'd to come this way,
Let us for Endimion stay,



Let us for Endimion stay,




Endimion's Flocks all go astray,
Their Master strays as much as they,
For you Bright Moon Endimion sights,
For her he fondly pines and dies,
Pitty poor Endimion's pain,
Poor Endimion! hopeless Swain!



Poor Endimion! hopeless Swain!



Why should not a Lover
This Whining give over,
Since nothing but sorrow it yields.



Rich Egon's Brown Daughter,
Has made my Mouth Water,
But by Pan, not for her, but her Flock and her Fields.
See yonder he lies
Sleep closes his Eyes,
I'll wake him 



No Dorus, no, let him alone,
I'll wake him 
No Dorus, no let him Sleep on,
Sleep is the Lovers only Ease,
By Sleep, of quiets he pertakes,
Gay Dreams of Bliss, his Fancy please,
But when they fly, Dispair awakes:
To those short Ioys the Swain we'll leave,
The only Comfort, we can give.



To Corydon's Cottage we'll go,
There the Liquor does merrily flow.


Sleep Shepherd, 'till thou wak'st in Ioy,
I've kindly wounded Cynthia's Heart,
Let coming Bliss thy Thoughts Employ,
She comes to Sooth, thy raging smart,
Sleep Shepherd till thou wak'st in Ioy.



She comes, my Goddess come, I dream 
'Tis not forwaking Eyes
To see such wondrous Ioys,
Ioys like my Mighty Love, extream,
All Heaven is round me, O, I Dream!



Awake Endimion, from above
Thy Cynthia comes to Crown thy Love.




Sleep does my wishing Soul deceive,
I wou'd, but dare not Believe.
I Dream!



In thy soft Dreams true Ioys appear;
Awake, and see thy Cynthia here.

Endimion Starts and Catches her in his Arms.
She's here, I have my Goddess here.

Cynthia and Endimion come in Attended by
a Train of Stars her Concomitants.


Here, here, we'll Regin in full Delight,
And thou Swain shalt Rule the Night.



Happy Beings here concea•

All the Pleasures, which they steal,
'Tis the Scandal makes the Fault,
Still she's Chaste who such is thought,
Love's delights are always sweet,
But when Secret, Sweeter yet.
Happy Being, &c.


To the Grand Chorus Cinthia's Celestial
Attendants repeat the last Six Lines.
