




COme back! Prithee Lovell, come back, and
let's to the Tavern.



Unconscionable Man! I tell thee
I am going to see my Mistress.



Pox o'thy Mistress; if thou
wer't going to a Wench, I wou'd excuse
thee; But I should think my self Damn'd, shou'd I consent
to thy going to sollicit any Woman in the Way of Matrimony.



Wilt thou never leave this lewd wild Humour?



Not upon the score of Matrimony; Why, Iack
Lovell, I'le tell thee I'am now like a Colt in the Fenns, that
stragles every where, and feed where I like best: But shou'd
I Marry, I shou'd be tether'd to my Spot of ground; at best,
confin'd to an Inclosure.



But the Horse that is loose often falls into a foul
Ditch; or is put in the Pound for 'straying into his Neigh∣bours
ground: Marriage is honest and safe.



Yes; if all Wives were honest, I'le undertake a
Miss shall love thee twice as long as any Wife thou can'st
  2
find; nothing choaks Love like the Surety of Possession;
Love is an excellent Meat, but Marriage is an ill Sauce; and
believe me, it is the worst Estate of Mankind. If I was go∣ing
to Tyburne, I wou'd cry, Drive on Carman; and choose
to Sing my Penitential Psalme at the Gallows, rather than
return to say, For Better for Wors•.



Atheists 〈◊〉 Love, ••ke 〈◊〉 in Religion, are not to be
reclaim'd by Argument; yet now and then are converted by
some Accident or other. Thou may'st one Day see a Beauty,
that like a Burning-Glass, shall draw all thy loose Flames with∣in
a narrow compass.



Beauty is mo•••ittle than the Glass thou talk'st of;
and Mans Estimation of it less Durable: I may perchance,
Love only one at once; but not that one always: And whilst
I am in my right Witts, I will not leave Delightful Variety for
the Unsavoury Insipid Bitts of Constancy.



Well; Iacinta, has a Kins-woman for her Compani∣on,
so Beautiful, her Eyes wou'd fix thy wandring• Thoughts,
and make thee abandon all Women for her 〈◊〉



So thinks the Devout young Novic• newly enter'd in∣to
his Cloister; He has no sooner forsaken the World▪ the Flesh,
and the Devil, but imagines he is able to persw•de the greatest
Debauchee, to make himself a Fool in the like manner.



I have not seen my Mistress these three Dayes; and
my Mind is not compos'd enough, to return an Answer to every
thing▪ You urge But venter thy Body within these Doors,
and if ever thou return'st the same Man 



I know myself so well grounded in Sin, and have
••sted so much the Sweets of Wickedness, that I dare venture
my Self into any Temptations to the contrary: And for this
once, I will suffer my self to be seduc'd by thee into Civil
Company; And if they do debauch me 







But I know not how I shall forgive my self the Sin of
forsaking Wine, Women, and Dice, for the Conversation of
Damn'd Vertuous Women.



Enter De Boastado and his Man, combing his Wigg,
and adjusting his Garniture.


Careless, we are undone!



What Fantastick is this?



It is the Vain, Idle, Simple, Conceited, Imperti∣nent,
Talking, Travelling Lord De Boastado (as he calls him∣self.)



He looks like a good Subject for Mirth, let's hear his
Character more at large.



I ner'e saw him but twice in my Life; but once is e∣nough
to know what he is, for like a Word writ in Text, you
may Read him all at first sight.







He much values himself upon his Travelling; many
Countries have taken Notice of him, and he of a few; he
pass'd them o're as some Men do a great Library of Books;
who Read the Title-page, then turn to Finis: He carry'd more
Money out with him, than he brought Wit home: His Obser∣vations
are of Modes, Fashions and Women: He speaks some
few words in most Languages, but Sence in none: He has Bap∣tiz'd
himself with the Honourable Titles of most Countries:
His Name is as long as a Coach and six Horses.



Let's fall upon him.



Shun him as you would the Plague.



Thou shalt stay, he makes full at us.



He, he has prun'd himself, and comes with a full
Swoop.



Mr. Lovell, good Morrow to you.



Good morrow to your Lordship.



What Gentleman is this?



A worthy Friend of mine.



One that has the Ill Fortune to be unknown to your
Lordship.



My Friend's Friend must not be a Stranger: I
  4
am covetous of your better Acquaintance.



Pray do me the Honour to let me know to whom my
Services are owing.



My Name is Mounsieur, Heiro, Signioro Countalto,
Donno D'Boastado.



Bless me! De Boastado, what Arms bears that Fa∣mily?



Sir, they are very famous, and thus blazon'd; but
first imagine the Escutcheon in a Frame of beaten Gold, rich∣ly
Enamell'd, set with Pearls, Rubies, Diamonds, and other
precious Stones of great value and number, Incredible 
for such an one have I hangs up in my Dining-Room against
my Embroidr'd Hangings, that were presented me by the
Emperour; betwixt a Golden Watch in a rich Case, given me
by the King of Spaine, and a great Medal, with the Pope's I∣mage
on't: And underneath all this, hangs the Golden Armour
I won in France, at the head of Four Thousand Men; I must
confess there was not any one cou'd do the like, tho' they all
try'd one by one But no matter for that, let that pass.



I have heard much of your Fame, but as to your He∣raldry.



You do well to put him in mind of his Text, for he
was run too far from it, to come to't agen under the turning
of an Hour-Glass.



Well; now as to my Armes 
The Supporters of this Frame are
The Griffin and Tyger Couchant, for on their two Backs it
is borne up at each Corner: in the middle, by the Flower De
less Crescent; on each side, guarded by the Dromadary and Ele∣phant
Rampant, which stand upon a Castle Guardant; on the
Top of the Frame, is the Helmet Militant, held up in the Ta∣let
of an Eagle Volant, bearing a Crown upon her Head Trium∣phant.



The Flourish of all Christendom!



This is a strayn beyond what I ever heard yet.



His Heraldry has run him out of breath.



Then Gallants, in the Escutcheon, is only a Man
  5
with a Spade Foclant in a Field Gules.



A Silver Brim to a Wooden Dish.



Or a Leek Enchas'd in Gold.



That wou'd be a fit Armes for him, for by the length
of his Name, he shou'd be a Welch-man But my Lord, these
may be said the Armes of Adam.



They are so; ours is a very Ancient Family, and
we are lineally Descended from him And our Motto is
Dii Vendent Omnia Laboribus.

In Italian, Ciascunno è figliolo Del sue operè.

In English, Without Paines, no Gaines.



We have trespass'd on you Lordship's Patience.



We beg your Pa•don, and take our leaves.



I hope your Friends better Acquaintance.



You honour me much.



How far walk you this Way?



No farther than this House.



Thither I am going too.



Are you acquainted with Mr. Muchworth.



His Daughter will be a great Fortune, and I am
in Treaty with him about a Marriage.







Great Persons of mean Estates choose Wives out
of the City; they are covetous of Honour, and we of Money.
And here comes the Alderman.





Good morrow to your Lordship.



How does your fair Daughter?



You honour me with enquiring after her Oh
Mr. Lovell, a word with you in private. Sir, you have for some
time made Addresses to my Iacinta: But for the future, I desire
you wou'd be a stranger to her To me you shall be always
welcome, but she is otherwise engaged?



It is less in my Power not to love her, than to hate
you; Tho' she shou'd follow your Example, and turn me off
too.



You know my mind, and shortly she'l let you know
hers, your Servant My Lord, I'le wait you in my Daugh∣ter
and my Neece are but gone to buy a few Trifles at the Ex∣change;
they'l be back soon.









Iacinta engag'd! false faithless
Woman.



Prithee think no more of her. Come now, go with
me and be merry; wee'l have Women in abundance.







No; such Women as your Mistress is, are more like
Jilts. These are good Conscionable Girles, that will not let you
spend your Money for nothing with the others; you waste your
Gold and Time, and at last, like young Heifers when they
come to be milk'd, they Spurn at you in Defiance, and away
they frisk.



Ah Iacinta! Hast thou forgot my Vowes? Unhappy
Lover.



Damne this pineing, whineing, puleing, peaking,
sneaking, sniveling Love: I'le carry thee where thou shalt see
merry, gay, jocund, sprightly Love. Thou shalt have it in
Arm-fulls, and Dilate thy self in Pleasure.



My Soul is out of Tune!





Sir, Master, Sir, Madam Iacinta, and her Cousin Hi∣laria
are just turn'd the Corner of this Street; I suppose they
are coming home.



I'le meet her, and tax her with her Inconstancy.



They have both their Masques on, but you'l know e'm
by Beatrice; my sweet Beatrice.





These are they. Lovell, accost thy own Natural,
and leave me to manage the other Impertinent.



My Heart's my Guide. Iacinta stay, stay Iacinta;
Speak, tho' but one word, and tell me the Cause of this sudden
  7
Alteration: Pull off your Masque, and let me see if your Face
is alter'd as much as I hear your Heart is. Unkind Woman,
dost thou flie me! I'le pursue thee as a Ghost does the guilty
Murderer.



Now you and I, like Squire and Damsel, will follow
Beatrice; if thou hast lost thy Tongue too, you and your
Mistress are a Blessed pair; for were it not for your Tongues,
you wou'd all be Angels.



Da, da, da 




Nay, nay, Madam! You are not to pass so.



What wou'd the man be at?



The Man's at what he wou'd be; he's at you.



What do you mean?



Faith I can't resolve you till I see your Face; pull off
your Masque, and then I'le tell you what I mean.







Nay, if you are good at Suppositions, suppose I am
resolv'd to see it off.



Then I shou'd suppose you very Rude.



And if you don't, I shall suppose you very Ugly; for
I never knew a Woman that had a handsome Face cou'd endure
to hide it.



Yes, if she like not her Company.



Yet, she'd have her Company like her; I trust more
to a Woman's Pride, than her Love or good Nature: For
tho' they are ugly, they think th•mselves handsome, and wou'd
be thought so by others.



Why then do they maintain the Humour of Vizard-Masques?



Because under them they Sin conceal'd: I'le engage
Vizard-Masques ruine more Womens Virtues than all the
Bawds in Towne 



Your Reason for that.



Under the Vizard the Wife goes to the Play, Ball, or
Masquerade undiscover'd to her Husband; the Maid unknown
to her Mistress; the Daughter or Neece unperceiv'd by her Re∣lations:
  8
The Masque invites the Gallants: And tho' at first
you come but out of Curiosity, to hear what Men will say;
Our Alamode Repertees, our Gentile Bawdry, and brisk Raillery
tickles your Ears; your Bodies are buxome, your Bloods
grow wanton, your Fancies strike firmly on some Man or o∣other;
the Gallant grows Importunate, and you are Con∣quer'd.



Do you find Women then so fraile?



A Womans Ear is the Out-work to her Chastity; get
but there, and the Fort is more than half taken. When once
a Woman hears what you say, she'l soon do what you'd have
her.



Then you take a Parly for a Surrender.



No, but after a Parly they soon yield.



Now have I a mind to stay and talk with you, but must
be forc'd to leave you to avoid your ill Opinion.



Nay, if you have a mind to't you 'ido't; let me think
what I will. And if you won't pull off your Masque, I'le e'en
begone and leave you. Fare you well.



And fare you well.

Turn from each others, and looks back o're their Shoulders.


Nay, if you look o're Shoul∣der
after me, I'le turn again, for you
have no mind I should be gone I am sure.



Why did you look back at me?







If I wou'd look at you, and so we e'en caught one ano∣ther;
and what can you say to me of that which I can't Retort
on you agen.



But I'le be judg'd by your self, if I have not more rea∣son
to think, you desire my stay, than I yours; You have a full
sight of me, and see what I am, and now whether you like me
or not: You are all Vizard, long Scarfe, and Petticoat; for
ought I know, you may want a Nose, a Sett of Teeth, be
Squint-ey'd, or Blobber lip'd.



You'l make me as ugly as the Devil.
Am I not Cloven-footed think you?

Offers to look on her Leggs.


I'le tell you that presently 







A handsome Legg and a Foot I'le be sworn; and here's
a well shap'd Hand and Arme; and what Breasts are here?
How round and plump?



Hands off, your enquiry begins to grow troublesome.



If you have a Face and Features answerable to your
Limbs, you'r a prime piece of Womans Flesh.



Do you think I have?







Then to keep you in your good Opinion, I'le begone,
and you shan't see't: Nay, nay, no Attempts, hands off.



I have sworn to see't.



And I have sworn you shall; but stand at greater Di∣stance:
Farther, farther yet See


Hil. gets her back close to her Uncles Door, pulls off her Masque, steps in, and shuts it.










Ha! are you so cunning? She has lock'd the Door
against me.





My Master, Sir, is gone out the Back-way, and sent
me to give you Notice.



I'le be with him presently.

By her Witt, I did not judge she had so good a Face; for
Wit and Beauty seldome go together in a Woman: She has
a large stock of both, and I cou'd wish my self in Bed with her:
but the Thoughts of her are Momentary.
I'le keep my Soul free as the Bird that flyes i'th Aire,
I'le ne'r love one, till I of all besides Despair.






MOst luckily met, I am sent Embassadress of good
News, and was just coming 



Return, and Attempt not to deceive me
with fair Words. Return, I bid thee, and tell
thy Faithless Mistress her Unhappy Lover will not long be
the subject of her Scorne: Bid her practice her Receipt else∣where.



My sweet Face, tell me, What Humor is this has pos∣sess't
thy Master?



Your sweet Face, you Impertinent: Go, do as you'r
bidden, Be gone, go.



Hey! Are you in the same Tone?



Be gone Baggage: Speak not a Word more for your
Life.



What a Vengeance ayles you both? Well, I'le go in∣forme
my Mistress how Sq••res go.




Thus to treat a Lover, and one that was the most pas∣sionate,
and most faithful of all Lovers.



Tis strange to me they should treat us so.



I have show'd the greatest Love and Tenderness for her
that can be imagin'd; I lov'd Nothing in the World but her;
Thought of Nothing but her; and Sleeping, dream't of No∣thing
but her: She was all my Desire, all my Joy; I spoke
not of anything but her: And is such a Love thus Rewarded!
These three Dayes I have not seen her, seem'd so many Ages
for me: And am I in three Dayes forsaken and forgotten?
I meet her, and she will not speak to me, not look at me; but
shun me as a Thing she hates.



Ah Sir, I may say the same, for Beatrice will follow her
Mistress; Honey or T as she is.



Can Iacinta be match'd for Ingratitude?



Or that Baggage Beatrice?



To forsake me after so many Sighs and Vows which I
have offer'd to her Charmes.



To leave me after so many good Offices and daily Ser∣vices
I have done for Her.



After so many Tears shed at her Feet.



After so many Payles of Water lugg'd up Stairs for her,
to wash her Roomes.



After I had express'd so Ardent an Affection, and so
gen'rous a Flame for her.



After I have so often kindl'd a Fire for her in her Mi∣stress
Chamber, and Scortch'd my self with taking her Hea∣ters
for her out of the Fire.



Does she after all this, refuse to speak to Me?



Does she for all this turn Cat in Pan?



And flie from my sight.



And turn her Back-side with a Pox to me.



Her Unkindness deserves my severest Resentments.



Her Pettishness merits a hundred Kicks i'th Breech.



I charge thee never speak to me of her, nor for her.



I, Sir! not I by Grandsires Beard.



Never attempt to excuse her Infiedlity.







I'le be Deaf to all you can say in her behalf.



I think not any thing of't.



I will cherish my Anger, and break off all Intimacy
with her.



Agreed: And I'le break off my Intreigue.



Perhaps she's taken with this Foolish Lord, and puff'd
up with Hopes of being a Lady Ambition is the Vice of her
Sex; but she shall not boast an absolute Glory; for I'le Aban∣don
her as she does me.



I much approve your Resolution.



Do thou lend it Aide against all that Love can urge to
  12
the Contrary; I conjure thee, find all the Faults in her thou
can'st, and Lampoon her to me in a Description 



Shaw waugh; You may find a thousand prettier
Women than she. In the first place, her Hair inclines to Yellow.



That's but the Lustr'e of her Hair.







But smooth and Delicate.



Her Nose is too bigg.







When she speaks, she draws her Mouth from Ear to
Ear. 



Which discovers such a fine Sett of Teeth, so white
and even; and her Lipps so red.



And keeps her Teeth close, which makes such a Jarring
in her Speech.



That breaks the fulness of the Voyce, and makes a
pretty kind of Harmony.



Her Face is a White clumsey big-face.



But every Feature is so excellent, the greatest Crittick
in Beauty knows not where to take away, or what to add.



Then she has a peaking way of holding down her
Head.



But at the same time, appear such a pattern of Modesty
and Innocence.



Her Breasts are too bigg.



But are firm and white, and such delicate blew Veyns,
Their Bigness seems Graceful.







Finely turn'd about the Hipps.



Her Stature is low.



Aug••l of a fine middle Size; not so Tall to or'e, ••p a
Man, nor so Low as to be or'e-look'd.



She's of too dull and serious a Humour.



That which you call Dulness, is her Modesty; and her
Seriousness, is the Effect of her Sage discreet Behaviour.



But she's very pettish 



Which shews she has a Spirit. But in the Fair nothing
  13
seems amiss, and in them we easily pass o're small Faults.



Lord Sir! She's a Book without an Errata; never did
such a perfect Impression come from the Press of Nature: I see
how things will go. Whom we excuse, we Love 



Love her! I'le rather Die. I'le more disesteem her
than ever I priz'd her.



This is not the right course you take.



In this my Revenge will shew it self; the more full of
Charms she appears, the more Glorious will the Conquest be:
When from my Heart, I drive the Sentiments of Love, and
plant in their Room, Contempt and Disdaine.






Here she comes; now stand your Ground.



His behaviour Madam was such, I have nothing to say
in his Excuse.







I'le not so much as speak to her.



I'le follow your Example.



What makes you so strange?



Why stand you at so great a Distance?



What distrubs your Mind?



What a murren ailes you?











I see my Company is troublesome to you; was my Si∣lence
this Morning the ground of your Anger?



Let me tell you, you shall not Triumph in your Infide∣lity;
I will banish the Love I have for you from my Heart, and
leave in it no Impression your Eyes have made.



No nor I neither.



I will acquaint you with the Cause why I held not dis∣course
with you this Morning.







I'le tell you why we were Mu•.







My Father Lov. I care not.



My Mistress Tob. My Master.



Hear me! Lov. No.







No, hark you 



































Pray hear me 























You wont stay 







Well, since you will not hear me speak, Remain in
your Ignorance, and do as you please.



Since you are so frumpish, a Pin for you.



And a Fart for you Mrs. Turd-pie.



Well then, say what you wou'd say.



My Mind is alter'd now.



Come tell your Tale.































Come out with it.































In the name of Iupiter Speak 







































Lay aside your Anger.







Let your Gizzard leave grumbling.



I'le have nothing to do with you.



Since you are so Averse, to let me know the Cause
why you treated me so Ill, and prov'd so false to your Faith,
This is the last time you shall ever see me, for I will turn Wan∣derer,
and spend my dayes in Travel.



Ay, and so will I.



















What are your Intentions?



To banish my self from my Country.











You must not go.



Your Unkindness drives me hence.



You shan't be gone.



You'r grown so Turdy the Devil wou'd not endure your
Company.



Lovell, 'tis you are unkind, to condemn me unheard.



You refus'd to speak for your self.



It was not then convenient: My Father both this
Morning, and e're since I saw you last, charg'd me never
to admit you more in Conversation, nor to see you; cou'd I
help it? And sayes his Curses shall be my Portion, if I disobey
him.



Will you be so unjust?

Ready to shut the Boult.


Never; tho' you shou'd prove so to me!



By your Father's words, I understood you were as wil∣ling
to retreat from my Love, as he to have you 



I saw, e're since that Foppish Lord made his Pretenti∣ons
to me, that my Father was resolv'd to put a Stop to our
Proceedings. I seemingly comply'd for had I urg'd his
Anger with my Denyals, he wou'd not only have banish'd you
from his house, but have, Immur'd me in my Chamber, till I
had been dispos'd of; Then I should have lost the satisfaction
of seeing you, which I now may have if things be manag'd dis∣creetly. 



You acted prudently 



I durst not speak to you this Morning: when I return'd,
I spy'd my Father at the Window.



Look you now, the Secret is out.



'Twas e'en so, I verily believe.



Ah Iacinta! See what pow'r you have or'e me, that
can with one word appease all the Mutinies in my Mind: and
with what Facility, we let our selves be perswaded by them
we love.



Ah these White Devils have as great power over their
Servants, as the Black Devil over Sinners.




Madam, the Door begins to open.



Begone Sir. I fear it is my Father.















You have a happy time on't Cozen, you are alwayes
merry!



I vow Coz. I have so laugh'd at his Lordship.



How can'st thou laugh at such a Fool?



He's one of the most pleasant Comedies Nature ever
brought into the World.



He's but a meer Farce!



His Taylor is come after him with a New Suit, but of
the oddest Fashion he is putting it on, and will soon be
here to shew it you; he sayes 'tis of his own Invention.



I wish thee in my place; you wou'd know how to man∣nage
him.



I wou'd my Uncle had ordain'd him for my Lover.



And do you wish he were to be your Husband too?



There's a certain Reason, Madam, why a woman shou'd
wish to have a Fool for her Husband.



Yes Beatrice, but I do'nt; he's not Fool enough for
that!



For my part I believe it to be a Vulgar Error.



Some are so skilful, as to judge of those matters from
the Features; but Experience is the best Mistress.



Ay Madam! from thence comes the most certain
Knowledg.



You talk so I don't know what you mean.







Why Madam, we may talk or mean what we will; we
are alone.



I blush at your Answer.



Dear Coz, you are a very Wag at your heart, or you'd
not blush at what she said.



Here comes your Animal.




Never let me have your Custome, if it be not exact∣ly
to your Description!



I think it is; Madam Iacinta, I come to shew you
my Gallantry. 'Tis an odd Fancy, but new; 'Tis my own In∣vention.
How does it please you?







It is well quarter'd.



We want a Herald to blazon it.



I never lik'd Suit better.



I am glad you all like it, for I wou'd not let my
Taylor go, till I had got your Approbation. Hark you! How
many Artists sat in Consultation about it?



According to your Lordships Appointment, Twelve.



A Jury of Taylors to make up one Fool.



How make you up the Number?











Because they are the best Mathematicians at Cutting
out. Go on 











Auh! Their deliberation in proceeding does much.
They set not a Stich without Thought, and their Gravity is a
good Allay for the French Mercury. It gives Fixation to their
volatile Spirits. Proceed 



Two Italians, one German, and one Polander.



And why those my Lord?



Because I pass'd through their Countries in my
  18
Travels, and have here something of the best of all their
Garbs.







In this Suit Ladies, you may read all the Countries
of my Travels; I design'd it on purpose, to give the World In∣telligence
where I have been.



I vow 'twas a pretty Contrivance 



Yes very Ingenious 



And to make the Number, the Twelfth was an English∣man,
and that my self.



Go thy ways, and carry thy Bill to my Steward, and
bid him pay thee thy Money.



I thank your Lordship.




Now do I wish to be well quit of him.



Go you in, and I'le endeavour to detain him.



Going away, 'tis Unkind not to take me with
you.



I am going about a small Affair my Maid tells me
of.



Accept of my Company till she re∣turns.





Oh Madam, 'Tis most agreeable.



I wou'd it were my Lord.




Why sigh you, Madam?



Wou'd I was as handsome as my Cozen.







And as good a Fortune too.



Your Fortune is large, your Uncle tells me.



But not answerable to hers. I wou'd it was.



Repine not Fair one.







Pray why sigh you so?



I wish my Lord.







That you had never seen my Cozen.







Because I think she'• love you 



And I'le love her 



But I wish you'd love some body else.





And why do you wish it?



Because a Friend of mine loves you.



You mock me. Ha, ha, ha.



No my Lord, 'tis too true That you may know I
do not, I cou'd tell you of more than one that loves you passi∣onately.



I must confess it has been my Fortune to be be∣lov'd
by considerable Persons, in all places where-ever I have
travell'd At Rome the Pope's Neice fell in Love with me,
and sent me her Picture richly set in Jewels. In Tuscany the
Grand Duke's Sister. I cou'd tell you something of an Intrigue
with the Sultana, when I was at Constantinople, but it is some∣thing
incredible.



Nay, I have reason to believe it, for no Woman sees
you without some concern; even in this very Street lyes a
young Lady that has Forty thousand Pounds to her Portion,
and she but saw you pass along the Street once or twice, as you
came hither, and is falne in Love with you: And hearing of
your pretensions here, is since falne sick, and has kept her Bed
these two' dayes.



I protest I am sorry; but is she so great a For∣tune.



My Uncle knows her, and all her Concerns as to those
things.







I cou'd tell you of some body else too. But 'tis not con∣venient.



That's her self this may be worth enquiry.





My Lord, my Lawyer's within; if you please, we
will look o're some Particulars of your Estate, that we may for∣ward
the Settlement of a Joynter for my Daughter.



I have some reason to think, she and I may not
  20
disagree. Your Servant Lady.






I had not return'd to you, but that I saw my Father come
this way.



You miss'd the Relation of his forreign Amours: But I
have perswaded his Lordship, that you and I are in love with
him, and that a great Fortune has kept her Bed this two dayes,
hearing he pretends to you 



And is sick for love of him.



Yes! he believes it.



He's a most credulous Coxcomb But should he find
you out to be a Lyar.



Not a greater than himself, he cannot I am sure!



How can'st thou in Conscience make such a Fool of
him.



Heav'n ordain'd every thing for some use or another;
and he can serve for no other than our Pastime.





Ha! these are they!



Here comes Mr. Lovell's Friend.



Now which of e'm is she that I am in love with?



He's at a stand.



He'd fain know me agen; but prithee take up a Brisk
Humor, and let's try to puzzle him.



No! Prithee let's go in.



What, are you upon this Wing? Do you come out a
Grazing like Rabbets just at the Burrows mouth; that as soon
as any body comes, you may pop into your Holes agen.



We had need be watchful; when such Pochers as you
are abroad.



Your watchfulness signifies little: I come now like a
Ferret to creep into your Holes, and scare you out of your Bur∣rows.



But if instead of a Burrow, you shou'd run into a War∣reners
Trap.



And that you may easily do; for we are no Out-lying.
Conies, we keep within Heart of the Warren.



I, but I know your Musees, your In-lets, and Out∣lets,
and where-ever the Rabbets pass, the Ferret or Weezel
may venture. You see I come just to the same place; 'twas
here you pop't in from me before; but now I am got between
you and the Hedge.



But how do you know that we are the same Pair?



And which of us is it that was too nimble for you?



You had best have a care on which you adventure, for
in such cases, you ought not to spoyl your Friend's Game.



'Tis one of you!



I see you are no good Hound. You can't follow the
Scent well.



Many a good-Nos'd Dog is at a loss when Scent is
cross'd; but if I catch one, and my Friend another, if we
are mistaken, let him say which is his, and wee'l make a
change.



But which of us two, do you think, wou'd fall to your
share.



I' Gad I do'nt know.



Do'nt you know a woman's Face when you see't a second
time 



She show'd it with-such a Leger-De-Maine; her
Masque was no sooner off, than on agen; and she was gone.








Let me see Faith not I If you had your
Masques on, I should know her from a thousand, at the very
sight of her Vizard, my Heart wou'd go Pitty-pat.



If you are so in Love with the complexion of Velvet,
you shou'd have a N•gra for your Mistress.



There is Beauty in Black; Why else do Ladies put 〈◊〉
Patches? And some love Black-hair better than Light, and 〈◊〉
why not Black •aces as well.



But you'd be for a White one at this time, if you knew
but which was under the Vizard.



'Tis well for us he does not, for then he'd pretend Love
to one of us.



Gad but I wou'd not to you, nor ne'r a Woman in the
World.



I dare swear you wou'd.



Perhaps I might make you believe I was in Love with
you.



No, that you cou'd ne're do.



Why, don't you think your selves handsome enough to
be lov'd?



Yes; but we think you have more Wit.



What, then to love one of you.



Yes, or any body else that is never like to love you
agen.



Are you an Enemy to me or to Love?



To love. I think it is a very foolish thing.



But 'tis Marriage makes it so. Give me Love as Na∣ture
made it, Free and Unconfin'd. Observe but Mistress,
and Gallant: How Brisk, how Gay, how Fierce they are
in their Amours! Whil'st Marriage-love comes like a Slave
loaden with Fetters, dull and out of humour.



For my part, I am rather for a Gallant than a Hus∣band.



So am I clearly 



'Tis well dissembl'd on one side; one of you I am sure
speaks against her Conscience, but if you are as you say, you'r
Girles for me.







Both, 'I gad both 



Hold, one's enough; and if you'l be a Gallant to one of
us, we expect you shou'd be constant.



That Circumstance makes it too like Marriage.



The Constancy is while you pretend; not but that ei∣ther
Mistress or Gallant may choose elsewhere, but they must
love but one at once.



But which of us will you choose?



Faith I'le be for her I talk'd to in the Masque.





Madam! Dinner's on the Table.







My Master has call'd for't, he's in haste to go out.





We come: Well Sir, when you find which of us two is
she; claim her for your Mistress.













Ha! Hilaria, i'faith, that's she. But they are gone.
Iacinta I remember, is the Name of Lovell's Mistress, till now
I fancy'd the other was she, because she was more brisk and
airy. Well, I•le find out my Friend, and we'l give a visit in
the Afternoon.
If for a Wife my Liberty I loose,
One of these Two shou'd catch me in a Noose.








YOur Joynture is agreed on; and Directions are
given for the Drawing of the Writings; there∣fore
put things in readiness, and dispose your
self for Marriage; for it must be within a day or
two.



Sure Sir, if you lov'd me, you'd not be so hasty to be
rid of me.



It is the great Care and Love I have for thee, makes
  24
me solicitous to see thee well-dispos'd. My Lord is a Person
of Worth and Honour, and thou wilt be happy in his Love;
Iacinta thou'lt be a Lady 



My Lord merits, I question not, a Wife much above
me in Desert; But how do you think I can on the sudden, re∣solve
to leave the Family of him that got me, bred me, and
brought me up to what I am.



Your Mother did the same before You; and for this
thou hast had all thy Education: This is the last great Act a
Father can do for his Child; in this his Care ends, and when
we give a Daughter in Marriage, 'tis suppos'd, we give her to
more than a Father, for such is a Husband; Husband and Wife
are one.



That rule Uncle, won't hold in Arithmetick, for according
to the first principle, one and one make two.



Mad-cap Neice, meddle with your own matters. Let
me see 



Nay Uncle, ner'e put on your Considering-Cap, for
an Answer. What I say is true; and I'le give you a further De∣monstration,
that Man and Wife are not one: For in this Age
they are seldom, or never together; the Man's in one place, and
the Wise in another▪ as far asunder as ever they can get. And
you know it is impossible for one and the same thing to be at the
same time in several places.



She has a very unhappy Wit. I am glad, Daughter,
that you are going from her, for she's enough to spoil all the
Young Women she meets with; but I hope she'l have a Husband
will meet with her.



Never of your Choosing, Uncle.



Likely so, for you'r Hair-brain'd enough, to do things
of your own Head. But your Father when he Dy'd, left you
to my Care, and bid that you shou'd be Rul'd by me; and if
you are not, your Disobedience will come home to you one day
or other.



This is but talk. Do you think, Uncle, I han't as much
Wit to choose a Husband as you?



Well, well, follow your own Course; but I hope
  33
you'l get a Husband one day will Cudgel your Bones for
you. 



But Uncle, it is not now as it was in your young dayes,
Women then were poor sneaking sleepish Creatures. But in
this Age, we know our own strength, and have wit enough
to make use of our Talents. If I meet with a Husband makes
my Heart ake, I'le make his Head ake I'le warrant him.



Nay, I am apt enough to believe one house will be
too not to hold you long. I doubt not but your Husband (who
e're has the ill fortune to be so) will in a short time be as weary
of you as I am.



If he shou'd prove but half so ill-natur'd as you are
(which certainly no Young Man can) I'd swear my self a Vir∣gin,
and consequently, Sue a Divorce against him for Impo∣tency.



I must be gone, this Wen•h will never hold her prat∣tle;
she'd out-talk e'm at a Bake-house.





Well, thou'rt a mad Wench to talk so.



Pish! I'le have Women say and do what they will:
Have not we Rational Souls as well as Men; what made Wo∣men
Mopes in former Ages, but being rul'd by a company of
old Men and Women: Dotage then was counted Wisdom, and
formerly call'd Gravity and good Behaviour.



What can'st thou advise me to in this extremity. I
hate this Foolish Lord.



Let him know your Mind, and if he won't believe you,
tell him he's an Unmannerly Fool.



If I break with him, my Father will conclude I affect
Mr. Lovell, and to cross me, never consent I shou'd have him;
And he's the only Man I can Love.



See! he's here, and our Gallant with him; wee'l con∣spute
the Bu'sness with them.





Mr. Lovell, how durst you venture here.



This Gentleman told me your Father was to go abroad
  34
this Afternoon; and by his perswasion and my own Inclinati∣ons,
we adventur'd to wait on you, and just as we came into
the Street, my Lord and he pass'd by us in a Coach.



And who sent for you Gallant?



I hope, Madam, you'l allow a man to look after his
Heart when 'tis gone a'stray.



You cou'd not find it the last time you were here.



You conspir'd to juggle me on't; but I know well e∣nough
which of you had it.



You are beholding to Mr. Lovell for your Knowledg.



No, Madam, upon my word, but he has told me his
Adventures.



Well, Madam; I hope you'l stand to your Bargain.



We are no Flinchers; wee'l not be worse than our
words.



Well then, you I challenge for my Mistress; you were
the Lady I talk'd to in the Masque.



I am not her I'le assure you 


Carel. takes Jac. by the hand.


I am well assur'd it cou'd be none
but you; I knew it when I was here before, tho' I did not then
own it.



Take nay word Sir.



Lord that you shou'd think to deceive me; why all
the while I was in the Company before, my Heart beat all
on that side you stood, and my Cheek next you burnt and
glo'de.



Ha, ha, 'slife he has not found it out yet.







No, I'le be swore Careless han't you.



I'le be sworn Madam, Hilaria was the Person.



Ha, ha, ha: But that's my Cozen Iacinta.



No, no, no, did not you call her Hilaria as you went
in.











I thought how well you know; and did that on purpose
to try you 







Now Careless thou art caught 



What wou'd I give now to come handsomely off: I
must be impudent: Well, Madam, to let you see that I did, go
both of you out of the Room, and come in Masqu'd, and if
I don't choose the Right, I'le be content to resigne the Hopes
of a Mistress.



There is but right and wrong.



To give you a greater Proof on't, I'le make my choice
Blind-fold.



'Twill still be an even Wager that you hit on the
right.



Careless, thou art Out-witted i'faith.



Servant, our Covenant is voyd for Non-performance of
the Conditions.



But calling of me Servant after the Condition is bro∣ken,
is a Confirmation and will make it stand good in
Law.



No Careless, that Quirk won't do neither.



But Madam, I hope you'l give a man leave to retreat,
when he finds his Errour; your self occasion'd the Mistake,
'twas an Errour of my Hand, not of my Heart, for at the same
time, I told you Hilaria was she, and you are Hilaria; Therefore
'twas you I meant.



Yes, yes, 'twas me you meant; when your Cheek glo'd,
and your Heart beat on the left side!











Cozen, you are too great a Tyrant.



You pursue your Victory too severely; 'tis generous to
give the Vanquish'd quarter.



I do more; I give him Liberty to make his retreat.





Ah Madam, your Father has met with his Lawyers
  36
Clark, who told him his Master was not at home, and he's re∣turn'd
already.



Convey Mr. Lovell out quickly Sir; will you go with
him?



'Tis not possible, Madam, he's just coming into the
Room.



What shall we do?





Ha! Mr. Lovell Daughter, I see you observe
my Commands well: Sir, I beseech you; What makes you
here?



Sir, I come to wait on my Friend.



Yes Sir▪ I had much adoe to perswade him; but
considering the bus'ness I came about, requir'd some Body
to give you an Account of me, which none cou'd do better
than he; he did adventure to trespass on you to serve me.



What Bus'ness, pray Sir!







It was my Fortune twice or thrice, to have a sight of
your fair Niece, as she went abroad.



Sure he's not so mad to tell him.



To whom, Sir, I took so great a liking, that Day nor
Night, I cou'd not rest, till I had found who she was, and where
she liv'd; which I had no sooner done, but engag'd him to come
along with me, to acquaint you who I am, and what my For∣tunes
are, hoping to gain your leave, to make my Addresses to
this fair Lady 



This I hope Sir, will gain me your Pardon.



Do you, Sir, know this Gentleman 



Yes, his Name is Careless; I believe, Sir, you might
know his Father.



I did so, he was a worthy Gentleman; 'tis now some
eight years since he dy'd.



'Tis so long; peace be with him.



He left some Twelve hundred a Year to his Son, then
not at Age.



This Gentleman is that Son.



But has he that Estate?







I heard you were a little wild.



I have my Froliques as most young Men have but
I keep my Estate out of the Devil's Clutches; I have yet not
sold one Foot of Land, or cut down one Stick of Wood.



Nay Sir, if you were as wild as wild could be, you'd
meet with your Match there, my Niece is as wild as you can be,
she's Vain, Idle, Careless, and Talkative.



Uncle, you shou'd do in driving Bargains for Marriage
as they do in Selling of Horses; tell their good Qualities, and
leave it to 'em to find out the ill.



These are Faults will be discover'd in you at first
sight.



Sir, I hope you'l like me ne're the worse for what he
sayes.



Instead of his getting you for a Wise, you intend to
get him for a Husband.



It is more to the humour of the Age; if you won't com∣mend
me, I'le commend my self; and if I thought but half so
well of him as Id' of my self, wee'd soon shake hands fo• to have
and to hold without your leave.



You see her humour Sir, if after this you dare venture
on her, I shall not counsel her against you; provided what
Mr. Lovel and your self say be confirm'd by good Authors; for
I wish her well Marry'd.



Stay Uncle, now I think on't, you may take him with
you. Marriage is quite out of Fashion, and I hate to be out of it,
as much as you do to be in't; if he had Ten or Twelve Thousand
a year, would keep me a Coach and six Horses, and all things
suitable to that Grandeu•r, I might admit him as a Gallant, and
all that 



I'le leave you to her; at this mad rate she talks all
the Year round.




I did not think Careless, thou had'st had a Lye so much
at command.




It was to serve my Friend and these Ladies.



But the Jest wou'd be, if your Lye should prove true, and
you shou'd play such a Simple trick, as to fall in L'ove with me
indeed and indeed.



Make your own words true, and accept me for a Gal∣lant,
I know not what may follow 



But you know what you must have first A huge
Estate; but because you brought us so handsomely off? There's
my Hand to Kiss, and I confer on you the Title of my Ser∣vant.



He cur'd a present Evil. I wish he cou'd as easily divert
what I fear will follow.



Madam, we must court Fortune as we do a Mistress;
never leave her when she's in a good humor. Let's hear your
Grievance:



'Tis the Match my Father drives on so eagerly with that
Lord.



Will he not be satisfi'd, if you tell him you can't love
him.



Hee'l not take that Answer from her, nor ne'r a Wo∣man
alive.



He thinks we are both in love with him.



Since Dinner I writ a Love-Letter to him; I have made
him believe too, that the Rich Heiress that lodges in this street
languishes for him.



And he pitties her extreamly.



Hark you Lovel; Let's put him upon courting this
Great Fortune.



But it may be he'l not quit his hold here.



For so great an Advantage he may: And it must be
your parts, Ladies, to give him sufficient grounds to conclude,
that neither of you love him.



Let us alone to give him proof of that.



Then we will contrive to bring him in Disgrace with
your Father. Lady of the Bed-chamber, you must act a part in
our Comedy, attend us to the Door; you shall receive Instru∣ctions
as we goe.






Here's my Father; let us retreat and consult about our
Affairs.



You know this Lady I suppose.



I have seen her: But I am very well acquainted with
her Uncle.



And has she so great a Fortune?



Yes, it lies in the three Banquers hands we were but
now speaking of.



I'know it does; for when I parted with you, I made
enquiry, and they confirm'd it: She lodges in the middle of this
street. Mrs. Rich is her Name.



Right: But my Lord, do you think she has so great a
Kindness for you?



I speak not without good Reason; and were I not
Engag'd by Love and Honour to your Daughter, I wou'd make
an Attempt.



Her Uncle trusts her not out of his sight.



I cou'd find ways to speak to her, but I prize Mrs. Ia∣cinta
above all Women. Tho' there are others have no small
Kindness for my Person, and one you know too• but she shall be
nameless; yet I'le shew you what a passionate• Letter she sent
me. You shall hear it.




Your Person is so Taking, and your Obligements so conquering,
that no Woman living, and you beholding, can resist Loving: There∣fore
since of this you are knowing; I doubt not your pardoning her,
that with Blushing tells you her Ailing; the Ioy of whose being,
is, when you and she is seeing: Your's remaining for Everlast∣ing.



This is a very Odd strayne.



Ah, 'tis very Amorous, and I pitty the Lady for
your sake.



Is she Related to me!



The first Letter of her Name is Hilaria.



My Niece, this is some Trick of hers; but I dare not
  40
tell him he's abus'd, lest he should take it ill, and think my
Daughter had a hand in't But of all that love you, your
Lordship can have but one.



True; yet 'twou'd vex a Man to Discard Trumps,
but 'tis a forc't Put: This I tell you, to give you a Proof of my
Love for your Daughter. I know poor Thing she loves Me.


Hilaria and Iacinta appears.


My Lord! You'r a happy Man, we have over heard
your Amours.



I did not think you had been so nigh.



Without Doubt, you were wrapt in your Mothers
Smock.







Observe that Sigh, and how she eyes me. Lady you'r
Melancholy.



You call'd my Thoughts from a pleasing Contemplation.
I was thinking 



Of what Madam? 



Of you my Lord.



I saw you look wishly on Me.



I was thinking what good Eyes your Lordship has.



O fine Eyes! if they stood but more out, and were not
sunck in's head, like Candle-Snuffs in their Sockets.



And did not squint so much.











He has a handsome Nose too.



Was it not an Inch too short.



And turn'd up at the end with the Air of a French
Dog.







Why Girls, what mean you?



Pretty good Cheeks Were they not so lean and
pale!



And fal'n in for want of Side-Teeth.



The Devil's in e'm both.



A handsome Mouth were it not so wide.



And his Lips not so Thin and Blewish 








Have done, or I'le lay my Staff about your ears.



His Gums not so worn away.



And his Teeth not so rotten.



His Mouth not so •urr•d.



His Breath not so scented with the French Hogo.



Disgrace to my Dignity.



They are Mad, Distracted. They know not what
they doe.







And has a Swarthy, Tawny, Tallow Complexion.



Peace, and have done in the Devil's name.



In fine, was your Lordship but ten times as handsom,
you'd be a pretty well-favour'd Man.



And fit to be lov'd by a Woman of Sixty and upwards.


















You Huswifes you, say you are Mad, say you are
Drunk, or any thing; or I'le swinge you.



No, no, Uncle; We are neither mad nor drunk.



Husie; your Reason for this.



Why does he make his Brags that we are in Love with
him, and so fond of his Company?



We have given him Proofs of our Kindness. In Love
with him!



Get you up to your Chambers; Go! Husbands;
Halters you deserve 


Have Patience, be pacified, the Baggages shall down on their
knees to you.



Ha, ha, ha! This is only to blind you. Ha, ha, ha,
'Twas your Nieces Frolick; they love me as they love their
own eyes and because I told you on't Ha, ha, ha 
See what tricks they play to cozen you, ha, ha, ha.



I'le instantly know the truth on't, or 





Henceforward, I will hate their whole Sex for their
sakes, I will defame the Living, revile the Dead, and leave a
Curse to the Generation of Females to come.





My Lord, my Lord 



Avoid thou She-Devil; thou art a Satan in Petti∣coats.



Ah my Lord; if you knew my Errand, you'd say I was
an Angel; I have such News for your Lordship.







If a Woman might but trust your Lordship with her
Secrets.



I hope she's in love with me; she's a Bit will serve to
stay a mans stomach when he's hungry. What Secrets Pretty
Beatrice? Dost thou love me?



Ah dearly, dearly, my Lord But 



But you are asham'd to tell me your mind.



I am afraid 



Thou should'st have a great Belly 



No, my Lord, that you shou'd tell 



No: I'le tell no body; go, go up to your Cham∣•er,
and I'le steal after you 



No my Lord, I can do the Business here 



Art thou a Virgin?



As to Deeds a very Innocent; but in Words and
Thoughts, I have been a little waggish.



Come into the next Room.



No, no, I am only to tell you 



No matter for telling, we will talk afterwards,



See this Gold, my Lord here are Twenty pieces.



And you wou'd have as much more.



I shall deserve it.



Wilt thou go then, go.



This Gold my Lord was given me.



For that, that thou hast more mind I should have.



No, my Lord; it was given me to betray my Mi∣stress.



Hau Who has Plots upon her Body?



No body; it was given me to deprive her of you, my
Lord.







To tell your Lordship that But I am so afraid, you
shoud tell agen.



I'le be secret on my Honour.



That there is a rich Heiress not far off in love with your
Lordship.



Humh And is not this a Plot laid 



Yes, my Lord, 'tis a Plot laid.



To betray me 



Yes, my Lord 



And you'l discover it.



To none but your Lordship: It is to betray you, but
will your Lordship be sure not to speak on't agen?







To betray your Lordship into a Marriage with this great
Fortune.







I am to tell her Name too, and how you shall come to
see her, for all the Dragon her Uncle; and how you shall steal a
Marriage and all.



What say'st thou Beatrice?



Nothing but truth: Her Name is Mrs. Rich, she lives
in this street, and is sick in Bed for love of you. She sent for me
and gave me this Gold, with promise of much more, if I wou'd
be true to her, and acquaint you with her Condition; and be
instrumental in helping her to see you 



How Beatrice; may I come to the sight of her.



She has brib'd her Physician to joyn in the Conspiracy;
he will pretend to bring an able Doctor of his Acquaintance
to see her, that with him he may consult of her Disease
and Cure. You are to be this Physician, and the Person in the
habit of an Apothecary which you are to provide, for we
know none.



Let me alone for that!



Then if your Lordship like her; you may there Marry
her.



A very neat Invention! Oh subtile Woman!



This my Lord was my Plot.







She has promis'd I shall live with her when I am
Marry'd.



Thou shalt But Beatrice, thou'lt keep thy Maiden
for me, wilt thou not.



If I find you can keep Secrets; I will trust your Lord∣ship
with any thing.



I know thou did'st love me better than thy Mistress,
or her Flirking Cozen Well, were it not for what thou
hast told me, their Affronts wou'd drive me to my Country-House;
where I'd live like a Hermit, and leave half the Town
languishing.



You wou'd leave my Lady a bleeding. But I hope your
Lordship is better Natur'd, and more just, than to revenge the
Faults of a few upon the whole Sex. I'le go put my Affairs in a
posture for my getting abroad to wait on your Lordship.



And I the mean time, will disengage my self from
all concerns here, and to Iacinta's Father resign the Interest he
gave me in her.



Go thy ways, Lord Credulous; how greedily he swal∣lows
the Bait with which he was caught before.
A Fool will often run into the Snare,
But once escap'd, the Wise-man does beware.









COme Huswife; ask Forgiveness.

Threatens Jac. with his Cain.






But on your Knees.







Quickly down; down on your Knees, Baggage.




Courage Cozen Iacinta, I am come to your aid: Look
you Uncle, I have got as Tuff a Cain as your's.



Get you out of my Doors Huswife So down,
down on your Knees.



I do Sir 




Down, my Lord, Come you must down too.











Nay, 'tis very true Uncle, if you lay't on there, I'le lay't on
here with a Vengeance: Down on your Marry-Bones 



Why look you Lady to serve you 





Get you out of my Doors; get you out of my
House.



Nay Uncle, keep off, I am resolved to stand upon my
Guard.



Get you gone I say, and never come near me more.



But don't you think to Domineer when I am gone, if
I hear you do, I'le have abo•t too with you Uncle, as old a
Cock of the Game as you are, I'le have a Sparring Blow too
with you.



Enter Beatrice, and Toby following in a Disguise, a Suit of Four
Quarters, representing the Four Parts of the World, with his
Head habited like a Spaniard.



Here's a Stranger enquires for you my Lord.



Here's a Cavilere to Defend us; Cudgel lye thou there.



I am your Humble my Lord.



Sir, I am yours.



I have had the Honour to see your Lordship in many
Countries abroad, and you appear'd so pleasing to me; That
returning from Travel, I could not but take England in my
way (Tho' I had formerly liv'd here six years) that I might
receive the Honour of Kissing your hand; and making my self
Familiar in your Lordships Acquaintance.



Which I covet abundantly. A Traveller cannot
but be worthy my Knowledge. I venerate a Pilgrims Shooe as
much as they do Saints, whose Shrines they go to visit, because
it hath trod the Dust of many Countries; shall I beg Cogni∣zance
of your Name, Sign•or.



My Name is Signior, Simplaio, Folio. Del no no, Wittesso
At-Allo.







The Co•nts Name is but Monosillable to this.



This is a noble Family as I take it.



And you are a great Fool for your pains.



'Tis a very Noble one in Spain. I was borne at Castile,
Christen'd at Rome, Educated in Paris, return'd to Italy, left
my Virginity at Venice; Sayl'd from thence to Constantinople;
Travell'd to Ierusalem, and there I first Shav'd my Beard.



Uncle, he may well have a long Name, that went as far
as Rome to be Christen'd.



He appears to be a great Traveller.



His Face shews it.



He has indeed a right Olive-Complexion; which is a
sign he has much in the Sun.



My Lord, I hope you'l command my pardon for this
Gentleman, and these Ladies, if my Respects to your Lordship
makes me appear uncivil to them.



Not in the least My Lord merits all 



My Lord, don't you remember to have seen me in your
Tra•els?



I begin to call you to mind, as I take it, I saw you in
the Court of Spain.



Right, you did so; I was then playing a Game at Chess
with the King!



And at Vienna, the Emperor's Court.



The Emperor and I, the first Morning I saw you there,
were at Tennis: I remember I lost a Sett for a thousand Pistols
to satisfie my Curiosity of looking upon your Lordship; that
was the second time I had the Honour to see you.



This is a Great Person; behave
your selves with Respect.

A Bottle of Sack, and Glass ready for Beatrice.



And as I take it, I saw you as I Ac∣company'd
Cardinal Palavicina, the Popes Nephew, to the Con∣sistory;
I was at that time in his Coach.



I think you were; and I well remember, I Rid with his
Holiness in His And your Lordship gave me the Grace of a
Bow, which I return'd your Lordship with so great Obeysance,
that had not his Holiness caught hold on me behind; I had t•m∣bl'd
out or'e the Boot of the Coach.



You did much Honour my Civilities.



Now we have encreas'd our Acquaintance; I'le obtrude
the trouble on you, to go with me to Court some Day, and
present me to the King, that I may have the Honour to kiss his
Hand.



I swell with the Ambition of waiting on so Noble a
Cavaliero; Now I perfectly remember you.





I beg your Pardon 



Sir, pray advance, here's only a Noble stranger, one
that's a great Traveller, and of my former Acquaintance: He's
worth your knowledge, O Sir Cavilliero; pray receive this Gen∣tleman
into your Armes.



Ha! sure I know that Habit Ha Sirrah You
Rogue, What make you here?



Sir! Your Language is too bold.



You take too great a Liberty to affront any Man in
my House; besides, he's a Man of Quality.



I'le fetch his Qualities out of him, with a Pox to
him.




Ah good Sir, hold Sir, or you'l make a Discovery.



Ah Sir, I'le make you discover what Tricks you are
playing here?




Hold, hold, Sir, hold 



Hold, hold, Sir, hold 



Ah, ah, Good Sir Nay Sir Good Sir Pray
good Master.











Ha, ha, ha, he!



Ha, ha, ha, he!



Ha, ha, ha, he!



Ah Sir, I ask you Forgiveness on my Knees.



Sirrah; what makes you loytering here, when I send
you about Business?



Ah Lord Sir, I only put on your Masquerading Suit to
come to Mrs. Beatrice in, to see if she cou'd know me!



Ha, ha, ha, he! Toby! Ha, ha, ha, ha.




Ha, ha, ha, he! Toby! Ha, ha, ha, ha.



Ha, ha, ha, he! Toby! Ha, ha, ha, ha.



I thought I should find you here; go get you home you
Rogue, go.



Wou'd I was gone too.




My Lord, won't you follow, and wait on your Cavaliero to
Kiss the Kings hand; Ha, ha, ha 



Ha, ha, ha, ha 




Your Lordship saw him in Spain, Germany and Rome;
Ha, ha, ha.



And bow'd to him out of the Cardinal's Coach; Ha,
ha, ha.







I am amaz'd; Ha, ha, ha 



What mean you, Ladies?



Ladies, Gentlemen; a good Jest Ha, ha, ha 
Laugh at it, Ha, ha Laugh heartily, Ha, ha, ha. 











He's a witty Knave, Ha, ha, ha, my sides will burst
with Laughing, Ha, ha, ha.



I am afraid the Rogue has play'd some Unlucky
Trick 



No, no Ha, ha, ha, a Jest, a very good Jest,
Ha, ha, ha; I protest my Laughing has made me Sick. I'le take
my leave, Sir.



Beatrice, fetch in a Bottle of Sack. My Lord, pray
drink a Glass of Sack, if you'r not Well.







Oh, by all means! my Lord, how came you to be so
mistaken in him?



There was a Noble Cavalier, that I often met in my
Travels Sir, like this Knave, Ha, ha, ha. I protest, I thought
it had been he Well Sir, Your Man's a Witty Knave 



I am glad he has made you all Merry; I was afraid he
had play'd the Rogue For which, I wou'd have so beat
him My Lord, your Servant; your Servant Sir; Ladies
your Servant 


Knocking at the Door.]





Come Beatrice, Fill my Lord a Glass of Sack. See
who Knock's at the Door, Beatrice.




Here's a Woman wou'd Speak with my Lord 




Bid Her come in.





Ha! Have I found you at last? Are you come again,
after so many Years Absence? Cou'd you, wicked Man, think
to Forsake me for ever?



What means the Woman!



Ah, Hard hearted Lord, You know well enough what
I mean! Can you see me, and not Blush? Was it for this, that
you pretended Love to me, and caus'd my Poor Parents to break
off my Marriage with the Viccar's Son? And did you Marry me
your self, only to leave me, and make me Wretched?















Woman! what in the Devil's name dost thou mean?



I mean, your going away, and leaving of me Af∣ter
you had Marry'd me: assoon as you saw me with Child, you
pretended Business to London: You left me Money to keep me
Six Months, but before the time expir'd, you ran beyond Sea,
without letting me know whether you were gone; not sending
me any thing to Maintain me in that Condition: And to en∣crease
my Misfortunes, I had two Children at a Birth.



Does not your Lordship know me?



An impudent Quean! I never saw her before. I know
her not.



Not know your own Wife! Shameless Lord! You are a
Dishonour to the Womb that bare you: Have my Cares and Mi∣series
this Seven years so alter'd me, that you don't know me?
Yes, You know me, but you won't. Ah that I had never known
you, then I shou'd not have known Sorrow: You were in Hopes
it would brake my Heart; but I live to plague you.







Heav'n help us poor Wretche•, if we must have such
hard Fortune! To be forsaken by our Husbands, and left with∣out
Money in our Pocket, Cloaths to the back, and Meat or
Drink for the Belly.



The Womans Distracted; send her to Bedlam.



The Woman talks sensibly.



Ah! How dost think I have maintain'd my self, and
these Two poor Children, these six Years and more: E'en with
the Work of my own Hands God help me.








It g•ieves me to see her Weep.



What shou'd this mean?



It appears by the Story, that she's his Wife!




Not my Wife, I protest.




Here's another Woman with Child enquires
for my Lord.




Let me come in Hau, hau I am almost dead;
I am out of Breath Oh wicked man; it is after you, that
I run thus up and down, Hau, hau, hau But now I have
found you, you shall not escape me.



What mean'st thou now?



I mean to cross your Marriage; you thought I was
dead, or far enough from England, ne'r to trouble you more, Did
you?







Ah that Wretch of a Husband there; that Unnatural
Wretch; he Sold his own Wife, Sold his Child, Sold his own
Flesh and Bloud.



This is some Mistake.



Are you his Wife?



Yes Madam, he Marryed me, and carried me from my
Friends; he carry'd me with him beyond Sea, and when he got
me there, and I began to grow Big with Child, he pretended to
send me by Sea to England To live with my Friends till he
return'd But instead of that, I was carried to Iapan; he
had Sold me to the Master of the Ship, who was a Dutch-man: he
Sold me, and this poor Child that was in my Belly, to Slavery
and Bondage.



Which do you say is your Husband?



E'en this; this is he, let him deny't if he can.



No, 'tis I am his Wife.



You his Wife too! What, has the Wretch two Wives?
That will Hang him.



Hang him; no, you'r none of his Wife.



Yes, he is my Husband.



I say, he is my Husband, and I can prove it.



Are ye both possest? I am Husband to neither of
Ye.



We have been Marry'd this Seven Years.



It is Six, since he Marry'd me.



Is this true, you wicked Lord?



Yes, yes, one's as true as the other.



Ah shameless Man! Dost thou confess thou hast Two
Wives? Come hither little Ienny, come hither Sarah; Look
you, these are the Fruits of our Marriage.



And here's my Child too.



Look here upon these Two sweet Babies.



And look here too: here's thy own Flesh and Bloud which
thou did'st so Barberously sell.



Never were two such impudent Carrions seen.



They are as like you, my Lord 



Yes Lady, and so they are.



This has the very Eyes and Mouth of him; he is so like
his Lordship 



They are sweet Children indeed.



Ye all dream; they are neither Like me, nor Pretty,
nor Nothing.



Kneel Ienny, kneel down little Sarah, and ask Fa∣ther
Blessing; and let's see if he can be so Unnatural to Disowne
you.



And do you kneel Tommi•, ask Blessing; 'tis thy own
Daddy.



Father, Father, Father 



The Devil take you for Whore's-Birds 



Father, Father, Father 



Don't you think to be gone, and Leave them; I'le fol∣low
you, and Proclaime it to all the World.



And I'le haunt you where•e're you go; I'le be satisfi'd, if
she is your Wife too: and if I find it true, I'le have Recourse to
Justice; you shall be hang'd, if all the Law in England will hang
you, for having Two Wives.







Justice, Justice, Justice, &c.



Justice, Justice, Justice, &c.



Father, Father, Father, &c.



Now must I bestir my self.

D. Bo. Breed. Clap. 3 Children, Beat.
Run out.


I am so amaz'd, I know not what to think of all that
we have seen, and heard.



They are both his Wives for certain.



This wou'd have been a fine Husband for my Cozen.
Now Uncle, Are you not beholden to Fortune, or your Wisdome,
for her Deliverance? Cozen, let me choose a Husband for you
the next time.



Iacinta, be not rul'd by her, nor hearken to her Coun∣sel;
but on all occasions, shew all ready Complyance to my Com∣mands;
for your Niece may stay in my House. I forgive
you.



Ah Uncle, and I pardon you Come Old-Man,
Let's shake Hands; you see I am good Natur'd. So now we are
all Friends.



Well, I must be gone abroad.



Fare you well, Uncle 

Now he's gone, we'l be gone too. Come Cozen, we'l spend
this Afternoon in a Frolique: we'l go see a Play at the Nurse∣ry;
I'le put on the Boyes Habit I made for a Masquerading
Suit.



Let's go in our Scar•s, Vizards, and Masques.



You shall; but I'le have my own Humour: I'le Cock,
and Strut, and so Hector the young Cits, if they come to disturb us
with their Impertinences 








You come luckyly, our Plot succeeds rarely.



Have we Routed the Enemy?



Horse and Foot; he'l ne'r be able to appear in the
Feild agen.




Our new Alderman Rich, and his Neice, are ready to re∣ceive
e'm if he comes 



His Wives follow'd him so close, I am afraid they have
scar'd his Lordship out of Town, if not out of's Witts.



We must find out Beatrice, and recover him; for all things
are so well prepar'd 



She's after him where er'e he is. But by what means have
you compass'd the bus'ness we last spoke of?



I sent a Letter as from an unknown friend to the Alder∣man,
to let him know there was an appointment made by his Neice,
and some Gallants, to steal her away to Night; this he easily be∣liev'd,
because 'tis but what he always fears and is jealous of; he pre∣sently
out of pretence to carry her abroad in's coach to take the air,
has convey'd her to his Country House, which is but Eight Miles
from London.







This the Landlady told me; for she's my friend, and I
have feed her, to let a Lady of my acquaintance have the command
of the lodging for this night; and thither I have convey'd our coun∣terfeit
Heiresse.



And Toby is now a Grave Alderman.



I sent him one of her Uncles old suites, which I borrow'd
of the Landlady.



He's at the Tavern here waiting for orders.
Enter Beatrice.
Here's Beatrice now 



But where's my Lord?



In my pursuit I saw him give his pursuers the Dodg. I gave
e'm the sign to make a fault; he turn'd clear back this way, and they
keep at a distance, and I am come a nearer way to meet him here.



We are •eady to receive him.





That's well here he comes, lets slip in there, that he may
not see us together.




With much a doe I have at length got clear of e'm. The
  47
Jades, and their bawling Bastards Father, Father, Father 
I have run my self almost out of Breath.





I am glad I have found you, my Lord; I have run my
self almost off my Legs to o're-take ye.



'Pox o'th Whores; my Shirt sticks to my back.



But my Lord, are you Marry'd to any of e'm?



O the Devil! Not I.



Nor promis'd e'm Marriage neither?







If it should appear so hereafter, it would be an injury to
the Lady; and I would not have a Hand in doing her any
Wrong for the World: I Love her as my Life!



I never saw either of e'm before. Upon my Honour, I
did not.



Now I believe your Lordship; but if any thing of this
this shou'd come to the Ladies Ear, it wou'd Ruine our De∣signe.



But I hope she'l not hear't so soon.



We must out-fly Report: Come, my Lord, let's instant∣ly
about it, to prevent Danger 



But I have got no Parson yet.



It can't be help't: I hear her Uncle will be abroad all
this Afternoon, and we'l perswade her to Counterfeit a Fit of
Illness; and the Doctor shall tell the Landlady, and the Ser∣vants,
that she must presently take the Air, or she'l dye; that
she has an Oppression of Spirit about her Heart, and that the
Jogging of a Coach will relieve her; and when we get her a∣broad,
we know what to do.



Yet I wish we had a Parson ready, for fear her Uncle
shou'd be at Home, or come in by accident; then we might do't,
and he in the House.



At worst, you may contract, and break a piece of Gold
betwixt you.
Within, 3 Child. Father, Father, Father 



Hark! The Beagles follow us; they have taken the
Scent afresh, and come with a full Cry.
Within, 3 Child, Father, Father, Father 



The Cry comes this way Follow me with all the
hast you can, that they not come within view of us.






So, now the Children are sent home, let's to the place
of Rendezvous.



Here's the Tavern; Enter 


Lovel and Careless appear.



Come Lovel, they are gone to the Tavern to look
for us.



I am the worst man i'th world, to Converse with this
sort of Cattle.



Thou ought'st to be civil to e'm upon Account of the
Kindness they have done for thee at my Request.



Will not my Money excuse my Company.



Did not I condescend to visit a Pair of Honest women
at your request? Aye, and visit them a second time; and can
you in Conscience refuse to Accompany me now ?



Your first Visit was made by my perswasions; but the
second, was the Effect of your own Inclinations.



Well; but come along, if you like not your Com∣pany,
be gone assoon as you will.






'Tis e'en so; your Lover and my Gallant are gone in af∣ter
e'm: We'l put off our Frollique of going to the Nursery, and
I'le adventure into the Tavern; to see after what manner they
Treat e'm.



But shou'd they know you 



They know you: they can't in this Disguise; but if they
do, 'twill pass for a Frolique 


Tables, Chairs, Candles, Bottles.
Enter Mrs. Breeder, Clappam, Drawer in Tavern.


What Wine do you please to drink, Ladies?



Sack and Claret; Is it good?



We have as good as any is in England.



But you Son of a Whore, shall we have any of it?



I'le bring you that shall please you 



Breedwell and Clappam, both Sing and Dance about.
Enter Lovel and Careless, Singing.
SONG.I found a Thief a Managing
My Natural on a Chair,
I pull'd out Focus speedily 







As Merry as Birds in a fair Morning.



Or Crickets in a warm Chimney.



Fill some Wine Boy This will encrease your
Mirth 




Here Careless, you Son of a Whore, here's to you.



I thank you Mrs. Breedwell.



Lady, my Service to you 



Damn your Complement. My Service to you You'd
have said as much as that to an Honest Woman 



Ladies, I can't talk at your rate; but if you are for down-right
Drinking have at you.



Here Careless, you Damn'd Confounded Dog, give me
your Hand.



Pray mind your own Intrigue; we are agreed.



Mrs. Breedwell What right have you to choose your
Man before me?



I have been acquainted with him longer than you 



Mr. Careless, do you like a Woman e're the better for be∣ing
an Old Acquaintance?



He chose me, and that's a signe he likes me better than
you 



I took the first that came to my hand.



Yes, she's so forward.



I am then shut out for a wrangler.



Rot your humour! that you'l be so disobliging to any
Gentleman.



He's as Dull as an Alderman.




Madam! there's a young Gentleman at the dore desires
to speak with you.




Come Lovel, here's both their Healths to you.



Madam, I had a sight of you as you came up staires, and was
extreamly taken with you: pray oblige me so far as to own me for
your acquaintance, and introduce me into the Company, which I
much desire, for your sak•.



Sir, you may Command me. Lord 'tis the prettyest man 
Nay Sir, you shall come in here are none but friends.



Sir, you must not refuse a Ladies Invitation.




I fear I shall be uncivil.



That you can hardly be in our Company.



Sir, these Ladies Healths to you 



Come on Sir, Ladies, To your good Healths.



And here's Mr. Lovels Health.



I am ready to pledge it.



And to make it go down the pleasanter, there's That to
sweeten your Wine and yours.




Were we but sure such sand lay at the Bottom of the Sea,
wee'd drink the Ocean off.







And now Ladies, I thank you for the good service you have
done for me.



Will you leave us then?



My absence is no Injury, now you have got another Man 







And I have a little Bus'ness.



Damn Business; when Wine and Women are in the case▪



It is of great Concern 



Sir, can there be affaires of greater Importance than Drink∣ing
and Wenching?



To tell you true Sir, he's going to see a Lady that he's in
Love with.



What sots Love makes of men.



Your servant Gallants 












I hope he'l find Compunction of heart e're he gets there, re∣pent
of's sin, and so come back agen.



As I live, this is the prettiest youth Come let's be freely
merry 



I love freedom in my Mirth; Come Sir, will you pledg
me on that Ladies Lipps? Ten go downs upon Reputation.



Sir! Ile pledge you here, and
there, and every where.

Kisse each other wo∣man,
and then change and kisse their own.




Come in you sons of Melody.



Come my little Squire of the Body, You and I will have
a Dance together.



Nay, keep to your own man.



I have as much reason to Dance with him as you 



You Lye and you take Tobacco, and I am satisfi'd.



What Interest have you in him, I wonder?



To beat you with your own Cudgel: know that I am his
old acquaintance, and he chose me.



That was because he thought I had been engag'd elsewhere.



So, now they Quarrel for him. And I am in the Condition
my friend was just now.



Ladies, I am ready to serve you in any kind, but then you
must take me by turnes.



I'le ease you of half your Burden; Mrs. Breedwell, you and
I won't part so.



Strike up you Rogues.




Now Sir, let me oblige you to Dance a Jigg.



Lord, Mrs. Breedwell, you are so forward I can oblige him
to't as well as you.



They are at it agen. A pox of this smock-fac'd Rogue.
I must be forc't to kick this fellow out of Company. Some Wine
Boy. Mrs. Clappam, you are not so obliging to day as you us'd to be.



Not I Sir, I Swear, I begg your pardon: I'le pledge you Sir.



How your Dancing has made you sweat: Let we wipe your
face. How long Sir have you known that Lady?







Have you ever bin concern'd with her?



No, but 'tis my present business.



Have a Care how you venture: I wou'd not say so much
but that I have a kindness for you.



Is she not well?



Pretty well agen now: but she's not quite out of the
Surgeons hands yet.



I am just now in the humour, but I had rather have your
Company.



Take your leave, and I'le follow you to the next Tavern 



You must pledg me now 



That they may not suspect, go you first 



That's not fair play Mris. Breedwel.



If you are Jealous, wipe his face your self Some. Some
Wine Boy. To your good Thoughts. 



How do you like Mrs. Breedwell?







On my word you'l not find a finer Woman in Town of her
age: How old do you think she is?







Gemine! I am as much.



I may be mistaken.



Why she lay In a year a goe of her fifth Child, and were't
not for some defect in her Teeth which taints her Breath a little, she's
not to be dislik'd.



How malicious are Women against one another! Let us a∣lone
to discover each others faults.



Has she not acquainted you with her Lodging?



You need not be Jealous, let me but know where yours is.







I must be forc't to kick these two out of the Room; I hate
whispering, it spoiles good company.



Enough we have done Sir slip from the Company and
go home. I'le come to you.







What are you for?




There are a Couple of Seamen in the next Room desires
to Entertain you with a Dance.



Bid'em come in Play away,
Give e'm what Wine they'l drink,
and clap't to our reckoning.



Bid'em come in Play away,
Give e'm what Wine they'l drink,
and clap't to our reckoning.




One of you Two Ladies I hope will entertayn us with a Song.



Mrs. Clappam, you have a good Voice.



Before you hear't I'le lay a Wager 'tis either a Drinking, or a Bawdy Song.



Is there not Phillis in't?







Then it may not be Bawdy. Come, let's hear your
Old out-of-Fashion Song.



'Tis Call'd the Agreement.



Now I'le steal away.






Come peevish Lovers, hear and see
How my Love and I Agree:
We are in sweet embraces twin'd;
I am Constant, and she is Kind.





Sir, a Porter has brought this Letter for you, and stayes
for an Answer.



I'le take this occasion to slip away.





I'le o're take you 





Gallant, I know not what's the Cause, but I am very
Mellancholly: pray come and spend the rest of this afternoon with
me; for I find an Inclination to your company, perhaps the sight
of you may cure me:




This 'tis to have the acquaintance of honest Women,
they presently grow troublesome.







Why, if they be of the dull sober sort, a man can hardly
get acquainted with them, but they fall flat in Love with him: if
  54
they be of a sprightly gay humour; they presently grow impertinent,
they will ever be sending such Notes as these to a man, or running af∣ter
him.



But is she handsome that sends you this Invitation?



Yes: hang her, she's well enough.



Then you shou'd tak't for a kindness 



Yes: just as a Husband does when his Wife jogg'd me by
the Elbow, and askes him the Question. I wonder Women han't
Wit enough to know when a Man cares for their Love, or their
Company: to be sure, when he has a mind to either, he'l be coming
or sending to them.



But won't you go?



Dost think I'le leave good sociable Company to go to a dull
honest Wench?



She'l take it ill.



I have a better opinion of her Wit, than to think she'd de∣sire
me if she knew how the case stands. It wou'd be as unreasona∣ble
in her, as to invite a hungry Man from a well-furnish'd Table, to
go & look upon the Picture of a Banquet, where he can only feast his
eye, but never allay his appetite. Boy, bid the Porter tell her he
can't find me I'le make such Visits when I can have no better
Company.



But where are our Women?



One of e'm went out just before the Song, and bid me tell
you 



Speak out you Rogue 





That she was gone to th' place appointed.



Young Squire, you don't play me square play. You ought
not to take up another mans Dice 
And where's she that sung? 

Do you know where the Lady is that was here but e'en now?





2d. offers to whisper Hilaria.



Whither? Are you going to whisper too? speak out 



I suppose that Gentleman knows. She sent to desire
him to make haste?



Get you both down; We'l pay at the Bar 

Sir, you make too bold with me; to take one Mrs. from me,
  55
was Ill-manners; to Rob me of both, Malice and Ill-Na∣ture !



I do't by way of Reprizal; you have took one from me,
and I have got two from you.



I take one from you !



Yes; I have had a long Intrigue with the Lady nam'd
Hilaria: And I hear you are become her Servant 











I was ignorant of any such pretensions.



I shall spoile your Markets there too: I shall tell her, that
she's Impertinent to send after you, and all that and when you
can find no better Company, you'l come to her, and all that 



Nay then; I'le take another course with you. Come
Sir. 




Surely, you'l not be so mad to fight for one you don't
love?



Look you Sir, tho' I scorn to tell her so, or any of her
Sex: yet I do love her, will love her, and must love her: and no
Body else shall love her 



But I do shall, and will love her better then you 



Come: give me a proof on't then 




Yes Sir, I will give you a proof of 't 
ha, ha, ha. 








Alas poor Gallant ha ha ha observe, now you are Chea∣ted
of three Mrs's. ha ha ha fare you well Gallant.



Hark you, stay 



No; Women are so impertinent Men will come after
them, when they love them adieu 




Gad she's too unconscionable, to deprive me of two Mrs's.
and then to run away her self and now she knows I love her,
she'l insult o're me and those Damn'd Whores to serve me
such a Dog trick I thought they had some honour in them;
But I find that Women are by Nature guilty; For be they Whores,
or no Whores, they will jilt ye 





Enter Deboastado in the Habit of a Physician, Toby
like an Old Rich Alderman.


MR. Doctor, I desire no more of your Consultations
with my Neice; I say no more, but I smell a
Fox.



What do you mean Sir?



I say no more: but some Wiser than some.



That Sir, was the very reason, why the Doctor
brought me with him, thinking I might observe some Cir∣cumstances
which might discover the Nature of your Neices
Disease, of which he yet remains doubtful.



And you discover'd, that it was good for her to go A∣broad
in a Coach, to take the Air.



Yes Sir, and I'le give you a Reason for't; for want
of Exercise the Bloud grows thick, and corrupts in the Veins,
which are the Channels Nature has design'd for: Sir, does it
not stand to reason, that Motion and Exercise which opens the
Veins, rarifies the Bloud, and gives it a free Passage; should it
not in some measure work it's Effects on your Neice.



Well, Sir, I say no more, but that some are Fools, and
some are Physicians.



I will maintain it against the Learned'st Professors
in Town, that it will do your Neice more good to Joult about
one Hour in a Coach every Morning and Evening for a
Month, than to take Ten Purges a day.



I am much of your mind, Mr. Doctor; and I say no more,
but that it is not good for Sick Folks to go abroad in the
Air.



Her Sickness is for want of Air.



And I say no more, but that some peoples reasons for her
going Abroad, is, that she's an Heiress.



I hope you don't think that I am an Instrument in any
Designe.



I say no more, but that there are Blades upon the Ran∣dan,
that would Feel her Pulse, and stir her Bloud to some
purpose; and that's one reason why 'tis not good for her to go
Abroad.



I beg your Pardon, Sir, I spoke as a Physician in
Consideration of her Health, and Mr. Doctor within was part∣ly
of my mind.



He was of the mind too, that my Cook-maid wou'd not
dye yesterday: and I say no more, but that she dyed within two
hours after.



Physicians sometimes say what they think will best
please their Patients.



And you thought 'twould please her best to be Gadding
abroad; I say no more, but that if her Bloud want stirring, I'le get
her a Husband.



Yes Sir, that will do best of all.



Sir, Then we agree at last: and I say no more, but that
his Lordship shall go without her.







A Friend, a Neighbour of mine sends me word, that
she's in Love with a Foolish Fantastick Lord.



What is this Lord?



I say no more, but that he has been a Traveller, is very
conceited, and very ridiculous.



What is his Name?



You may as soon call o're a Troop of Horse as Name him;
I know no more, but that he has two Wives already, that he
is a very great Fool; and I say no more, but that I'le have my
Neice into the Country to Morrow.







Let me tell you Beatrice, this Alderman is an old
  58
Rooke, he smells Powder a great way off.



Does he suspect you?



He suspects every body: he has heard the whole Sto∣ry
of her being in Love with me.



It comes from our House, I warrant you▪ but was it not
very Unfortunate for us, that he should come Home just as we
had convinc'd the Landlady and Servants, that it was necessary
for the Lady to go abroad?



The Coach sent for, and all.



And when he came, he was so earnest for you to be gone,
being a Stranger, and kept such a fidling about his Niece, that
you could not break a Piece of Gold as we design'd, and make a
Contract.



Fate was indeed very malicious.



But how does your Lordship like her?



She's a Miracle! I protest I saw not so great a Rariety
in all my Travels.



What a pretty Mouth she has, so Little; and her
Neither-Lip so Cherry-like; and then she's such a Pattern of
Modesty and Innocence, one wou'd wonder how she got the
Confidence to be in Love.



She's a rare Creature!



She loves the very ground you go on.





O Beatrice, if I had her 



She's resolv'd by some Stratagem or another, to get
to you to Night; therefore be sure you be not out of the
way.



I'le go directly to my Lodgings.



Be careful you are not seen i'th Streets; for if those two
Women once get sight of you, their Tongues will blow up your
Credit.



I'le be gone, lest they shou'd come and find me
here.








You may venture forth, he's gone.





'Twas damn'd ill Luck, that we had ne're a Parson here;
The Business had been done.



He fail'd of bringing one with him; and if we had pro∣vided
a Parson, our Forwardness might have given him
Cause of Suspition; but Disappointment does make Men more
Eager.



So much for that now, Beatrice; being at Leasure, let us
examine how Matters stand 'twixt you and me.



Just as they did, on my part.



But methinks now you have seen how well • Acted the
Gentleman, Traveller, and the old Alderman, you should love
me much better for my Ingenuity.



In the first Shape, you appear'd so much like a Gentle∣man;
and in this, so like an old Rich Alderman, that I shall never
endure to see you your own Man agen.



When I am neither Gentleman, nor Alderman, I shall be
Toby still; and I am no more now.



But if we Two shou'd Marry, how shou'd we do to
Live?



Live, well enough; we'l live by our Wits.



Then I must maintain you and my self too.



Why Beatrice? do'st think I have not as much Wit as
Thee?



No marry han't you.



This day I have given the World sufficient Proofs of my
Wit.



I doubt not but e're Night, to give you a better Proof of
mine, than any you have, or can give of yours.



P'shaw, p'shaw Yonder's my Master, go and acquaint
him how Matters succeed.







The truth is, she plaid the Tyrant with thee; but you de∣serv'd
that, and more.



Well, were not the Use and Conversation of Wo∣men
absolute necessary for Man, I wou'd forswear the whole
Sex.



I know by the Constitution of your Body, that you'd not
  60
be able to keep that Oath: but, I advise you to Forswear all but
one.



That is; you'd have me Marry.



Yes; you'l find more Comfort in a Wife, than in Ten
Mistresses.



If what you say, be true, Why do most Husbands in
this Age, (which I take to be wiser than any that's past) Turn
away their Wives, and keep Wenches? at least, those that are
so Civil to keep a Wife, they keep a Mistress besides?



And if it be not true, Why do the great Wenchers at
last forsake all their Mistresses for a Wife? for, we find most of
them Marry at the Long-run; Nay, generally they prove the
best Husbands: And the reason is, they have experimented the
Folly of that Lewd Course of Life.



I had never so good an Opinion of Marriage as now;
for, this Dog-trick that these two Gilting Jades shew'd me in
Leaving me so in the Lurch, has lessen'd e'm in my Esteem, to the
degree of Honest Women; and now the Scales are equal,
the first of either Party that oblidges me, draws it down on that
side.



Then I hope Hilaria will turn the Ballance.



If the Devil is minded to lose a Gamester, let him ven∣ture
to make her and me Friends.





Sir, We are still Successful in our Designs; it is
drawing to a Conclusion, therefore be in a Posture to receive
us.



I'le give u'm Notice within: you'l take Care of the
rest.





The Parson and the Fidlers, I believe, are Drunk to∣geth•r,
and falne asleep in the Tavern; but I'le Marshal e'm pre∣sently.



And I'le back to my Imployment.
















You are very merry Gallant.



I have no reason to be other∣wise.
Why do you Josle me?

Sings, and walks about two or three times, and Iosle one another.


And why do you Josle me?



You walk in my way.



'Tis you walk in my way.







Go you farther off.



I was here first.



Then you may be gone first.



I have Business here.



What, to see me?








Yes, in my Conscience, you was coming to see me.



Now I think on't, so I was, on purpose to let you see that
I am alive; for I believe you thought I had either hang'd my
self (for the Trick you put on me to day) or had broke my Heart
with Sighing for your Absence, with whom I am too desperate∣ly
in Love; but believe me, I have not yet broke so much as a
Butten, and may I brake my Neck, when I do, either for Love of
you, or any Woman alive.



Yet you love me.



'Tis true, I love you well enough, because you are Un∣lucky;
and was not Honesty in the case, I should love you better;
but as it is, your are in a desperate Condition.



Must I then despair?



You are for Matrimony, and that I hate; I can no
more endure a Wife, than a standing Dish of Meat.



You think then I am in Love with you.



Think it, Ha, ha, ha As though I did not know That
by your following me up and down; what came you to the Ta∣verne
for after me? And for what came you hither now, if you
an't in Love with me? And what made you seduce the Ladies
  62
from me, but that you had a mind to have me all your self?



I vow, now you put me in mind on't, I may be in Love
with you: but you say my Case is desperate; then desperate must
be the Cure, and I must e'ne resolve to be your Mistress or
Wench; or what you will.



That's your only Remedy. I am a Bird of prey, and
flie at all.



Nay, then I'm a dead Woman still; for, you'l s•on take a
Flight from me, to another.



But when I have catch'd my Prey, I take my Belly full
of it; I never leave it till I am Gorg'd.



And will your Stomack come to you agen?



Yes sometimes, but Generally some Ravenous Fowl or
another picks up my Leavings, and flies away with't.



But wou'd you have no more care
of me?


Call Careless, Musick, Breed. Clap.


My Care wou'd signifie but little; for, a man seldom
finds either▪ Money or a Woman in the same place he left
e'm.



But they say 'tis a Rule amongst you Men, not to leave
the Women you Debauch; but if they prove Constant, to pro∣vide
for e'm.



Provide for u'm! Is it not enough we Teach e'm a
Trade, by which they may get their Livings? but you will not
want providing for, you have a good Portion: but if I wou'd, you
your self, in a short time, would be for Change.



Well Careless, we'l do nothing rashly; I'le in, and
consider on't; and some other time I'le tell you more of my
mind.



But let me give you this Caution; be not deceived
with the vain Considerations of Virtue, Modesty, Honour,
Chastity, Reputation, and the like; these are Bugg-Words
that aw'd the Women in former Ages, and still fool a great
many in this; and if once these idle Notions get into your
Thoughts, I shall give you over for a lost Woman.



The common Practice of my Sex may prevail much
evil Example makes twenty Sinners to the Devil's one 
Adieu.









This Night is to be the Burial of one of my Uncles Maids, who dyed
Yesterday Morning; put your self in Masquerade, and stand
over-against Mr. Muckworth's House, for near to that is
the Church-Yard; when you see the Corps pass that way, Sing
these Words (Hums to himself) then whatsoever you
see, be not startled; for, it is all but Designe to affright the
People, and make e'm Run away; come you to the Coffin, and
instead of a Corps; you shall find Her, that for Love of you,
Attempts thus to make an Escape.
This is notably contriv'd; what a Witty Wife shall I
have?
I am inform'd by Beatrice, that there will be Dancing at Mr. Much∣worths;
we will venture in amongst them as Masqueradors,
and she has promis'd there shall be a Parson ready to Marry us,
and then in spite of my Uncle, I shall for ever be
Yours,
Grace Rich.


Here comes Company; I will Retire till they are gone past.



Musick pass the Stage.
Enter Careless, Leading in Mrs. Breedwel and Clappam, Musici∣ons
playing before them.


Now Ladies, you may pull off your Masques; you'r
no strangers to one another.






Clap. Breed. pull off their Masques.






I know you wonder to see one another here, but both of
you came to'th Tavern on the same account.







To see what was become of the young Gentleman.



I love you for that 



Nay, Mrs. Breedwel, I was behind you when you ask'd
the Drawer what was become of him; it seems he fail'd you
both, of your Assignation.



S'life! did she dare to have an Intrigue with my
Man?







Yes, my Man, you impudent Hussy; I'le scratch your
Eyes out.



Touch me if you dare.






Breed. Clap. Fights, and tare
one another about.


So, so; enough, enough; Brave Girles both 







You, what are you?



A Degree above you, I think.



Yes, to you are; for I am not Whore and Bawd too,
as you are.



You han't Wit enough to be a ••wd; and scarce Beau∣ty
enough, to Drive on the Vocation of Whoring: And let
me advise you to make much of those Cloaths you have on,
for that Face will not be able to bring you a New Gowne
agen.



And do you make much of the Embroyder'd Bodyes
you use to run to Playes in the last Summer; neither your Beau∣ty
nor your Wit will ever bring you such an other Pair: You
may speak French long enough, before you get such agen.



My Back is not my Wardrobe, as your's is; I had a
New Gown but a Month agoe.



What, the Mourning•Gown you bought at Second
Hand. A Woman of the Town needs no Curses, when she once
comes to a Black-Cloath-Gown, and Plain Linnen; that is their
Last Refuge in point of Cloaths; and when that's worn out, she
must on with the Strip't Semar, and turn Bulker: at which
Trade I hope to see you suddenly.




And I as suddenly expect to see you so Miserable, as to
  65
abuse Charity, to relieve your own necessities, and go up and go up and
down with a purse to all your Acquaintance, to gather relief for
some pretended poor Woman that is sick, or in Prison.



Enough, enough; bravely perform'd on both sides, you
faught well▪ and you scold well.



If you had been here, I would have so tew'd that spawn
of a Sempstress 



And I would so have claw'd off that Shooemakers Daugh∣ter,
that she should have thought it worse than her last Child, or
her last Clap, or the scuffle she had with the Sedan-men, when they
tore the Cloaths off her back for 4 s. which she ow'd 'em at least
half a year.



And you should have scap'd no better than you did when
the Coach-man met you at the New Exchange, that you bilk'd off
his Faire after five hours Ramble.



No more, come a Truce, a Truce; you serv'd one ano∣ther
no more than you both serv'd me, I have reason to be angry
with you on account of your leaving my Company for that fair,
smooth, Chitty-fac'd Stranger, that neither of you ever saw be∣fore.



Ah, he was such a pretty Gentleman, and had such a boon
Meen 



But the Devil a penny of money in his Pocket: I paid the
whole reckoning; I had a good mind to have sent him to you in
revenge, that he might have bilked you both, for his jilting me.



And Bilking is so us'd now a days, that 'tis not more hard
for a man to find a woman with whom he may safely venture, than
'tis for a woman to meet with a man, who the next morning, or as
soon as she has been kind to him, will not say, Y'gad Madam I have
got no money about me, I had damn'd ill luck at play, but I am
going to receive some this Afternoon, and if you'l let me know
where I shall be so happy as to meet you anon in the Evening, you
shall find none more a Gentleman 



And if you make an appointment, he meets you no more;
then he goes to pay off his Taylors Bill at the day promis'd: hang
me if I was not serv'd so three times the last week.



Men are grown so base, that 'tis enough to make any wo∣man
  66
for swear keeping Company, but if that young Gentleman
had serv'd me so, I Vow, I should not have been vex'd.



And I had rather he should have serv'd me so, than failed
of coming, as he promis'd.



I find both of you have a kindness for him; 〈◊〉 am per∣swaded,
when you see him agen, that you will not be so fond of
him. Come shake hands and be Friends, and I will carry you to
him; he shall have his choyce, and I'le be content with the other.



Mrs. Breeder, come Kiss and be Friends.



With all my heart.



Now put on your Masques, and in here with me.






So, they are gone, and in good time: Here comes the
Burial, I'le stand close.


T•by in the habit of a Bearer, 4 Bearers with a
Coffin on a Beare; 4 Maids in white, bear∣ing
up the 4 corners of the Sheet; they walk
round the Stage, set down the Corps as to rest
themselves; attended with some few followers.


Come let's rest a little.



Ay, set down, set down.








Ay, she was as good a natur'd Maid 



And as pretty a Servant as ever liv'd in the Parish.



She's in Heaven, I hope, poor Wench.



Wake all the Dead, what ho, what ho 





and all the Bear. Hark 






Beatrice in the Coffin speaks with a mournful voyce.






The Windows are op't, the doors unbar'd, come from the
Church, and the Church-yard.





The Voyce is this way.









No, 'tis in the Coffin, in the Coffin
Neighbour.


Enter 4 Ghosts, a Men, and 2 Women.







The World's at an end 






The Women in long winding Sheets, the Men with Muf∣flers,
Caps, white Cloaths, Wastcoats, Drawers, Bree∣ches,
Stockings & Pumps.

Tob. and all the Bearers.
Look, look, look.


Beatrice rises upright in the Coffin, in a Winding-Sheet.


Ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah,

Bearers, Maids, and Fol∣lowers,
all run out speaking.


Away, away, Lovers away.




Deb. helps Beatrice down, and carries her into Muchworth's house. Deb. Beat. Ex.
Hall-Table and Candles, 4 Chaires.
Enter Lovel, Jacinta, the Scene changes, and a Room in Muchworth's House.


Why Iacinta, do you fear your love will wrong your
duty.



You know my Fathers command; if I marry you, I dis∣obey
him.



And if you do not, you'r unjust to Love:



I will still be true to Love: I will never Marry any other
man for your sake.



But if your Father Command, will you not obey?







Not to obey his Commands in Marrying, will have the
same event, as to disobey him now in Marrying me.



'Twill not then be disobedience, though Parents have
power to command us not to Marry.



Ah Iacinta, was your Love like mine, you would not
stand upon such nicities; a perfect Love inspires those minds with
courage, where it inhabits.



I love you so well, I will not make you unhappy: Till I
can bring a Portion with me, I will not be your Wife.



I was discarded to make room for that Pretender, whom
we have now defeated; he being removed, your Father will soon
be reconciled.



Endeavour then to get his consent.



'Twill be a greater expence of time and labour to get his
consent before Marriage, than to reconcile him after: when all
things are once done, and not to be recall'd, Men are soon pacifi'd.



It may be more easie, but not so secure; Old Age is very
exceptions, wherefore excuse me if I dare not venture to disoblige
a Father, whose Love may be considerable, and an Advantage to
me.




Come leave off your Sneaking pittiful Love; my Gallant
has brought some Company, Let's Dance, and be Merry; here
mey come, strike up Musick.







But we want Men 



You'l have more Company presently; the Parson is
doing Execution in the next Room.





Here's my Uncle; we'l have him in. Come Uncle, will you
make One in a Country-Dance?



What's the matter here? What are you doing here?
What, are Candles Lighted in every Room? And what does Mu∣sick
here?



I believe you are Fudled, Uncle, you are so full of Que∣stions.



I say, What is all this for?



Give me leave, Iacinta, to pretend this our Wedding-Night;
and that all this is on that Account.



If he resents it ill, I shall soon undeceive him.



What, will no body speak? Daughter, what's the Oc∣casion
of all this?



The Occasion, Sir, is such, that she is afraid to tell you;
and I should be loath to let you know it, but that we hope your
Pardon; without which we cannot be truly Merry.



What's the Matter, Mr. Lovel?

Lov. and Jac. Kneels.


From this Posture you may guess.



What mean you by it?



To beg at once, your Pardon and your Blessing.



Ha▪ Is it so 



It will be otherwise with u'm anon, Uncle.



You are Marryed then?



It was their Fate, Sir; the business is done.



Now do I hope my Uncle will take pett at the Marriage,
and give Me all his Estate when he dyes, to vex his Daughter.



Rather than you shall see a Groat on't, I would give it
to Hospitals, which is the worst use a man can put his money to; be∣cause
the Poor are always Cheated on't, Mr. Lovel, rise. If
you do well, and prove a good Husband, I have all I can desire;
which is, to see my Daughter well dispos'd of; and I shall do well
by you: If you prove an ill Husband, she may thank her self, and
her Disobedience will be punish'd in the event.



Lord, Uncle, that you should do this on purpose to spight
me.



I believe, you was an Instrument in the design.



Nay, Uncle, I must confess you have over-reach'd me clearly.



But, Sir, my being here, is on another account. I come to
desire you, to use your Authority with your Niece, and keep her at
home; for I can be no where, either about business, or taking my
Recreation, but she presently comes and disturbs me; insomuch,
that if you don't take some speedy order with her, I must be forced
to leave the Town to avoyd her company.



Pray take her along with you, and you'l free me of a
greater trouble, for she's my Vexation all the day long.



'Tis true, Uncle, that Gentleman and I have been a little
troublesome to one another; for you know, he came to sollicite
me in the way of Matrimony, which I don't much approve of; for
it makes Folks fall out: The first day of Marriage, is the last day of
Love. I lik'd him well enough for a Gallant, and if he would ac∣cept
  70
of me for a Mistriss or so? but he had a foolish scruple of Con∣science,
nothing would serve him but Marriage, and so away came I▪
this is all, Uncle.



If you will have my Opinion in the case, you were cut
out one for the other, and 'tis pitty two houses should part you;
therefore, if she'l agree to your desires, or you conform to hers, 'tis
all one to me, you have my consent to either; all that I desire, is,
that you'l make an end quickly, that I may be clear of her company.



Then Sir, you may either go into the Country, or stay in
Town, if you please, with danger of being troubled with me; for, I
absolutely declare against Marriage, and if nothing else will serve
your turn, you may go where you will, and do what you please,
•'le have nothing to do with such an unreasonable man as you
are.



To Convince you, Mr. Muchworth, that what she says is
not true, but what, on the contrary, I am for having Her for a Mistress,
and She is for being my Wife; here are a couple of Ladies, to
whom, on or off, I have been Gallant this 7 or 8 years, and they
can witness, I have coutinually rail'd against Marrying Mrs. Clapham,
Mr. Breeder, what say you?











Now Lady, if you are not for what I propos'd, you may
e'n keep your Maiden-head till it stinks, and is not fit for man to
meddle with.



I except against your Witnesses, they are brib'd, and rather
than such a Lying man as you shall have it, i'le keep it still.




What new Masque is this?



Some Masquers, hearing the Musick as they were passing
by, are come in to Dance with us.



Do you know me?

To Jacinta in a squeeking voyce.






Do you know me?





You should be a Catt, by your little squeeking voyce.



Iacinta, let us take this occasion to slip into the next
Room to the Parson; now with security we may perfect our de∣sires.



Do you know me?





When I see your face, i'le tell you.















Has your Lordship (out of a •rollick) rob'd the Church∣yard
for a Companion? If so, you have but a cold Bed-fellow.



No, feel here, she's warm flesh and blood.



Marry Sir, she rellishes well in the hand.



Pray my Lord, who is she?



She is my Wife, Lady, my Wife; I have Married
a Lady, a Lady, that has some forty or fifty thousand pounds to her
Portion; I took her by way of Cordial, to revive my Spirits, much
weaken'd by the grief I had for loosing your Daughter.


habit in his hand.


Neighbours, here, here she is; Aye, here she is.











Keep off the Ministers of Death, this is a living
body.



She is my Maid, i'le have her agen, she shall serve her
year out.



Good Mr. Alderman, you are deceived, this is your
Niece.



My Niece is at home in Chamber.



No, Sir; but your Maid is at home, and as dead
as a Herring; it was not a Corps, but a Quick Body, that
came out of your house in the Coffin: it was not your Maid you
suppose, but your Niece: and now, I think, my Wit hath bin
too quick for you all.



Niece, come away from him.



You cannot have Her, she is my Wife.



Are you married then already?











The Parson is still in the House.



Then, Sir, see your Alderma•, your Fellow-T•aveller
and Toby, all in one.















This's some new Trick.



And now, I think our Wits have been too quick for
your Lordship. Who have I married here? I would fain see, but
I dare not.



I will inform your Lordship who your Wife is, as
yet I know her better than your Lordship. I had here in Town
three Mistresses, of which, one of 'em was very young and very
pretty, and but newly debauch'd: I thought it great pity, she
should drive that Trade: and therefore advis'd her, to get her
a Husband before she had quite ruin'd her Credit: to advance
her Design, she took the Name of Alderman Rich's Niece, and
this morning took the same Lodging too; and, by the Story, I
guess, this must be She you have married.



The Alderman and his Niece went this morning
out of Town.



O! I am undone 



Ha, ha, ha if your Lordship has any Grief at your
Heart, go to bed, and take a Sup of your Cordial, ha, ha, ha 



Since your Lordship has bin so kind, to take one of
my Mistresses of off my Hand, I'le make you some requital in re∣leasing
you of your Wives. See, My Lord, these are my o∣ther
two; they shall never trouble your Lordship more, upon the
the account of Marriage.



All the right of a Husband, that I have in You, I
resign to that Lady.



I do the same.



Now, my Lord, you have got one Wi•e, and lost two.





Now Marriage has made us one, our Wishes are com∣pleat.



My Lord, now you have drawn your Lot, see whether
Fortune has sent you a Blank or a Prize.



Ay, ay, come, Mrs. Grace, you may e'en shew your
Face.



Married to a Wench I am abus'd, cheated 



Yes, my Lord, and so they are all 











Beatrice I am, but not your Beatrice now.



Are thou married then?



Yes, to a Lord. Who has most Wit now, Toby?



Am I then forsaken? Oh! that the Fates would be so
kind, to lend a Dagger, or a Knife, to an incensed Lover.



What wou'd you do?



I would kill my self, to be reveng'd on thee.



There are Knives enough for that Execution in the
Table-basket that stands i'th' Hall.









But how came you to surprise us with this new Turn?



Out of pure Kindness to his Lordship; rather than he
should marry a Wench, I cast my self away upon him.



My Lord, comfort your self with the old Rule, Since
'tis no better, it's well it is no worse.



Take her to you, My Lord, had She not bin your
Friend, you had bin in a much worse condition.



Though my Daughters Servant, she is a good Gen∣tlewoman
born, and near related to us.



'Tis well your Lordship has light of an honest Woman.



One proof of my Honesty is, I promis'd your Lordship
my Maiden-head, and now 'tis at your Service.





Look, look here, ungrateful Beatrice, look how on my
Breast thy Perfidiousness revenge.







Then, Toby, die, die the Death of a faithful Lover.














Toby strikes himself on the Breast, and falls down.


Ay, Toby, what hast thou
done? Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha 


Beat. looks on his Breast, & takes up a great Candle.


What dost laugh at?



Look here, he has mistaken a great Candle for a Case-Knife.



Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,



He scar'd me: it gave way, and, I thought verily, I
had seen it run into his Body.



Rise, Toby, you have only greased your Doublet.



I durst have sworn, I had left a Knife in my Heart.



If you go to the Basket agen, be sure you bring a
Knife with you.



No; me thought, Self-Murder was a great Sin; and
now I have consider'd on't a little, I'm glad to see my self
alive agen: and now, rather than kill my self for You, or
any Woman breathing, I would first see the Souls of a hun∣dred
thousand of 'em ramm'd into a Morter-piece, and shot
into a Duth Fire-ship, and so I leave you to his Lordship; and
to let you see, I am my own man again; I and my Friends
will dance at your Wedding▪ Come, give me my habit.




My Lord, you see I did not any thing for want of an
Husband▪ what I have done, was purely out of Kindness to
your Lordship.



I have consider'd on't, and I will own
thee for my Wife, and as my Wife thou art a Lady, and
know your State, and take the upper hand of your two 〈◊〉:
'tis some Revenge to see thee take place of those two
proud Minxes.



Come, play away for the Dance.

All the Company seat themselves, Beatrice takes place of all the Women.


`A Dance. Toby, in the habit of a Bearer, and 〈◊〉
3 Beares dance with the 4 Maids.


So, Mr. Lovel and Daughter, I wish you much Joy
together: the Match is of your own making; and when ei∣ther
of you repent it, you must blame your selves.



That Marriage can hardly know Repentance, in which
both parties had their choice.



My Lord, I intreat you, let my House have the Ho∣nour
to treat you to night.



I embrace your Kindness: give me your Hand,
now no more Beatrice, but my Lady, we will suddainly down
to my Country-House, and there fix our selves, and visi•Lon∣don
but seldom; the Town is not a place for Wives to live
in, that bring no Portions.



I shall like a Country-life very well, if I have but
the Honour of your Lordships good Company; and, I doubt
not, but in few years to raise a Portion out of my good
Huswi•ery.



Come, I'le lead you the way to a better Room, Mr.
Careless, Ladies, and all, pray follow.



Hold, hold, Uncle, Sl•fe, you are for rising from Ta∣ble
before Dinner's done, the third Course is yet to come
up.



Pray, lead on, Sir; I beseech you, lead on, Sir.



Come, come, Careless, ne're halt before a Cripple.



Good Madam, you are sharp set, I dare not trust my
self with you, unless they will all stay.



Niece, wha• say you to me?



It come just now in my mind, that I have lost my Bed-fellow;
and now my Cousin is gon, I know not what I shall
do; for, I vow, I dare not lie alone.



O no, 'tis dangerous, for after seeing Marriages and new
Married folks put to bed together, as strange dreams and fancies
will be apt to run in your mind, as after seeing bloody Executions
and dead people at the Gallows: and who knows what a taking you
may be in i'th' night, and what strange fits you may have.



Aye, some e'•e rave upon the like occasions, and bite, and
gnaw, and tear the very sheets in pieces.



O Madam, aye so they do.



Well Uncle, you may go, I'le e'ne send for one of the
Neighbours Daughters from the next door to lye with me.



O Madam, 'tis a hundred to one, but she may fall into
the same fits and fancies too, and that will be more dangerous still,
to have two mad folks in a bed, and neither able to allay the others
•ury.



O Sir, do you begin to •ome about, wou'd you beat off
others, that you may be my Bed-fellow your self? I perceive that
you are for having a Wife.



I for a Wife?



Nay, •ay, 'tis so, ne'r deny't. Well Sir, give me your hand,
rather then lye alone to night, I'le do any thing.



I knew 'twould come to this.



• w'll be your Wi•e, and since I can't have a Gallant before
Marriage, I'le do like other Wives, and have one after; and, now
I think on't too, a Husband is very necessary, if it is only to save the
trouble of being ask'd questions o're and o're, as who's the Father,
who go i•? and besides, what Children the Gallant gets, the Hus∣band
must keep.



I can be even with you there, for you can bring me none
to keep, but what are your own at least; and if you expect I should
be Father to all your Children, I expect you should be a Nurse to
all mine, and I may have 'um brought home to me on all sides,
from twenty several women; for I intend to be a great getter and
Father of many.



Well, I have but this thing more to say to you; whosoe∣ver
I choose for my Gallant, you are not to quarrel, or •all out with
him, but on the contrary, to make him your particular intimate
Friend, to be always inviting him home to Dinner, and the like.



And also, whosoever I like for a Mistress, be the Maid,
Wi•e, or Widdow, you are to get acquainted with her, to Visit her
often, to speak••• my praise, and tell my good qualities, to com∣mend
my abilities; and in fine, to use the utmost of your power
to bring us together, gain us opportunity, and if need be, to watch at
the Stair-head, and in case of necessity, to hold the door.



In Company, you shall never call me Wife, or Dear, or
Sweet-hear•, but Madam.



In Company you shall never call me Husband, or by my
Christian Name, but Mr. Careless.



In none of these particulars will I ever offend Mr. Careless.



In none of these particulars will I ever offend you, Madam.



This 'tis for Folks to meet that understand themselves;
Marriage with these Circumstances▪ I like well enough, and mu•t
certainly be very pleasant and delightful.



Sir, I beg your pardon, for detayning you and the Com∣pany
so long; but you'l excuse it, being a business of concern; and
each party ought to understand the other before they set their
Hands and Seals to the Engagement.



Uncle, pray con o're the Articles, for you are to be sum∣mon'd
for a Witness upon occasion.



It is like to be a fine Marriage.



Yes, if it go on according to Agreement.



You shall see our Marriage (which you think is clapt up out
of a frollick) go on more chearfully than yours, made out of stark
Love and desperate Affection; we, like two Birds (though we Roo•t
together at Night) will have our freedom all Day, and flie Ch•rip∣ping
about, whil'st you like two Domestick Animals, ti'de too close
together in a string, shall still be snarling and biting one another.



And we have the trouble every now and than to part you;
mark the event on't.



Mrs. Clap. and Mrs. Breedw. you must not think you have
quite lost me, because I am Married, and so pray tell the rest of my
Acquaintance; I am enter'd into Matrimony, but not in to Bondage.



He has, as it were but one Mistress the more: L ead away Uncle.
Whilst other Wives, and Husbands, Scold and Rant,
We two will live like Mistress and Gallant.


 1. line 13. for my, read one. p. 4. l. 17. for four r. fou•score. l. 32•. •. Tall••.
r. Tallent. p 5. l. 1. •. fo•lant, r f•dant. p. 7. l. 8. •. you, r▪ you W•men. p. 10.
l. 6. •. receipt, r. deceit. l. 26. •. for me, r. 19 me. l. 28. •. shun, r. shuns. p. 11.
l. 24. r. my Grandsires. p 12. l. 23. •. appear, r. appear•p. 23. l. 15. •. •▪ r. l' de. p. 3•.
l. 4. f. sleepish, r. sheep•sh. p. 34 l. 29. f. sw•re, r. s•orn. l. 35. f. know, r. knew▪ p. 3•.
l. 22. •. Id', r. I do. p. 39. l. 28. dele and. p. 36. l. 13. •. know, r. knew. l. 14. •. fl•king,
r. flirting. l. 18. •. my Lady, r. many a Lady. p. 38. l. 3. dele Habited. l. 34. r. has been.
p. 42. l. 17. •. know me, r. know her. p. 45. l. 8. dele not. l. 13. for your Niece may▪ r. for
you Niece you may. p. 47. l. 26. •. Spirit. r. Spirits 15. s. know you, •. know me. p 52.
l. 17. dele some. p. 54. l. 7. •. j•gd me, r. j•ggs him. p. 56, l. 14. •. for it. l. 17. dele
it. p. 53 l. 29. dele Be•. Sir we are still, &c.
