




FOrtune thou hast proved kind in placeing me
So near my Rival Theodocia;

And now false Loveall suddainly shall find
A Woman's Honour, nor his Perjuries
Shall rest long unreveng'd 
When by his soothing Language, cunning Arts,
With Protestations to be none but mine,
I was betray'd to his unruly flame:
But thus disguis'd, as Theodocia's Maid,
I've subtly won her Love so that when e're he comes
I easily shall frustrate his design. 
To her Theodocia.



Ah my dear Luce 
Were't not for thee, my labouring heart wou'd break:
Thy Friendship eases my disturbed mind,
And I shall ne're forget that happy hour
In which thy Cousin brought thee since thou doest prove
Not only of Servants, but the best of Friends.



Madam, whatever hitherto I've done,
Or shall hereafter do, will prove at last
To be my Duty but Madam, your sad looks


And frequent sighs betray an inward grief;
Let me Conjure you, by that Name of Friend,
Which you've been pleas'd to think me worthy of,
Reveal the cause of this unusual Sadness.



Ah Luce a Father's Rigour does disturb my mind
So much, he's blinded with the love of Wealth,
He'd have me Cancel all my former Vows
Which I by his command did make to Courtly,

And place 'em on Loveall, whom I never saw,
But by his Picture, so that either way
I must prove perjur'd or disobedient.



But Madam if Courtly's false, your Vows will then
Be cancel'd, his silence may cause suspition;
For 'tis at least a month since he left the Town:
And were he constant, as his love seem'd true,
He could not have forborne so long a time
From sending kind expressions of his heart,
T' oblige a pleasing answer but
Mrs. Essence
ready above.
A constant Lover in this Age is rare;
'Tis gallantry to break the Vows of Love,
And he's the bravest man, who has been most
Perfidious to his Mistress 



Forbear dear Luce such fatal suppositions:
Here I'me inclin'd to think all that
is false▪
Pulls out a
Picture.
Dwells in this man each feature, all the air
Proclaims a guilt of all things that are ill 
Oh, take that hated object from my sight

(Gives Luce the Picture.


Ha! Lovel's Picture! 
(Theo. pulls out another Picture.
My Soul's transported with this gift,
So highly I esteem what she rejects,
That I have been but one continued thought
How to obtain th' original.
This present may an happy omen prove,
To my desires t' enjoy the man I love.



But look on this then check thy rash opinion:
Canst thou see here e're an inconstant line 
Ah what a pleasing air dwells on this Face!


These eyes display at once 
A charming sweetness, and a noble pride;
Nay, all the Lineaments bespeak him one
So truly brave and noble, that 'twere a crime
Unpardonable but to think him false.



This piece indeed denotes a noble soul:
Yet Madam, pleasing looks have often prov'd
The cloud and varnish of a Treacherous mind:
Yet since your Love's so great, I cannot blame
Your just resentments of a Father's rigour.



By all that's good I love him yet I must oh 

(She faints and lets fall the Picture.


Help, help some help for Charity.


To them Tom. Essence.


How now Mrs. Luce, what's the matter!



My Lady is not well 



Is that all? your cry was so lowd, I thought of
nothing less than a Rape poor soul, she's very silent 
that my damn'd tatling Wife wou'd take example of this di∣vine
silent Creature 



Pray Mrs. Essence hold her till I call more help to
carry her in



Mrs. Essence discover'd at a VVindow.


She's cold I'le try if she has life 
(kisses her) Amber, Musk, and Civit! I protest I
know not whether she breaths or no  (kisses her again)
she's Essence of Violets from head to foot what a ra∣vishing
lip is here! 




What is't I see, my Husband with a Wo∣man
in's Armes 'tis so he kissing her 
Oh pretious Rogue! must I suffer this! I'le be sooner with
you than you desire y' faith.
Exit Mrs. Essence.


To him Luce and a Maid.


Come, come away, 'tis pitty such a pretty
plump (and I believe sound) thing, shou'd slip into the other
World at an Age, in which she is capable to do good in this.
Exeunt]
Enter Mrs. Essence alone.
Gone! how soon they've quitted the place, as if the
Plague were here I have often wonder'd at his late cold∣ness
  4
to me; but now I find he deny'd me those refreshing
Comforts to bestow them on his new Miss; this is the crying
sin o' th' Nation, grown common among the Block-headed
Husbands, as well as with the single Libertines, who think
every man's Dish ought to be at their command to carve
where they like best; and 'tis grown so modish, that the
accomplisht Gallants, as they call themselves, will not Marry
unless they may have the freedom of keeping a Love-toy, as
they name those lewd Creatures; for a bare Wise won't down
with 'em when Heav'n knows they need not ramble, did they
perform their duties at home; but the Wife must starve and
languish whilst they are at their Varieties but in Troth
it shan't be so with my peirt Block-head; I'le hold him so
strictly to't hereafter, that I'le spoyle his gadding I'le
warrant him 
(Spies the Picture.
Ha! what's here? if this duskey light deceives me not 
tis a rich case 
By're leave, I must see your inside 

(Opens the Picture, starts.

To her Tom Essence.


Heaven's be prais'd, 'twas but a swound 'tis
a lovely soul, and on my Conscience not of my old Neigh∣bours
Begetting Her skin's as white and smooth as
Pomatom but mum here's my Mortifier 




Venus bless me, 'tis a lovely Picture 




What's that she's so devout at? ha! 
Stars shine out 
(Looks over her Shoulder.
Gad take me gad forgive me, 'tis the Picture of a
smooth-fac't Fellow.




What a Surprizing look is here! Oh these
bewitching Eyes and tempting Lips!
(Kisses the Picture.
Me-thinks they melt with such a sweetness! I cou'd for ever
dwell upon 'em 




S'life, she'l Fornicate with the Picture!




Ah Mrs. Essence, what wou'd become of thee,
had'st thou the addresses made thee by such a comely Person;
that Woman were a Beast that cou'd deny the kindness he
shou'd sue for Oh my curst Fortune! to make one of
the Vulgar my Yoak-fellow, 'twere better to be a Miss to
such a one as this, than to be Coupled as I am pretty
  5
thing but such a Picture of Ill-luck is my Logger-head,
that a Bear to me is the more beautiful Beast of the two, and
wou'd be more pleasing 




A Goat wou'd to satisfie your Appetite 
(Snatches the Picture.
How now Madam Flippant, have I caught you traducing
the Honour of your Lawful Soveraign, your Husband 
What, what defect have I that shou'd be corrected and a∣mended;
this shape and mein in times of Yore were not con∣temptible
when Knights Daughters with their Thousands did
prostrate themselves to me; and Maids of Honour, when I
carryed Gloves and Ribbons to Court to 'em, have sued for
Kindnesses which you have reapt; and I pray, what are you,
but an Oyl-firkin, whose sole composition is Lamp-oyl and
Anchovis.




Yes, yes, I know well enough that 



Do you so Iesabel and after my rejecting
my aforesaid creams of beauty to the fletton-milk of thy
Countenance, am I thus rewarded? You grow so Ram∣pant,
that the plain wholesome dish of a Husband won't down
with you, without the Ragous of a Gallant.




Goe to, my special Property, and Cover-lid of
Iniquity inslame not my resentments but restore my
Picture and that instantly 



Then this is my kind Journey-man, is it? hum,
a pretty Rogue to rob, an honest Cittizen of his good
name, but did I know him, by Finsbury I'de maul him.




Leave off your idle fantastick fancies, and re∣store
my Picture with those submissions that become a Hus∣band;
and beg pardon for prying into my Secrets, or I swear
I'le act what you may repent you e're provokt me to.



Make my Submissions? break thy Neck thou
Traytor to my Honour; Slife stop that Clack of thine, or
upon Rep, I'le quarter thee, and set 'em upon the Citty-Gates
for a terrour to all Extravagant Domineering Wives.




And what shall be done to Whoreing disloyal
Husbands?



Yet again! Stand forth, and make up your
mouth as demurely as on the day of my Tribulation and
Bondage, which was my Wedding-day with thee so
  6
now, against thy brazen-fac't Lady-ship, thus I draw my Ac∣cusation: Dorothy
Essence, hold up thy hand, hold
up I say so I will show you, to your cost, what I learnt
last Sessions, when I was on the Jury. 
Whereas thou Dorothy Essence, Wife of Thomas Essence,
Milliner.




Whereas thou Thomas Essence, Husband of Do∣rothy
Essence Gentle-woman 



Gentle-woman with a Pox a Cittizens Daugh∣ter
and a Gentle-woman 
Not having Grace or Obedience before your eyes 




Not having Grace or Obedience before your eyes.



But being moved by the Diabolical discourses of
lewd wild Gallants.




But being mov'd by the Diabolical glances of
lewd wanton Creatures.



By Amber-greese and Pomander leave off or 
Hast Feloniously stolen from the body of thy said Hus∣band 




Hast Feloniously stolen from the body of thy
said Wife.



The inestimable commodity of his Life and
Call∣ing,
his Reputation.




The inestimable commodity of her Life and
Calling, her Reputation.



To his dammage, and against the peace of our So∣veraign
Lord the King, and so forth.




To her dammage 



Cudslid Silence. How sayest thou Dorothy,
Guilty or not Guilty?




Hou sayest thou Thomas, Guilty or not Guilty 



As gad-sa'me, leave off your tricks and plead, or
Sentence shall pass upon you to be Prest to death.




Not Guilty my Lord 



Say you so? How wilt thou be tryed then?





(Snatches the Picture and runs out.
Exit.



Good She's run away with the King's Witness
that shall hang her; how-ever, I'le after her, for fear by tam∣pering
she spoil my Evidence.
Exit.





Mrs. Monylove and Betty.



It's dark Art sure you gave Stanly right
directions?



Madam I did but it is not yet the hour; besides,
shou'd he come, he'd go directly to your Chamber-window,
according to your appointment, and the Ladder is lett
down.




On better thoughts I came hither to prevent his
coming to my Chamber, therefore prithee step up and see
if he be there; if not, here I will expect him.


That Stanly loves me, is questionless, otherwise so brisk a
Town-gallant as he cou'd ne're have prov'd so constant to
his Amour, considering the frequent repulses I have
given him; I must reward his Constancy, but not with
yielding to his desires; for tho (by my old Master Sir Ti∣mothy
Thrivewell's contrivance, who having been busie with
me, and fearing I shou'd prove fruitful to his disgrace) I am
Married to a Superannuated Fool; yet in despight of all temp∣tations
and opportunities, if it be possible that flesh and blood
can hold out, I'le keep those Vows I made to my old Dotard,
in hopes that Heav'n, to reward my Loyalty to him, will
take compassion on my Youth, and by his death, make me
capable of making a younger Brothers fortune. not yet
come? I'le take another turn.
Exit.





Sir, Sir, are you mad? shou'd we be discover'd,
what can we expect less than a seisure for suspition of Felony,
Burglary, or what not, and so be worshipfully hang'd for a
frollick.



Thou dull insipid Ass, he's no true Lover, who will
not run some danger for the sight of's Mistress; and I swear,
e're I sleep, if possible, I'le either see or discourse with her;
that when I am in bed, I may dream my self into a passion
which may enable me more vigorously to express my Love
to morrow: for, if she proves as witty as her Picture describes
her fair, I shall be beyond expression happy 



No question Sir, but you'le be monstrous vigorous
to morrow, shou'd you do as you say Dream your self
into a passion. But Sir, in my opinion your Dream wou'd
prove more pleasant, if you wou'd home to Bed, and fancy
her one of those fine Ladys you've Courted and enjoy'd; that
is the true Elizium slumber! Hang these Night-spirits, the
damn'd suspition of their being either Old or Ugly, wou'd
sooner put me into a Fright, than create Amorous thoughts.



Sarrah, not a word more, and stir not from this
place till I come agen; nor breath for your life, lest any
one shou'd over-hear you 





I am a Slave Sir So, now is he as hot after fresh
game, as a new cured Gallant that runs a Tilt against the next
Perticoat he meets, to try his Doctors skill It's not above
two months since he swore a Rich Widdow into belief of his
Counterfeit Love; for she (good natur'd soul!) thinking
him real, yielded; but so soon as he had done the feat, he
(like the rest of his Brother strikers) turn'd tail and sneakt
away without taking leave ha I hear some∣body
comeing now honest Laurence, to save thy
Carcase, what wou'dst thou give for Daphne's fa∣culty
of being turn'd into a Tree?






Come my dear Friend 
Let's recreate our selves in these coole shades,
And for a while divert my troubled mind
From wracking thoughts 
For his tormenting silence prompts me to think
That your suspition's just Ah! were he here,
A Fathers rigorous power shou'd not prevail.



I wonder Madam that he's not yet come,
Since I writ word of what consequence
His presence wou'd be here and us'd, I thought,
Sufficient motives to have hastned him.



Pray Heav'n he's well 



She's very passionate poor Creature! 


Lau. Stumbles and makes a noise.


Ha! who's there? 



Cudslid I'me discover'd, but fie come off. I am
a Friend and Servant of your happy Lovers, Madam who
••fortunately arrived to ease your griefs:
  9
This must be Mrs. Theodocia 




Is fortune then so kind? Say Friend, to whom it
is you do belong? 



Belong Madam? to whom shou'd I belong, but to
him who admires, doats, and thinks of nothing in the world,
but of your fair self? My knowledge of th' entreigue of the
Picture will convince you who I serve: Say Madam, is it
not an excellent Picture, and describes the Original de∣serving? 



My doubts are clear'd, it must be Courtly's man.
Ah tell me if thy Master be in Town 
If he is, fly to him and bring him hither;
Tell him with what impatience here I wait
His coming, to confirm our plighted Loves.



That you may quickly do Madam, for he's in this
Garden; and since you are so impatient, I'le venture a broa∣ken
Nose to find him out Oh Love what power hast thou,
that with a picture canst create a flame!





Come Luce, let's hast to meet the man I Love 






He's not yet come Madam 




Art sure the Garden door is open see 





This must be She; for by the sudden glimps of a
light from the Houses, I saw her shape and mein; and both
seem'd pleasing 





Ha! there's some body; it must be he hist, hist.



Who's there? Now Love assist me 





Speak softly Friend, for shou'd the old mans spys
(As questionless such Agents he may have
To pry into my Actions) over hear,
Or discover you, I too soon shou'd lose
The good opinion which with care I 've gain'd
With my old Dotard, and be incapable
To prosecute my intended kindness,
Which for requital of your constant Love

I have design'd 
For know, the Assignation which I've made,

Is to propose what may advantagious prove
To you for ever▪ if you approve of it.






Ha! blest mistake! this is the old mans Wife
My Uncles once convenient Utensil:
Now for some Love-intreigue; Horns on my life
Are making for the old Fools empty Noddle.




In short 'tis this 
By my contrivance, I have won my Husband
To force his Daughter Theodocia

To break those Vows which formerly she made
To Courtly and I, assisted by my old Gallant
(Who made this cursed match for me, and thinks
Me loyal to his Intreigue) have, much adoe,
Perswaded my old man to give consent
That Sir Timothy's debaucht wild Nephew, Loveall,

Shall marry Theodocia 



Good meaning me, kind Devil! 





But I've a plot runs counter to both theirs 
For I've resolv'd Theodocia shall be yours.



So, now must I to exercise with rusty Bilboe;
For since I've Rivals, I may conclude she's handsome;
Which if she proves, I'le do what I before did not design:

I'le marry her before my intentions were
Only t'have Wheadled her good Nature up to Love,
Then given her strong sufficient proofs of mine;
That done gentilely, have left her in the fashion.




Why stand you mute? do not six thousand pounds
And a fair Virtuous Lady deserve thanks? ha Betty? 





Madam, Mr. Stanly is now enter'd the Garden 




How, Stanly said you! he's here already, wench 



It's impossible, I parted with him but now at the
Garden gate.



Now brain assist me to get off I have it.
Madam, I must confess I'me not the man
Whose bliss you labour; yet be he whom he will,

I love that Lady with as pure a flame as he;
Yet I confess I find he has the odds
Of me, in having two most powerful Advocates,
Fortune and your Self to plead his cause.




'Tis Courtly sure; but I'le not seem to know
him.
(aside.


Sir, who e're you are, that thus rudely 've entred
This place at so unseasonable a time,
'Twill be the safest way to quit it soon;
But if you obstinately stay, I shall conclude
What now I but suspect: That your design
Is not for Love, but to rob the House.



Of a fair Ladys heart, by Heav'n I wou'd:
Cou'd I but seise on Theodocia's Love,

I wou'd submit to the severest sentence
A Fathers rigour cou'd pronounce.




Oh Betty, this can be none but Courtly,

My Daughters Lover, and my design is ruined;
For questionless he'le tell my Husband of it then, 



Fear nothing Madam, if he proves so base

I'le take't upon my self, as if I did
Personate you; and I thank my Stars,

I have a Confidence can match the boldest blade.




Let's hast then to my Chamber, lest the Servants
Should discover Stanly there.




They are gone good 
What have I got now by my Curiosity?
Only the knowledge that I have a Rival,
And consequently blood must ensue.


Well, happen what will, I am resolved to morrow

I'le see her; and if possible, find out
Who this Rival is.





Hist, Sir, Sir, it grows damnable dark.







The same Sir, honest Laurence; and in despight of
the Proverb, no Lazy Laurence, for I've been active; both
Brain and Limb I've ventur'd to do you Service, and so suc∣cessfull
I have prov'd, that with the Emperour I may say,
Veni, I came up to her; Vidi, I had a glimps of her Phis∣nomy;
but Vici, I came over her: y' faith the Town's your
own, impatient •he is now in quest of you; i' th' Garden to
find you out, my Nose and Tree have had several encoun∣ters;
but that I am honest probatum est, my Nose stands
right, and smells your Mistress near.



My precious Rogue, where is she?



Not far, I'le engage. Poor Soul, I no sooner nam'd
the Picture, but she was on tip toe of desire to speak with
you: But she comes to her Sir, fear no colours, for I have
broke the Ice.

(Noise of a Door shutting.


Sarrah, I hear a Door shut; see if it be the Gardens,
and bring me word.



I'le endeavour to find it out Sir, and if I escape this
N•ght whole, I'le be hang'd e're I'le venture on such another
Romantick project.







Her Love has guided her so fast, I've lost her;
But I'le take th' other turn to find her out. Ha!

(Offers to go. Lov. takes hold of her.


My Life, my Soul: I want words to express
My joys, for this blest opportunity
Of makeing known to you my restless Love.



How's this? 'tis Loveall's Voyce, my for∣sworn
Servant.
Too sure 'tis he, for my rebellious heart
Leapt in my breast when he began to speak.




Your beauty by your Picture is display'd;
And if with beauty you have mercy too,
My joys will be compleat; for by those Stars
Which borrow lustre from your Eyes, I swear

I am so Fetter'd with Loves pleasing toyles,
That I can sooner dye than cease to love.



Too true, 'tis he; the very words he us'd
When he betray'd my Honour, Perjur'd man!




How! dumb, my fair? this shall unlock your lips.

(Offers to kiss her.


Keep off Sir, and who e're you are, y'are rude;
What business have you here? and pray with whom?




I am Loveall, who cannot, will not rest
Till I have heard my Doom.

I know not by what art the Painter drew
That Picture which was sent me by my Uncle:
But sure your beauty 'twas that did inspire him;
For with his Pensil h' has so powerfully drawn
Such killing sweetness, and attractive Charms
That I no sooner saw,


But lost my liberty, and became a Lover.
 Not speak, my fair?
Torment me not with this your killing silence,
But kindly answer me, and bid me live.



It shall be so.
Sir, your love by your impatience you have shown;
But shou'd I yield ere I have try'd or seen
The man that sues for love, what cou'd I expect,
But a just censure of a forward longing
For a Husband; or at least
My discretion might be call'd in question.
Then Sir, desist at present: fear; yet hope,
For till I've approv'd your person, tryed your flame,

I shall forbear further discoursing with you:
If your Love's true, comply with my desires,
And quit this place; for shou'd we be discover'd
By any of the Servants, my Honour wou'd suffer;
Therefore good night, but take this with you Sir 
I long for the approaching day as much as you.





She's gone; happy, happy Loveall;

Her wit, by her discretion, she has shown:
I'm so transported with my happiness,
I know not what to do.
Where is this Rascal now? that I might home,
And in a dream I'le Antedate my bliss.
Exit.





What shou'd this fellow be? perhaps 'tis one or∣der'd
to expect my comeing, and with more safety to con∣duct
me to her.




Is she not a charming Creature? what a Devil
shou'd make you quit th' encounter so soon? the Garden
door goes with a spring-lock, no fear of being impounded
for this Trespass: Well, had I been half as much in Love
as you pretend to be, I shou'd have giv'n her further proofs
of it e're we had parted. Oh 'tis the fondest Ti•, and talks
so prettily of Love! Y're strangely alter'd on the suddain;
you were not so cold and backward when you attempted and
enjoy'd the Frollick-widdow at Stamford.



How's this? Some Villain (on my life) designing
force on Theodocia's Virtue, knowing she uses to walk late
  14
at Nights in this Garden; but I'le spoil his Plot. Sir, dis∣cover
who that Devil your Master is, or I'le cut your Throat.

(lays hold on Lau.



Ha! Pox on't, what a damn'd mistake was this:
now some trick to get off;
I'le Huff: How Sir, will you cut my Throat Sir?



Yes Sir, if you defer your answer; therefore be
speedy.



So I will y' saith; murder, murder.


(Lau. slips out of Stanly's hand, and runs
out crying Murder.


The Rogue is gone, and will Alarm the House;
what shall I do?





That was my Rascals voyce: Hist Laurence: Sir∣rah,
Dog, how you yelp.



Another Villain? Defend your life, who e're
you are.




My Rival I hope: Now Luck, if't be thy will, di∣rect
my Sword.






What shall I do, there's a whole
Regiment coming: Ha! a Ladder;
b' your leave, this shall be my way.

Gropes about, & finds
the Ladder; goes up
the wrong-side.


Company coming? then 'tis time to Retreat.
Exit.




From this place the noyse came; come along,
come along.







Stanly slips off his Habit; disco∣vers
a Devils Habit; puts on a
Masque, goes and meets them;
they run out crying, the Devil 



Heav'n have mercy on my
soul, what will become
of me now?



Thanks good contrivance, this has done me Ser∣vice,
and all is husht again: My fighting Blade gone too.
Now for the soft caresses of my Love, her yielding kind∣ness
will countervail past dangers: I wish all doating Fools
had such obliging Wives as my Miss proves; what a gentile
  15
world it wou'd be then? The Candle's brought.
(A Candle set in the Window.
Thus to my Heav'n I mount.

As Stanly goes up the right way, Lau. descends the
wrong way of the Ladder.


Fortune I thank thee for this discovery and delive∣rance:
Old man, snore hard.


When old Fools Wed, they must with Horns dispence:
Horns are the just rewards for impotence.







Mrs. Monylove and Stanly.



YOur reasons Madam have prevail'd, and I'm
become your Convert; henceforth I'le curb
my loose desires: But which way shall we effect your kind
Contrivance, which you for my advantage have design'd?
for Theodocia will not quit her Vows she made to Courtly, and
your old man intends she shall be Loveall's Bride.
Mrs. M. Were you once introduced into the Family, my
Daughter-in-Law shou'd be yours; for I'de so work upon the
Old mans temper, that he shou'd believe all I shou'd say was
true: I'de add some Cyphers to your small Estate, to make
it swell above your Rivals; his Covetousness wou'd then be
assistant to the Cheat, and make him embrace you for his
Son-in-Law.



What e're we intend to do, must speedily be put in
execution; for without question, the person I encounter'd in
the Garden, was Loveall, her new-arriv'd Servant.





Oh Madam, my Master's coming up Stairs.



What shall we do, he's as fond as an old Baboon;
the Nights I Articled with him upon Marriage, to lye alone,
I designed for the enjoyment of my self; but he is so soon
stirring in the morning, that I am as much plagued, as if I
had lay'n with him all the Night; but his fondness wou'd
soon turn to Jealousie shou'd he see you here; therefore
good Sir, hide your self under the Bed, or any where.



Madam, fear nothing: Betty, prithee help me on
with my Coat: So, so, now I am prepar'd to receive him,
and both of ye be sure to second what e're I say.

(Old M. coughs within.
Enter Old Monylove.




Joy, where art? as I say, my Chick, I've hardly
rested for want of thy sweet Company to Night: Ha! what
do I see? a man in my Wifes Chamber so early? Bless me!
in the name of goodness, what art thou?



Be not surpris'd good Sir, I am your Friend and
Neighbour.




My Neighbour Sir! as I say, you may be my
Neighbour, but not my Friend; I'le stand to't.



It's Dr. Bleedwell Sir, he lives within three doors of
us; my Lady, last night, finding her self not well, sent me
for him.



But I unfortunately was then abroad; so soon as I
return'd, my man inform'd me that your Maid was to en∣quire
for me; I then immediately came to your House, and
finding the Garden-door open, innocently entered; but
such dismal shreiks I heard, and horrid Apparitions came up
towards me, that I let the place with great Confusion.




Apparitions said you Sir? bless us!



Many Sir; one Devil among the rest, was five
foot higher than the Dutch-man that is showed about Town,
with a great Beard, flaming Eyes, meager Looks, and a large
pair of Horns on his head; a Citty-Devil on my life, by his
Crest.




Sir, your Servant, I'le stand to't, the very Devil
by his description, that Roger told me he saw.



When I was got home, and had recollected my self,
I resolv'd to visit your Lady early this morning, to know her
pleasure; And let me tell you Sir 




What, what, will he tell me that he has Cuckold
me? as I say, I know not what to think, he seems a strong∣chined
Knave.




Your Lady's in a desperate condition.




Condition Sir! what condition? ha!



Sownd, Sownd, Madam, (to Mrs. Mon.) See, see,
now the Fits upon her; this is a Disease incident to young
Marryed women, obstructions which often produce Mad∣ness,
if not timely remedied.




Oh sick, sick, where is my Master? were it not
for his sake, I wou'd resolve to dye rather than undergoe
this torment long.




Oh kill me not dear Cock with such fatal words;
if all I am worth can purchase thy health, thou sha't not
want it, I'le stand to't. Good kind Sir, have so•e com∣passion
on a wretched man, find out some speedy way to
save my Chickins life; and as I say, here's your 〈◊〉 which
shall be trebled when the Cure is perfected; I'le stand to't.



There is a way; agen the Fit's return'd.


In short Sir, Tunbridge-waters are her only remedy.



They are sold in Town, I'le send for some im∣mediately.



In Town? Save your money Sir; those Waters
sold in Town, are mear Cheats, they put a little Salt-Peeter,
Brimstone, Rusty •on to our Conduit-waters to nauciate
the tast, which with the Ignorant, pass currant: but were
they right, they lose their Virtue, once remov'd from the
Spring; besides, the Air as well as Waters is assisting to the
Cure.




To Tunbridge Wells you say Sir; Betty, put up
your Mistresses things, and bid the Fellow get the Coach
ready, for we will go part of the way to Night.



Wou'd you go, said you? not for the world Sir.




Why Sir, why may not I go?



I find Sir, you have no insight into our Learning;
therefore your Ignorance is excusable.




What if I had Sir, what then?



You wou'd not then have offer'd to have gone your
self; for as the memorable Italiano, in his Treatise de Ele∣mentis  18
observes; some waters are of strange natures, and dif∣ferent
effects in operation: Particularly he mentions a
Spaw near Room, whose water was excellent for the Cure of
Barrenness, if Women went without their Husbands: And
he tells a Story, that some suspitious Husbands accompany∣ing
their Wives to those waters, instead of Curing, they
proved absolute Poyson to the women, so that no less than
six and forty Marryed-women lost their lives in one day:
but says he, had the Jealous Coxcombs stayed at home, they
had sav'd their Wives lives, and their Cures had been ef∣fected.




Goodness defend me! but Sir, are Tunbridge-wa∣ters
of that nature?



Of a far stranger; for shou'd any of your Servants
go with her, it may endanger her Life.




Some body must, for fear of further sickness.



Any of her own Relation or Acquaintance may,
without danger.




Let me see my Daughter cannot, she's to be
Marryed; were that don, The. and her Husband shou'd have
borne her Company Oh I have it: my Dear, prithee
send to my Cousin Pride, the Mercer's Wife, she's acquain∣ted
with the place, and found benefit by the Waters; and
that very Summer she drank them, soon after she had a
chopping Boy.




What you please Master, but my Maid says,
some of her Relations live near the Wells.




But Duck, our Neighbour Dr. says, none of the
Family must go.



Yes, yes Sir, her own Maid may with security, but
none that belongs to you.




Let it be so then, and Heav'n bless the Remedy,
and may the Waters pass.




Hast Betty, and put up my Cloaths whilst the old
man is in the humour: Oh sick; good Dr. some speedy Re∣medy,
and commiserate my sad condition.




'Lass poor fool, it grieves my soul, and see, it
melts to tears.






Sir Timothy Thrivewell, Sir, and a Gentle-man, are in
the Dining Room, and desires to see you.




My good Friend, and his long expected Nephew
I warrant: VVife, I'le see you agen e're you go: Sarrah, bid
my Daughter come to me in the Dining-room.



She's there already Sir.




That's well: Sir, I hope you will excuse my
abrupt departure.



Your Servant Sir: I'le write (e're I go) a Dyary for
your Lady, in what method she must drink the VVaters;
and if they operate as I expect, think of getting a Boy
Mr. Monylove.




Ha, ha, he, kind Sir, your Servant; how, I get
a Boy, you jest, you jest, I'le stand to't.
Old M. Exit.




Indeed Miracles are ceast: What a credulous Ass
is an old Dotard. Now Madam I have thought on a way to
perfect your design, and to make me happy with fair Theo∣docia.




I have, an Intreigue which certainly must take
for introducing you into the Family; but at your Lodging
we will discourse further of it, therefore hast thither and ex∣pect
me.



I fly Madam, and shall think the hours, Ages, till I
see you there.








False man! he's now repeating what to me he said,
To Theodocia, and shou'd she prove as credulous as I,
My hopes wou'd be blasted: may Heav'n direct her,
And make her hate him, which she sure wou'd do,
Were she inform'd of his Ingratitude.
What shall I do? Altho his injuries
To me, have been beyond expression great,
Yet my Rebellious heart pleads for him still,
And will not let entertain a thought
That might perswade to Jealousie.




Now Mrs. Repository of thy Lady's Secrets, since
my Master, like the bold Knight, is encountring your Lady,
according to Romantick method, I, the Squire of his body,
  20
shou'd caress thee, the Squiress of her body; and thus I accost
my Damsel, and display affection.

(Offers to kiss her.


Away, you are too Saucy.



Baulk not a young Lover in his first Address, for by
all those fine things my Heroe is saying to thy Lady, thy
beauty has so smitten me, that I languish all night, and sigh
all the day, and so forth.




And never saw me before?



Yes, but I have thy likeness, but let that pass.







Yes, thine, little wilde Cat: Let me see, where
was it? oh, in my Dream last night; me-thoughts thou
wert the kindest, comingst thing but a Pox on these
backward Interpretations of Dreams, for I find, That fancy
did, what Phillis will not do.




I hope this Fellow knows me not, I'le try him fur∣ther,
and will seemingly comply; he may perhaps discover
Loveall's intentions to me. Well Sir, I Vow •blush to find my
self so forward; for I must confess the first sight of you bred
an alteration in me, but your gay frollick humour so extream∣ly
pleases me, that if you prove as sincere a passionate Lover
as your Master seems to be to my Mistress, and they make
it a match here is my hand upon it, I will not be
backward.



If you are, I'le soon man you why so, this makes
the Proverb good, Happy is that Wooing which is not long a
doing. Hang all Love-speeches, they serve only to screw a
man up to such unreasonable protestations, that of necessity
he must break'em; or keeping them, proclaim himself an
easie Fool: But my Master (Heav'n be prais'd) knows better
thing good man ha, ha, he his Vows will ne're trouble
him.



Is not your Master real in his Love to my Mistress?



Oh yes, he's as really Passionate as Tarquin in his
Addresses to a Woman he likes; his design is only to stretch
a Commandement, or so, with her good Gentleman.
(aside.


How now Scoundrel, what come you for?



Here are some Letters for my Master.



Ha! Letters for him?




Give 'em me Sirrah, I'le deliver 'em.



My fancy questionless must take.
(aside.
I'le ease you of that trouble Sir, if you please, and carry
them in.





Wilt thou? with all my heart; for to say truth, I
long to be carousing with my Companions in the Cellar: I
shou'd have spoke with my Master, but the business requires
no hast, another time will serve do'st hear oh Damsel
fair, when I am full fraught, expect a broad-side from me;
for Wine elevates my soul, adds confidence, and will make
me boldly express the violent out-goings I have for thy sweet
self.





I luckily have thought upon a way
Which of necessity must take.
Fortune Revenge, I both your aids implore,
To cure my Honour, and my Love restore;
And both your powers for ever I'le adore.
Exit:







So, so, I have recover'd it at last: I rose early this
morning, and pickt her Pocket of it while she was in bed:
now I'le take a view of my precious Padder for hearts.





My soul's alarm'd with that fatal news
Which Theodocia sent in her Letter:
Thou fair example of true Love and Constancy,
I flye to rescue thy unsully'd Virtue,
And will redeem it from a Father's power.

(goes towards T. Essence.
Oh Heavens! I either dream, or sure that Fellow
Has my Picture which I gave to Theodocia

When I went out of Town I'le go nearer.

(looks over T. Ess. his Shoulder.


I know him not at present certainly he was never
my Customer:
Wretched Mr. Essence, to what a destiny art thou born, that
such a smooth-fac'd Rascal shou'd tumble thy Wife, and
rifle her of thy reputation.



By Heav'n, the pledge of my eternal love;


Strange thoughts and jealousies throng in and fill
My troubled breast,
And fatal sears wou'd urge me to suspect
That Theodocia is unconstant grown.





What, what wou'd this Fellow have? honest
Tom. must thou never go abroad agen, but must expect to
be pointed at for a Hen-peckt Fribble; in troth I pitty
thee.



Hell and Confusion, 'tis too true the same.




This Fellow's as prying as an Informer: Sir, what
are you, who would you speak with, what's your business, or
are you a Counter-Vermin you stick so close? if you are,
y'are mistaken in your man: I owe nothing, my Wifes Por∣tion
paid my Debts, therefore march off before my Indig∣nation
flyes about your ears.



You must resolve me one question first Sir.







Yes, must Sir, and that quickly too.



Before you ask it Sir? The strangest Fellow I
e're met with in my life.



Leave off Fooling, and tell me how you came by
that Picture?



How I came by this Picture?



The truth you Rogue, or I'le send thy soul to ano∣ther
world.



Rogue? very fine! in short my answer is, what
is that to you, how I came by it.



Sirrah trifle not, but tell me, or by Heav'n 



Yes, do kill me, and I'le have thee
hang'd, if all I am worth can purchase a Hal∣ter.
If he be a man of Honour, sure he won't
kill me, because I have no weapons.
Looks on
Court. then
on the Pi∣cture.(aside.
How? how? how's this? Slise, this is the Villain that
does my drudgery as they say; have I found you y'faith:
now Thomas take courage & Huff him briskly ha, ha, Sir,
have I found you? this blustring won't do; what, no one
but my Wife to satisfie you Goatish appetite: Cudslid a∣vaunt,
or I'le swinge you.



Oh intollerable impertinence! Rascal, explain thy
self, or I'le beat thy brains out.



If you can Sir, thanks to your Worship, my Nod∣dle's
hardned and too well guarded with your present you
have bestow'd upon me you conceive me.



Still more misterious; Sirrah, leave off your
riddling.



This is one of the impudent'st Whore-masters I
ever knew: he is not content to Cuckold me, but wou'd
force me to confess and declare my self one. Had I courage
enough, I wou'd chastise him till he were impotent.



I'me on a wrack By all that's good, tell me
how you came by that Picture




Well I must tell him; there's no remedy: How I
came by it Sir? why I took it from my Wife; you might
have sav'd me this labour, for you knew it well enough Sir;
but I'le, Ile but I say no more.



Damnation! is the your Wife, from whom you
had this Picture, said you?



She my Wife Sir? what now? yes Sir, I suppose
she is, for I believe I am married to her; but I'le swear I
have layen with her, and so have you to, a pox on your
picture for it.



Thou her Husband! you lye you Dog, it cannot,
must not, shall not be.



I wish it cou'd not, then it shou'd not have been:
but may that Parson that Marryed us, be for ever chous'd of
his Tyths, his Wife Cuckold him as mine does me; may the
Children be like the Fathers that got 'em, and his House be∣come
the Nursery of Whetstone-Whores, and Speering-Bullies;
But for your part, since you are so brisk Sir, the
Court of Arches shall tame both yours and my Wifes cou∣rage;
for to shame ye both, the world shall know how you
have abus'd an honest Trades-man, and one that has borne
all Offices in his Parish: Bu• first I'le to her Relations, and
let them know her Virtue; then I'le sue out a Divorse, turn
her out of doors, and after be fashionable, and keep a Miss
cum privilegio.
Exit.





He's gone; i• this thing then her Husband?
Is this th'effect of your repeated Love,
When before Heav'n you Vow'd a Constancy:


Ungrateful Fair! believing I, thought Heav'n
Might sooner err than thee.
Curst be the time I ever saw thy Charms,
And may thy quiet with thy Beauty fade.
VVhat shall I do, and whether shall I go
To ease the tortures of my troubled soul?
 Ah Theodocia; if thy faithless Tongue
Had never sworne to keep those sacred Vows,
Which (to thy shame) are in Heav'n Recorded;
Yet such an abject thing worthy your scorn,
Might have preserv'd
My Interest and thy Vows intire:
But I too late thy Sexes frailty find
In thee; Your Virtues like your Beauties fade,
And though all Heav'n does in your forms appear,
Yet Falshood, Treachery, and all that's ill,
Dwell in your souls and hearts: Oh 





This peremptory Fellow has plaid me a slip∣pery
trick, but if I catch him, I'le make him an example for
domineering Husbands: Ha! bless me! the
Gentleman I think will swound, he looks
so pale.


Courtly seems not well.


At length my griefs have gain'd the Victory,
My spirits yield to the resistless force
Of Injuries undeserv'd.



Sweet Sir, how do you, you seem not well? (a
comely person) pray be pleas'd to repose your self in my
poor House, both it and Owner are at your Devoire, I
swear.



I'le accept her kindness till I recover.
(aside.
Madam, I embrace your Charity,
I must confess I'me indispos'd at present;
Something I'le do to right my Injuries.
(aside.
Madam, you will excuse my boldness.





You honour me with your boldness Sir; and I
assure you Sir, you cannot be more bold than welcome to
your Servant Sir. Pray give me your hand Sir: Poor heart,
'tis a fit o'th'Spleen without question, 'tis so violent! and
he presses my hand so hard.









Since Madam, my Father has resign'd his power to
you, I question not your goodness will command what I
shall readily obey.



I cannot blame your hard constructi∣on
of a Fathers rigour; and now, to be just to him, I shou'd
urge what he already has; (Oh, I faint) but since your aver∣sion
to young Loveal's such, I will not only propound, but
effect a match which may prove beneficial to you, if wisely
you comply.



Ha, what means she?





You know the power I have over your Father.



Thanks to his Dotage.





Wisely then embrace the man I offer, 'tis my
Brother, to day he will be here; and did not my indisposi∣tion
force me out of Town, I shou'd have rejoyc'd to have
seen him: However, in my absence I'de have you treat him,
not as a Stranger, but as one who is to be your Husband:
consider, and let me know what you resolve.



Fortune! th'ast made me now compleatly wretched;
if I reject the man my Father offers, the world will censure
me for being disobedient: and if I refuse the man that she
propounds, her interest with my Father, is so great, what
is't she will not do to blast my fame, and to my Father aggra∣vate
my fault? and if with either I comply, my Bliss and
Love in Courtly, I must lose: what shall I do? I'le seem∣ingly
consent to what she has propos'd, and by that means
gain time to frustrate what they both design. It shall be so;
Madam, your kindness has prevail'd; and tho I never saw
the person you have nam'd; yet hitherto, so obliging you
have been, that readily I yield to your desires.




'Tis well resolv'd; and Theo. rest satisfied, he
has the accomplishments of a Gentle-man, his humours gay,
but that will be a good mixture with your Gravity. Daugh∣ter,
farewell, perform your promise and be happy.
Mrs. M. Kisses Theo. then Exit.




Madam, may your intended Journey prove pros∣perous,
and procure your health. Yes, I will keep my
  26
promise, but it shall be to Courtly; when I prove false to
Love, may all things prosper that may make me wretched.
Not Fathers Threats, nor Mothers subtlest Art,
Shall change my Love, or disengage my heart.
Exit.








I Have been with her Cousin, and to give the Devil his
due, his advice was none of the worst; 'tis possible I may
be in the wrong, and my Wife honest, notwithstanding
what has past; and tho this Picture may startle me, yet it
does not convince me: why then Thomas Mum, least thy
Neighbours shou'd conclude what thou doest
but suspect, let me see where am I to goe? to my
Pulls out a
Table-book.
Lady Hum in Pall-mall; to Madam Hum, one of the
Maids of Honour; to Madam Hum in Covent-Garden.
 Agad 'tis a plaguey troublesome thing to be handsome
and gentile, for the Women are ready to pull a Man a pieces
that is well accomplisht. I was forct to Marry, to be rid of
these fond souls; but a pox on't 'twont do, they have the
spawn of the Serpent in 'em, and will be tempting frailties
which hitherto I have resisted: But if my Wife proves a
down right Wife, I'le be mercyful to my languishing fits;
 ha who comes here?


Bless me! the very Rogue, whose Picture I have, Cour∣ting
my Wife suspition avaunt honest Tom, that thou
art a Cuckold is too evident.


If you will go, Sir oblige me; pray do, by ac∣cepting
this Bottle of water of my own Distilling, Sir; that if
your distemper shou'd return, the cure may be perfected by
my means.



Oh the Impertinence of Women-kind! Madam,
your obligations are beyond expression great.



Ha! She presents him too; now the pox upon
him, for the Devil has pleas'd her.



But shou'd it relaps indeed 



No danger of that I assure you Madam, your
Servant.




I was yours before Sir; but Sir, you remember
how to take the Cordial.



Oh yes Madam, as you applyed it to me; your
Servant.




A pox of her Application; I fear you have ap∣plyed
something too 



Very right Sir; adieu good Sir, may Heav'n re∣store
and preserve your health but, a word Sir, when your
Bottle is out, pray let me see you Sir, and it shall be repleated
with the same: my name is Dorothy Essence, tis true, my
Husband is somewhat whimsical, but you'l find a civil person
of me Sir.



Oh Mrs. Essence, your Servant 'tis the con∣ceitest
Creature I e're met with.




So, so, they are parted he comes this way; I'le
look big upon him, perhaps that may terrifie him.


T. Ess. goes by Courtly, and looks big on him.


Ha! that curst Fellow here agen? how my heart
rises at the sight of him what a hard Law is Duty to old
Age; he cou'd not sure be of Theodocia's choyce; but she
was forc't to obey her Fathers power.
(aside.
Oh too, too happy man, to have a Wife so fair and beauti∣full!



(As he goes out, Enters 'Theo. He looks frowning on her.) Exit



Hye day, what means he?



It is he; but why this strangeness, and his return'd
conceild from me. Ah Courtly, my excessive Love wou'd
promp me to embrace a Jealousie of what I wou'd not wil∣lingly
believe, that thou art false.



Oh too, too happy man, to have a Wife so fair and
beautiful! what shou'd he mean by this oh too soon I un∣derstand
the Rogue; now he has Cuckold me, he basely
tryumphs.



Perhaps I may learn something of this Fellow, for I
hear he is excellent for intelligence of Love-intriegues, and
has brought as many Couples together, as any Parson about
Town, but not so lawfully. Mr. Essence, are you acquain∣ted
with the person that but now lest you?



Ah Mrs. Theodocia, I always had a respect for
you, and have often commended you to the high-flown rich
Blades with Coaches, that are my Customers, how good a
Wife you'd make; and is this my reward, do you flout me
in misery?



Not I; but tell me the cause of your affliction?



Oh the greatest under Heaven, next to bad Trade,
but my Wifes Occupation is good, a pox on her Customers,
for Mrs. Tho. here stands the model of a compleat wretched
Husband that Fellow who went from hence but now.



What of him Sir?



What of him Sir? he has Rob'd me.







That Rogue; he has Feloniously stolen the preci∣ous
Jewel of my life; my Rep, in fine, he has Cuckold me;
now 'tis out, my heart is somewhat eas'd.



It is impossible; can Courtly be so base?



Oh 'tis too true, these eyes, but now, were wit∣nesses
of his and my Wifes familiarity: to conclude, he lyes
with my Wife; now you have the sorrowful truth of my
Woe.



All my prophetick fears were but too true,
And Courtley's treacheries too evident:
Me-thoughts his looks, as he past by, betray'd
An inward guilt.
If thou art False, where shall I find one Just?
For, with such seeming Honesty, he swore,
And wisht-such Imprecations on himself,
If in the least he Violated Love,
Or broke his Vows; those Vows he made to me,

I durst to have sworn, he really design'd
That Constancy he Vow'd:
But b'inded by my Love, I find too late,
He's like the rest of the perfidious Race,
And made these Vows t'entrap my Innocence.



Sweet Mrs. Theo. thou Queen of Diamonds, mo∣derate
thy passion: Your Charity to me is too great, and
since so cordially you espouse my afflictions, I'me griev'd
that you are not a man; if you were, I shou'd have en∣treated
the favour of you, that you wou'd have cudgeld him
  29
for my sake; but seeing that cannot be, I'le drown my self
in Tears, and lay my death to his charge; oh, oh, oh.




Oh that I were a man, I'de soon redress
My wrongs:
His Life shou'd pay the forfeit of his Vows,
And he shou'd fall a Victim to my rage.







But oh I rave;
For Courtley's generous soul cou'd ne're admit
A thought so base to harbour in his brest,
Much less wou'd execute so vile an act;
Heaven's! 'tis impossible! Courtly false? it cannot be.



O yes, Madam; yes, too true he's false; but
how shall we curb his Leachery?



Ah Traytor! double-hearted faithless man!







Sure Hell it self has not a torment equal to thy
Crime.







To wrong a person never injur'd thee 



Never I, Ile take my death on't, not so much
as in the sale of a pair of Jessamy-Gloves, a twelve-penny
glass of Essence, or six-penny pot of Jessamy-butter.



But my complaints are vain;
I'le tear this Viper from my brest, and then
Study a just Revenge to scourge his soul,
For Violations done to sacred Love!
(Exit.



She's gone! Heav'ns bless her! how cordially she
took my part, pretty Creature! and what she intends to do,
Heav'n knows, for she talkt of Revenge Fie Thomas, why
so slow to correct this Fellows lewdness towards thee? for
shame do somthing, let not a Woman out-strip thee in
prowess, in thy own cause too? well for Whetstone to
thy Vallour, thou sha't to th'Tavern, one pint of Sack, us'd
to make thee as huffing as a blustring Bully, half Drunk in
an Ordinary, or as Valiant and quarrelsome as a Constable
heroically Drunk, surrounded with his rusty Bilboe.
Exit.




This Letter which I have contriv'd, I hope
Will set a period to base Lovealls Treachery:


If not, I'le let fair Theodocia know
My wrong, and th'important secret of my shame
Declare; then some way we'le contrive
To right my Injuries, and redress her own.




Ah Luce, at last I've overcome my Love,
For Courtly is become the worst of men;
Imagine all that's base, the foulest acts,
The thoughts of wicked men cou'd e're invent,
In Courtly they are all compris'd;
Such things I've seen wou'd breed astonishment:
That false delewding man is now in Town;
And stead of keeping his past Vows to me,
Rejects and slights'em, wantonly sins
In the embraces of a Treacherous Wife.



You amaze me Madam! Courtly false?



As Hell but for Revenge,
I'le to my Father's power resign my self;
And tho I hate the man he has propos'd,
Yet I'le comply, and Lovealls flame admit.




Heaven's, but that must not be 
Oh do not rashly give your self away;
For Madam, Marriage is the great concern
Of our whole lives; according as we choose,
We are either blest or wretched in this World.



But I'me resolv'd, since Courtly's false,
And tho I look on both with equal hate,
Yet him I will reject whose Love was counterfeit;
But Lovealls passion for me may be true.




Loveall? the giltiest of all man-kind;
Those crimes you'd lay on Courtly, are his due,
And I me no stranger to his Perjuries.



Is he false too? Ah unhappy Maid!
Fortune has destin'd thee not one true Lover.
Say what thou knowest, then we'l consult some way
How to preserve my Honour and Obedience.



Madam, here comes your Father▪



Oh torment of my soul!





Look you Sir, there's my Daughter The. re∣ceive
  31
your Uncle with respect.






As gad sa'me, y'are the extravagantst English
Beauty I e're met with, the notoriousest pretty Devil! ha!
what charming features! bon mein! surprising graces, and
divine harmony of Limbs are here! By my hands, Old man,
thou wert inspir'd when you Begot her, she's a very Che∣rubin!




Ha, ha, he; as I say, 'tis the pleasantest Wag,
and I'le stand to't, his Sisters humour right, when she's pleas'd.



Luce, observe that face, it is extreamly like my
Mothers, the voyce too not unlike.



Upon my life, it is her self Madam; I'le take the
little Attendant aside and sift him.




And how, and how like you my Garnitire, is it
not Jauntee Madam, ha?


I am come reaking hot out of the Academy of Dresses; this
Suit was made by the King of France's own Taylor; let me
fee e're a Garlick-eating mangy-fisted English Rascal, make
the like: Ah with what an extravagant pleasure and delight
does this triming sit! ah how notoriously excellent is the
shape displayed this Ribbon a rare dye! French yellow,
emblem of Jealousie, and denotes excessive love and passion;
the only colour I value my self on; for Females understand
by that my mind and flame; and dye with desire of my ac∣quaintance;
but for variety, I have a Suit of Sky for Con∣stancy;
sometimes Pink for Modesty, to wear in such Company
as I shall visit that day; for by my hands, little Devil, a Suit of
Ribbon well suited with the address we men make to your
Sex, is half our Courtship, which is a secret of my own
discovery.



'Tis fit you keep it so Sir, for the rarity what
a strange thing is a Travell'd Fop?





How now soul! ala mort! come, come, lay a∣side
this reservedness; pox on the English breeding; by my
hands it makes all the Females Fools: Ah, how fort oblie∣geant
the Madamoisels are Ã  Paris; there, a Marryed Woman
in her Husbands presence, will clip, embrace, and kiss a
man she fancies, the first time she sees him.



And lye with him behind her Husbands back.




Mortblecu, a damn'd English censure; by my
  32
hands, I believe, that to one extravagantly honest here, there
are twenty at Paris; our London Devils are all Hypocrites;
for at that moment they seem most coy, they privately are
contriving how to enjoy the person they seem to slight Brother
Tim. if ever you will have your Daughter respect∣ed
and celebrated for a modish person, let her frequent Mas∣querades,
visit Play-houses in cognito, receive Treats, con∣verse
with the refined travelled Wits; make Balls speak
French, and be obliging to the modish Gallants.




Yes, and have her made a Miss, got with Child,
and be turn'd on my hands; no, good Brother, you must
excuse me for that absurd, absurd, I'le stand to't.




Ierneè rank English still a man cannot make
address on Gallantriè, nor a Woman be Complesant, but
Impotence will censure But little soul, my Sisters Cha∣racter
of thee has over-come me, and the blind god at last has
got the Conquest By my hands I love you, and the ra∣ther,
because I find 'tis not for want of wit, but breeding;
that makes you defective, when addresse is made to you;
therefore dear Devil, say, shall I sink or swim?



According to your skill Sir but sure so gay, so
brisk, refin'd a Travell'd Wit as you, can ne're be at leisure
to Love, nor so serious as to make Addresses.




Then you expect I shou'd have Courted you in a
Romantick stile; and whine, as if Sentence of damna∣tion
had past upon me; hang that dull, common-place way
of making Love but if Swearing will confirm you; by
those Twinkling Eyes, Cherry Lips, Alablaster Neck,
Painting Fountains of delight; and by all the clouded Beau∣ties
of your person, which by Imagination I am convinct are
excellent, I swear I never Lov'd before, but now am des∣perate;
yet if you slight it, I'le never Love again (Sing)
Let Fortune and Phillis frown if they please, I'le
no more on their Deities call, and so forth Is not this
better than your whining: Oh Love, if e're thou't ease a
heart which owns thy power Divine Damne such effi∣minacy then
pretty Rogue, be wise, and meet my Love; by
this kiss thou sha't (offers to kiss her she shoves Mrs.
M. away) oh insupportable English incivility.
She sings

  33Sweet Philida, be not so Coy,
I love not to ravish a Kiss:
Your peevishness will but destroy
The hopes of enjoying true Bliss.


If the Lover you like, does offer
To give you the proofs of his slame,
And you fondly reject his kind prosser,
Too late your own folly you'le blame.


Then yield to what e're he desires,
And slight not his Critical Love;
VVith your vigorous Lover r•tire,
You'le quickly the pleasure approve.





'Tis a merry Grigg; but Sir, is this his constan•
humour?





Ever Sir; this Gayeity has left many bleeding
hearts in France; he ne're encounter'd with a Female yet, but
he came off Victorious.




Say you so Sir? a notable Wagg, I'le stand to't.



But your Daughter only, as her Beauties due, has
gain'd the Victory; for ever since he receiv'd your Ladys
Letter, he has been Charm'd, so that his Nights have been
but one continued Dream of her.




I am sorry I must cross his dream, for my Daugh∣ter
was promis'd to another, before my Wife acquainted me
of her Brother's Fortune, by his Uncles death.



How Sir, is she engag'd to another?




As I say, she is Sir, to a man of a fair Estate,
engenious, and handsome enough for a Husband.



By all means break it off Sir, or you must expect
some fatal consequence, for he's so truly Valiant, he'l ne're
permit a Rival to enjoy the Beauty he admires.




I cannot help it Sir, 'tis now too late, for I'le
stand to't; the Writings of Agreement for settlement of
Joynture are drawn up, and tomorrow they and my Daugh∣ter
are to be Sign'd, Seal'd, and delivered, and so forth.





Doest hear old Oedipus, Father and Brother together, she
questions my Virtue and Modesty; this comes, old Priam, of
bringing up your Daughter in dull Security and Ignorance.




But Sir, you are Virtuous?




And had my Pusillage as they phrase it?









A Traveller, and bring home his Maiden-head!
damn'd Absurdity? why 'twas the only Commodity my Fa∣ther
  34
sent me over to Trade with; had I not bartard it away,
'twou'd have grown musty on my hands: no, no, (thank
Heav'n) this is a more knowing trading Age, than to keep
such druggs on our hands; I exchang'd that thing with the
Air: My Callis. Host's Neece had that Foolery, she was pret∣ty
and deserv'd it: I'le beget no Fool; I, there are too ma∣ny
in the world already.




But if you are as you say, you may beget Sooter∣kins
or scab'd-Cookcoes, I'le stand to't.




By my hands, sound as a Bell, both in Purse and
Person: See, see, I have Commendams of both 


Now Fortune be propitious Stanly, What think you of
my design? 



Well, hitherto; if you are not discover'd, as yet
I find no signs they know you.




Hum What's here? (he Reads) A particular
of Sir Humfry Hordwell's Estate, late Deceased, and now De∣scended
to his Nephew Christopher Careless, Esq the Sum
total 4000 l. per annum As I say, a fair Estate, but he's
wild, and I have past my word already, otherwise my Daugh∣ter
shou'd have had him.




How's this? A particular of all the Claps Squire
Careless has had since the Age of fifteen, and the several
places he got them, with the Catalogue of the Drs. names
that Cured him; as likewise an account of all he has layen
with to this present time? This is the newest and impudentest
way of Courtship I ever knew or heard of yet.





What Laugh you at, little Devil? that shews my
Constitution true Steel by my hands it does.



Without question Sir, and 'twou'd be a rudeness
unpardonable, shou'd I suspect you otherwise, when a whole
Colledge of Physitians have certified your health; yet I
shou'd be loath to venture on so desperate a Lover as you pre∣tend
to have been, for fear he shou'd not make the Song
good of a Healthful young vigorous Lover, and so forth.




By my hands, I'le confirm what they have writ 

(Mrs. Mon. Sings, Dances, and pulls Theo. about.)



I'le stand to't, Brother, y'are the merryest man But
come Brother, as I say, you and your Friend here shall
take a hard Lodging with me; I have one Bed to spare; ye
are us'd to lye together I hope?




Now this Old Fool will force me to Cuckold
him, meerly out of Covetousness, that he will not foul a
pair of Sheets extraordinary, Yes, yes, Brother, Tra∣vellers
always snore together.




Please you to walk in to Supper and then I'le
show you your Chamber 



What an old Dotard's this; now will he be Pimp to his
own Wife, for I'le make good use of my time, and will not be
repuls'd as before (aside): Madam your humble Servant.




Little one, give me thy hand; as gad sa'me good
flesh, and of a lushious Constitution: I find I shall be despe∣rately
in Love; Adieu, my Soul, Adieu: But doest hear, be
more complesant and agreeable the next time we meet.


Sings, Sweet Philida, be not so coy, I love not to ravish a Kiss.










What cursed Ascendant had I at my Birth,
That thus I'me teas'd by th'dross of all Man-kind:
Not one that's generous design'd for me;
Heav'n! take my Life, or rid me of these Plagues.

Luce, Prithee what news?




Fear nothing Madam, for I have discover'd enough
to break off this proposal; for it is, as I suspected, your Mo∣ther-in-Law
is the brisk travell'd Blade; but what she de∣signs,
as yet I cannot learn; but Betty promises a discovery.
Madam, here's a Letter in a Womans hand, which I found
in the Packet that was left here for Mr. Loveall, perhaps this
may confirm what I have formerly told you of that false man.



Let me see it I'le read it.




Your absence, my indisposition, together with the ill news of
your design of Marrying in London, have reduced me to such
weakness, I cannot long expect to live, nor indeed do I wish for
life, if mauger all your Protestations before Heav'n, and those
fatal pledges of our Loves, our Children, you at last prove false,
yet Heav'n one day may revenge my wrongs: I am sure some
Friends, who (did they know the affront) wou'd soon redress me,
  36
but I hope there will be no need of such exstremity; and that
your generosity will prompt you to be just to her, who is in sight
of Heav'n,
Your Lawful Wife,
Stamford. Eliz. Manly, otherwise Loveall.









He comes Madam, now let him know your just re∣sentment
of his wickedness.



Madam, such strange attractive influences y'are
Mistress of, I cannot live one moment from your sight; oh
wrack me not with torturing delay, but kindly say you will
comply with Love, and then my happiness will be com∣pleat.



Your strain's too Courtly Sir, to gain belief; there∣fore
your pardon, if I suspend Credit of them for a time 
but Sir, your Man left Letters for you with my Maid, and I
concluding so deserving a Person as your self, must in your
Life, have some Intreigues of Love, open'd one Letter writ
in a Womans hand; you'l pardon Sir the rudeness which
was the effect of Jealousie.



That Jealousie was kind, since it often proves th'ef∣fect
of Love; and I am so free from base unworthy acts; that
what you term a Rudeness, I esteem an Honour, since I'me as∣sur'd
you will find nothing there which can prove prejudicial
to my Love, or gain your disesteem.



Your Generosity Sir is questionless, and this has so
confirm'd what in your praise I've heard, that when you have
read it, you soon will understand what I intend.



What can she mean by this! let me see.




to Lu. Well Mrs. Sweet lips, what comfort do you
give a passionate Lover?



The same as formerly, I'le stand to my Agreement;
if your Master and my Mistress make it a Match, I am yours;
if not, your Servant.



But suppose a man shou'd be too far gone for ever
recovering, what then? I hope if thou wilt not commit Ma∣trimony,
thou'lt show good natur'd, and be civil upon oc∣casion?



Yes, with a Cudgel to coole courage, or with a Hal∣ter
to end your pain.



Pretty Courtship, 'tis by my troth, and you are won∣drous
civil.



Now Sir, you guess what I design, false and perfidi∣dious
as you are.
Enter old Mon. and stands behind Theo.

What wickedness there is in man!
To break those Sacred Vows you made to Heav'n,
And to betray poor Innocence to misery.
But now thy Treacheries I know, never expect
I shall comply, and so partake the guilt;
No, you shall never see me more.




How, how's this? never see you more: that's
fine y'faith! absurd, absurd, I'le stand to't; but Minks, he shall
both see and feel you too e're I have done; are you agen re∣lapst
into your former disobedience? I say comply, or 



I must confess, were th'accusation true, and I of what
this Lady charges me, were guilty, her anger then were just,
and death my desert: Read Sir the horrid'st Villany that e∣ver
was invented, and inconsistent Sir with one that's tender
of his Honour.



Now Squire, what becomes of your Knight Er∣rant,
and your hopes?



Why pretty Kins, I'le not break my heart for thee;
but if I lose thee, 'tis but once singing Fortune my Foe, and
twice being drunk will set thee a float out of my heart, and
then farewell to your Ladyship.




Reads former protestations hum, fatal
pledges of our Loves (a pretty phrase for Bastards)
crimes hum affront hum but your genero∣sity
 hum Eliz. Manly, otherwise Loveall ab∣surd,
absurd, I'le stand to't, shou'd this be true: I'le try him.



Now Sir, is't possible that a man of Honour can be
guilty of so vile an Act?




Lay aside your Honour Sir, and give me leave, as
I say; as you hope to be sav'd, do not you know this Eliz.
Manly? Ha! Answer to that, Answer to that.



Not I, by Heav'n Sir.




But that's not the question; as you hope to be
Saved, have you no Bastards? Answer to me that Sir.



Not any Sir, upon my Honour that you shall know
of; for my Widdow, for ought I know, may be forward with
my effects of kindness by this time.

This Sir, is some Rivals plot to undermine my Bliss with
this fair Lady: Ah Madam, let not such trivial Acts debar
me of that happiness I prize above my Life; but if your brest
has entertain'd anothers Love (pardon the suspition ground∣ed
on your concern for a thing as false as Heav'n is true) I will
resign my Life rather than be the Author of your discontent.




Away, away Sir, with these Complements, and
prepare to take her for your Wife Theo. rest satisfied
that I am convinc'd 'tis false; some trick on my life of your
old Lovers; but I'le marr his design: Come, ask his Pardon
for that foul suspition you had of him.








I say, provoke me not, but beg his pardon with∣out
more delay.



By no means Sir, her suspition was kind, and war∣ranted
by this, and I am satisfied.




But by your favour Sir, I am not, and I'le have it
so acknowledge your fault Baggage, or I'le stand to't:
I'le 



I must comply Sir, in Obedience to a Father's
power, I acknowledg my unjust suspition (that you
were Virtuous) and I shall be careful hereafter how I credit
Reports that may be prejudicial to your Honour (to which
thou art a Stranger) your Servant Sir, and expect an
entertainment suitable (to your perjuries) for here I Vow,
henceforth to study a Revenge on the Promoters (of your
Love to me) 






So, so, now 'tis as it shou'd be; be sure Sir to get
the Writings ready against morning; in the interim I'le en∣deavour
to keep her in this humour she is now in, lest
the Weather-cock of her Female-noddle rear to a colder
point.
(Exit.



'Tis in the coldest point already, full North to my
desires.



Say you so, then I'le after my little Pyrate, and try to
win her on our side.
(aside.)
Exit.



That Letter startled me, when I saw 'twas Dated
  39
from Stamford; I suspected my kind Widdow had found
out my Amour, and had sent this to forbid the Banes I was
a Rogue to serve her so, when she out of Charity entertain'd
and Cloath'd me when I was stript and rob'd, to top a false
contract and name upon her; but my Love, for variety, must
excuse that fault; and I thank Heav'n I have weather'd all
storms, and doubt not but to attain my ends; for I Love
Theodocia to that excess, enjoy her I must, Marryed, or Un∣marryed.


If fairly with my Love she not complyes,
By stratagem her Virtue I'le surprize.










YOur injuries (kind Friend) shall be redress'd; my
Father shall not force me to embrace a man that
values not his Vows nor Honour.



But Madam, your happiness depends upon Obedi∣ence;
you for your safety must comply with a Father's power;
yet I cou'd wish (so well I love him) that it cou'd be some
way hindred.



What shall we do? this is the fatal day, and every
minute I expect my Father.




Within Rise Daughter, rise.





And I already hear his fatal voyce.




'Tis well, make hast; I'le stand to't, the Bride-groom
will be here before y'are ready Ha Youngster, with
whom wou'd you speak so early, Ha?





Now Wit assist me 
(aside.(Feels in her Pocket, pulls out a Song.
My Master Sir, has sent me to know how Madam Theo. does
this morning, and presents her with the effects of his Love,
in a Song which he writ last Night before he went to Bed.




He is very quick: I must Marry her off, or this
Travell'd-Brother of mine will shew me an Out-landish trick,
and Marry her before I have enquir•d of his Estate.
(aside.
Let me see his Scribling this is such a buzzing crambo Age,
that the young Fops account it accomplishment to be thought
beggarly rhymeing Fools, I'le stand to't.




What an unluckly accident was this, with∣out
question Betty comes with Intelligence.




Hum, pretty Childish silly stuff; can you
sing it Little one?



Yes Sir, my Master made it to one of the new
Tunes he heard in an Opera at Paris.




Ah Sacred Boy desist, for I
Comply with your resistless Art;
Your Arrows with such vigour flye,
Already they've enflam'd my heart.


I will no more despise your power,
But thus submissively obey;
Yes by your favour, 'twas not your,
But Celia's Victory to day.


For had she Valid that charming face,
And you your keenest Dart had shot;
Yours had been the just disgrace,
And I'd obtain'd the Victors Lot.


Then not your Power, but Chance admire,
In having such a Friend as she,
Who lent you rays t'encrease my fire,
And thus made you a Deity.




Verry pretty; and as I say, your Master can be
serious for all his jollity, Young man.



My Master earnestly desires to speak with you Sir.




I am going to him, for I have receiv'd a Letter
for him from my Wife Daughter make hast and put on
your Trinkets, for I expect your Bride-groom every mi∣nute.
(Exit.



Thanks to my invention Madam, I have shifted
him this Song was presented me by our Butler, who pro∣cur'd
it made by a mercenary Scribler of the Town, for a fit
of Drunkenness, gratis.



Betty, have you found out your Mistresses design
yet?



I have, and Madam, by what I have learnt, I un∣derstand
your Maiden-head is short-liv'd, but I having com∣passion
for your Virtue, and finding my Mistress, your Mot∣er-in-Law
none of the Honestest, am resolv'd, if possible,
to rescue you from ruine for the Blade that came with her is
the person whom she designs to be yours; but not only yours
I'le assure you, for my Virtuous Lady lay with him to Night.



Unheard-of wickedness! But which way shall
we frustrate their design?



Troth Madam, show 'em a fair pair of heels, for
she knows you care not for Loveall, so that they conclude it
easie to win the old Man to their side, and force you to ac∣cept
of her Love, as she personates her own Brother; and if
so far she prospers, her Gallant is to be shuffled into your
hand when the Marriage is design'd, and by that means
chouse both my old Master and your self.



Cunningly contriv'd yet, for all this, I doubt
not but to counterplot both her and Loveall too but for
better security, we must be gone from this place.



Make hast then and avoyd the Net; and that you
may have time for your escape, I'le in, and hold my Mistress
in discourse; and let me know where you intend to be, and
I'le send word what passes at home.



We'le be at Essence's, I have some interest with
his Wife, till we have an opportunity to perfect your hap∣piness.



Thou best example of true Friendship.






in Old M. House.

Stanly dressing himself. Mrs. Mon. dressing her self at a Table,
have Night-cloaths on her head, in her half Shirt, and her
Breeches on.
A Letter for Mrs. Monylove.




Your Raptures are too violent to last and know
Sir, I had not yielded now, had not my Old Man warranted,
or rather justified my proceedure; for his Penuriousness I
cou'd no other way requite, and he was instrumental to his
being a Cuckold, for laying two so full of Love together.



'Tis Theodocia, whom I confess next to your self I
love, but chiefly for her money; for Madam, you are the
sole Commandress of my heart; and that I may hereafter be
serviceable to both, so warily I will proceed with her, that
she shall only raise an Appetire, which vigorously I'le lay with
you.




Soft Sir, you'le find your stock little enough for
her; and for my part, if I cannot hold out, my Dotards An∣gels
shall turn Prourers at my Command; for I must confess
the truth of the Song you gave me, which says 


Who complys with gay Youth, does prudently choose;
She that yields to old Age, does her passion abuse:
She may languish and sigh, but in vain it will prove;
Age, dulls the brisk flames, and slackens hot Love:
He may kindle a fire, but cannot supply;
So, for want of Loves fuel, her passion must dye.
But Youth that's full fraught with Love and desire,
Creates a true flame, and supplys the blest fire:
He'l rally, renew it, and with vigour maintain
What dotage endeavours to do, but in vain▪
Then give me a Gallant; when I'm yoak• to old Age,
What the gray-head does raise, his Youth shall asswage.





Betty, what news have you learnt this morning?



Madam, my Master is resolv'd on the Match be∣tween
Mrs. Theo. and Mr. Loveall, notwithstanding the
Letter Luce discovered yesterday, for he has sent for Mr.
Loveall this morning; but Luce has been before-hand, and
sent Mr. Loveall word that Mrs. Theo. will meet him at Es∣sence
the Milliners, on purpose to prevent his meeting with
my Master's message, and so hinder his coming hither.




That was well done but upon what account
is Luce so Zealous in breaking off this Match?



I cannot apprehend the meaning; however, if by
her means I gain Theodocia, she shall not want reward.






I must hold this Youngster in talk till my Daugh∣ter
is Marryed to Loveall; or I'le stand to't, this young Snip∣per-snapper
will, I fear, forbid the banes.
  43
Ha what do I see? my Wife dressing her self 'tis
too true absurd, I'le stand to't.




Cuds'lid, my Husband! what shall we do? all
our designs are ruin'd if he discovers me 



Let me alone, I'le bring you off, ne're fear it.




Curse on my Dotage; too late I find my folly in
Marrying a young Wife, I cou'd expect no less in reason,
than to be a Cuckold 
Wife! what subtle damn'd Devil was it put you on this de∣sign,
to make me the promoter of my own shame? but
Sir, for your part, I'le stand to't, I'le swinge you.





(Laughs). But Sir, do you in earnest conclude my
Bed-fellow to be your Wife?




A rat on you Are my Eyes my own Sir?



No Sir; if you suspect my Friend for a Woman, if
he were not, all thy Wealth shou'd not purchase her from my
Embraces here is a Face indeed, as charming as the
notedst Female Beauty; but Nature mistook in moulding e∣very
part, forgetting she had made a Venus-face, plac'd it on
an Adam's Body.




As I say, if this be true, 'tis wonderful! and in∣deed,
I have often heard my Wife say, that she and her Bro∣ther
were so alike, (being Twins,) that one cou'd hardly be
known from the other.





Brother, I thought I shou'd surprize you; by
my hands, thou art the most credulous man I ever met
with but to convince thee of thy Error Iack, pri∣thee
tell him what sport we have had at Paris in Masquerade.



Yes Faith, my Friend and I have liv'd at least three
months upon the Pistols he has had clapt in his hand at Car∣nival-time,
when he went disguis'd in Womans Cloaths, as
Earnest, for ensuing pleasure.




But say old Trojan, am I so like my Sister?




Like quotha? I durst to have sworne you had
been she.




To convince you, search me; do, do: but if
thou doest not, thy Daughter shall, for I am desperately in
Love with her.




Absur'd, I'le stand to't, that I shou'd take him
for my Wife 
(aside)  44
But soft good Brother, my business of this early Visit, was
partly to deliver a Letter directed to you from my Wife; and
partly to desire you to forbear any further amorous discourses
with my Daughter, sic volo, sic jubio, you understand me▪
I have promis'd her to another, and this I resolve shall be
her Wedding day.




How! this day is she to be Marryed? and will you slight Squire Careless? take heed Sir what you do.




Why Sir, I hope you wont Hector me? will
you?



I have a greater respect for the young Lady then 




You, a respect for the young Lady? what are
you Sir, that dare pretend to have a respect for my Daugh∣ter,
Ha?



'Tis no harm Sir, to be Civil to a handsome La∣dy;
it's a Devotion we owe to Beauty.




But as I say Sir, it is harm Sir, and I'le none of it,
therefore show you civility some where else.




Iack, no more Brother, rest content, I'le have
none of your Daughter; by my hands not I for my reasons,
see there 


Stanly, have courage, the Girl's thine own,
Since this last rub we have so smoothly past,
All little Oppositions I despise.



See, see, the Letter works rarely.




It must take, especially as now I have design'd to
proceed.




I'le stand to't, the kindest Wife man ever had.





Now shou'd you kneel and prostrate, Damsel, at
my feet, I wou'd deny her; by my hands, not once caress
her.



How Sir, can you so easily quit a Lady you so en∣tirely
Love?



What's that to you Sir: Good Brother rid my
House of this Friend of yours, for I fear he'le prove no Friend
of min•, shou'd he stay; I like not his Countenance, he has
the looks of a slye Rogue.



Rogue! you are merry Sir 



You Lye, y'are a 








What Sir? y'are a Quodammodo, I'le stand to't.









Yes, a Quodammodo Sir bring your Action, I
care not.



Such another word, Old man, will make me very
Angry and Extravagant.




Extravagant! I believe it; but march off civilly,
or as I say, I shall civilly make you Sir.




Iack, withdraw, and let me alone; I have a Plot
which of necessity must be prosperous.



Sir, on my Friends request Ile leave your House,
but look to't a Quodammodo said you!
(Exit.




Adieu, Huffing Sir as gad sa'me he has put me
into a filthy pet.




Brother, I have a rare fancy sprung, which if you
approve of, must procure your desire.




In what good Brother?




To make your Daughter comply, and marry this
Loveall, whom my Sister mentions in her Letter; for
since (as she writes) you have promis'd Theodocia to another,
I am resolv'd to fulfil my Sisters request in assisting you in
your intentions in pursuance of which, I have thought on
a way, 'tis this, you say I am very like my Sister?









How if I, putting on one of my Sisters Gowns,
shou'd personate her, and fairly at first use perswasions to
Theodocia; but if they fail, to use a Mothers Author•ty, and
Lock her up till the business is done.




How? you personate my Wife! and Lock her
up! well thought on I'le none of that good Bro∣ther;
soft and fair, I smell a Rat; I understand you, and so
you'l debauch her, if not marry her your self.




Who, I? by my hands, all my Courtship was but
Rallery a-la-mode.




But I'le stand to't, you may so a-la mode her, as
you call't, that may make her unfit for a Husband.




The insupportable censure of impotence! I tell
thee old Blade, I'de sooner marry an Orange Wench then thy
dull Virtuous Daughter; by my hands I wou'd.




A fitter Wife for such wild Gallants, than an ho∣nester
Woman, Ile stand to't.




Is not my Reputation at stake? a Sisters Conju∣ration?
by my hands you wrong me, to suspect my Honour.




But (pardon me Sir) shou'd it come to that extre∣mity
of Locking her up, will you neither say, nor do any
thing tending to Debauchery, as you hope to be sav'd? gad
forgive me.




I'le do neither by Heav'n.




Good; now if you shou'd, I'le Indict you for Per∣jury,
and I'le stand to't; y'are a witty Blade, the design
must take, for thou art so like my Wife, that I am almost
perswaded to kiss thee for her, but that it is so unseemly for
one man to kiss another.




Then it is a Plot.




It is, and we'le about it instantly, the Wench
shall furnish you with a Gown yet me-thinks I wou'd be
by, tho unseen to her, when you perswade her.




To show you how unjust your suspition is, you
shall.




(Laughs). I cannot but Laugh to think how the
young Baggage will be cousened; you, her Mother?




The deceipt will be pleasant, what an innocent
Cheat it will be? (to both) but let us about it.
Exe.






Well, I find thy soyl Tom, will never produce the fruit of
Vallour, therefore I have taken up the safer Cudgells of the
two; I have enter'd an Action of Battery against Courtly for
violently assaulting the body of Dorothy Essence, my Wife;
and my Lawyer tells me, I shall have swinging damages for
every bout I can prove he has assaulted her; and to have
dammage enough, so soon as I have dispatcht my Customers,
I'le to the Temple-walks, and hire two or three Knights
o'th' Post, who shall Swear to at least three thousand pounds
worth of Trespass, with which I'le buy an Estate, and turn
Country Gentleman.
  47Enter Men and two Women to his Shop.
Fair Ladys, what lack ye? delicate Roman, Italiansscented
Gloves, good Essences, Tiberos, Orange Jessamine, Essence
d'Espagne, Fanns, Ribbons in every point francois Boy▪ 
Boy, bring some Essences.


Ha my little Rogues, here are Perfumes ravishing enough
to revive the dead.

nose with his Finger and Bottle.


You are the pleasantest Creature Mr. Essence, I
cannot live unless I see you once a week at least; y'are the
divertingst person in the Town I swear.



Alas Madam, I, I my pretty hearts; y'are the
Diamond Queen of the Nation; say no more, say no more,
I have a rich Blade in store for thee; another time, another
time. 
Ha! my pretty Cherubins! 

(Pats their Breasts with Essences.
(Men buzze about the Women.


What a conceited impudent Rascal's this!
(aside.
Mr. Essence, a word with you 



I wait on you Madam Iack, bring those Spi∣rits
came in last from the Iews in the Citty; Rogue, you ne∣ver
mind, never mind Sirrah.




Let me see'em Mr. Essence 



'em about the Boy imitates his Master.


There are Scents Ladys upon Rep oh in∣comparable!
I can Dine as heartily on a good Roman or
Italian Scent, as you can on a dish of Meat oh lushious!
excellent! rare!



What do you ask for these Gloves?



Try'em on, try 'em on Queen of hearts upon
Rep, these Gloves are as well worth two Guynnies as the
common Jessamine half a Crown; but you pretty Beauty
shall give me but an Angel; I be-friend you I assure you; say
no more.



Are you Marryed Mr. Essence?


on the Gloves, pats, stroaks, kisses her armes, and •oys
all the while he talks.


Yes Madam; yes, I thank my Stars, I am marryed;
I was forc't to't, for what with Maids of Honour, and Coun∣try
Ladys, I was almost teas'd out of my Life see there, 
  48
a Country Knights Daughter; she has for these two years
past, all the time she has been in Town, been as constant e∣very
day at my Shop, as a Bully at the Ordinaries; and she
makes Love so passionately, that I was forc't to take the op∣portunity
of her being out of Town when I marryed, and
so choust her (poor soul) yet she cannot forbear coming still.



Y'are very hard-hearted, that cou'd refuse so
pretty a Lady; how chanc't you did not marry her? had she
no fortune?



Yes, Madam, yes, pretty well, some hundreds;
but alas, a Country Damsel is not fit for us Traders in this
lewd Town, they'd soon find out the fashionable Trade, to
our costs Faelix quem faciunt Madam, I am as to that point
wise, at my Neighbours expence; wag your Honour, wag
your Arm a little 
But I fear my Town-Soul has plaid me a prank; but Tom.
that secret's for thy self alone.
(aside.
 Ha Madam; how Ceraphically it sits, and for Scent,
smell; smell it little Ceraphim.



What means the Fellow Y'are Sawcy 




How? Sawcy in commending my Commodities,
pretty, pretty prithee smell agen 
This, ay this is it y'faith 
 Cudslid you Whore 

Bobs her, she gives him a Box
on the Ear, and goes away
with the Gloves. Enter Lov. who
prevents T. Ess. striking agen.




How now Tom, quarrelling with your Customers?



Customers with a pox, I have expos'd to Air,
at least a dozen papers of my best Roman and Italian Gloves;
smell Mr. Loveall and the Baggage laid out nothing but
a box o'th'Ear; but I had repartee'd it, had not you staid my
hand but Mr. Loveall, I am heartily glad to see you in
Town agen, the Ladys have so wanted you at my Shop.



Sirrah, will you never leave your Lying to one that
knows you? you were a pure Rogue to put a common
Whore upon me when I was last in Town, for a person of
Quality; but look to it Rascal, for I'le trappan thee into
Matrimony for it, and then Cuckold thee.



Say you so, then hang care, I find 'tis impossible
to be a Marryed man and no Cuckold, for the Misses who
are kept, are more true to their words than the Wives now a
days are to their Oaths they make in the Church 
(aside.
But Mr. Loveall, as I hope to be Alderman, and ride in
Scarlet, and have the Blew-coat Boys sing Iordans Poetry
before me to the Spittle, I was credibly inform'd she was a
Person of Honour.



Yes, of VVhetstones Park, Moseleys Damsels were
Nuns to her, and she was so Pockey, that she embrac'd the
offer of a French Vallet to go over into France to get Cure.



A person of Honour may get a Clap, or so, who
can help it but is she gone to Paris? that I had known it
sooner.



What wou'd that have advantag'd you?



Much, much Sir; for I wou'd have sent a Venture
by her for Gloves, Ribbons, and Essences: Those kind ob∣liging
souls buy three to one Cheaper than your Coy Vir∣tuous
Women, I know it by experience; the little God∣desses
of Love have the prettiest Wheadlingst ways, that
what I have lost by Selling to them, I have choust the Honest
Women of look you there goes a Rogue who has at
least three times giv'n me the go-by for several pair of
Gloves She has call'd in a Coach to see some, fitted her
self, faln into a Laugh, pretended business, and made the
Coach-man drive away hastily, sans paying a-gad: But
hang't, I always got up my loss by the next Virtuous Custo∣mers
have come, which is the cause of the Report that I
sell dear but Mr. Loveall, I must live; shou'd I be reason∣able
to the Honest, I shou'd lose abominably.



A precious Rascal, to make the sober Ladys of the
Town maintain the Misses: On my Life, this was some
thrifty Gallants invention, to mitigate his expence of Keep∣ing.



Upon Rep Sir, my own Invention, to make the
Rich Charitable to the Indigent members of Venus-encoun∣ters
 See, I have a swinging Catalogue of 'em, here, all
Debtors, who are to pay trebble for the Commodities they
have taken up, when they come to the Preferment of being
kept by Lords or Country Cullyes; so that in my own de∣fence,
  50
I'am forc't now and then to top 'em on some shallow▪
brain'd Lord or Knight, to hedge in my Debts.


T. Ess. retires to his Shop.


Laurence, are the Writings finished?





Yes Sir, they are done, but I having had no war∣rant
to pay the Fees, the Lawyers wou'd not trust.







Almost Twelve Sir you must make hast, or the
Canonical hour will be past; and if the old Man shou'd be
in a pet, he may chance to stop your Marriage till to morrow.



Fear it not for I will not sleep, till it be in Theo∣docia's
Arms; let us hast to the Temple for the Writings,
from thence I'le flye to take possession of the two great bles∣sings
of the World, Wealth and Beauty.


Whose mighty Charms the World cou'd ne're withstand,
For their joynt powers both Age and Youth command.









MY restless soul stung with Theodocia's Falshood, hurries
me head-long to a wild despair, yet mighty Love con∣trolls
my faint Resolves but spight of Love, and all his
mistick trifling, no longer I'le sustain my Injuries but
stay 
(Studys
To him Mrs. Essence.




This Husband of mine is possest, that's certain,
and shou'd I be so too, he'd soon be fashionable, which I am
resolv'd to make him, if he continues longer in his Whim∣sies.


 Ha! here's the fine Gallant agen, as pat as may be; well
Thomas, look to thy Head, for if this Blade proves kind,
something to your cost may follow. 




Marry'd! and broak her Vows! and still enjoys an
undisturb'd mind! she shall not long, for like her ill-genius,
I'le hant her every where with repetitions of her
faithless Acts since thou fair faithless Creature hast rob'd
me of a constant Love as thou'st made me, thou sha't be
wretched too.





sweet Sir your Servant 

Mrs. Ess. sets her self in order by
her Pocket-glass.


Oh the disquiets of an Injur'd soul!




How do you do Sir? good∣ness
Searches her Poc∣kets,
and pulls
out an Essence-bottle.
defend him, I fear he is ill agen 
let me see oh, here it is, this Spirit
they say is excellent good to dispel Va∣pours'
 Ile try the experiment on him 


on her Finger and bobs his Nose.


What mean you Woman? 
It shall be so, I will revenge my self on all the Sex; first force
this Tyrant from my soul, then practising dissembled Love,
like her, I'le win 'em to my cursed end, and then expose 'em
to eternal shame.




Upon my life some Ill-natur'd Creature has de∣ny'd
his request, which makes him out of humour; but
I'le make amends for the rudeness, and will comply if he has
the goodness to ask, let it be what it will, for I find I shall
not be able to refuse him any thing Sir, as I was saying 
pray how do you.


To them Tom Essence.


Fire and Gun-powder! my Wife and Courtly toge∣ther
agen! where be these Catch-pole Rogues now, they
might kill him with Authority, shou'd he resist how-ever
I'le in, and fetch a Weapon, and by knocking him down, se∣cure
him till they come to Arrest him.
(Exit.




One word for pitty Sir my heart beats hea∣vily,
and I am so concern'd for you, that I Vow I am strange∣ly
indispos'd Oh I am sick 

She falls into his Arms,
and lets fall the Bottle.


Ha! the Woman faints 




The Spirit, the Spirit Sir, quick, quick 
rub my Temples Sir, pray do what not one kiss 
(aside.
the Spirit agen, and bob my Nose with it Sir 



Damn her, 'tis Counterfeit and the whole Sex is
  52
a Cheat thus Theodocia seem'd, when I took leave of her
and left the Town but I no sooner gone, but she resign'd
my Interest to another 





Hold me a little harder Sir squeze me har∣der
yet Sir; fear not, you cannot hurt me Sir the Duce
take him, he understands me not sure!


Re-enter Tom Essence with a Paring-shovel.


Blood must ensue were he at his Prayers, I'de
knock him o'th'head Cuckold me quotha? a good jest
y'saith but I'le maule his Mazzard, were he as stout as
Hector or Goliah hum hum, Valour assist me; Tom,
stand to't, and cool his courage in the midst of Courtship 
now Sir, after my hearty Commendations 



Curse on my Eyes,
what do I see? that hated Fop 


T. Ess. offers to strike. Cou.
turns. T. Ess. bows & cringes


Pox on him, his looks make me tremble like an
Aspin-leaf: Friend Thomas, thy disgrace will be insuppor∣table;
what, Cuckold and Coward too, thy Father was as
pretty a spark as e're play'd Tryal of Skill at the Bear-Garden.



Sirrah, retire from my sight instantly, or by Heav'n
I shall grow wild.



This is the Kings High-way Sir 
winks & beckons
to his Wife.
and the Baggage wont stir, ah Gypsie.



Do you dispute Sirrah? 



I'm gone, I'me gone Sir 'tis a hard case, a man
must be forc't to leave his Wife with her Gallant but I'le
be near to hear and see what you do 




Wherein can I be Serviceable Madam 




Cannot you guess Sir? I am young, have an
Ill-natur'd Husband, and I Vow you are Sir but you'le
think me a Wagg, shou'd I tell you my mind 



No, no, no, speak, what am I? 




You are Sir Lord I blush so pray turn your
back Sir you are pray Sir do 



Torment! now Madam speak, you are obey'd 





Upon my Credit Sir, you are the most desirable
man I ever saw, and cou'd wish 



Cou'd wish I wou'd do what?




Revenge my quarrel on a necessary, but ill na∣tur'd
Fool, call'd a Husband 



To Cuckold him or so? 




I Vow you are an Ingenious person, and guess
admirably well Sir. 




Oh Theodocia, too late I find the falseness of thy
Sex.





Nay Friend of mine, thou canst not want a greater
Whetstone for thy Valour than her Impudence.


strike: Court. turns; he starts back fearful.


Rogue, are you here agen 



For no harm, no harm I Vow to gad Sir I only
come to pare away the durt my Neighbours have cast at my
Door Sure my Father begot me in an Alarme, for I
have fear enough to put a whole Town into Confusion.





My Husband just in the nick what ill Luck
was this.






That Perjur'd Villain here? how I loath the sight
of him.





do you tamely stand, and let that Fellow rob
you of your Honour?



Troth Mrs. Theo. I cannot help it, for to say truth,
I am a very Gyant in thought, but a Dwarfe in action; I
understand the Theory of fighting, but the thoughts of blood
and wounds have kept me from the practick part, or by this
time I had pepper'd him.



So poorly-spirited! you deserve no bet∣ter
Fate 


False and Inconstant man, are these th'effects of horrid pro∣testations,
enough, if broak, to damn thy soul.










Madam, in vain you Counterfeit a Passion, a second
time I will not be deceiv'd; thou'rt faithless grown, and
hast betray'd thy Honour to Eternal Infamy Oh Theo∣docia,
Reproach me not with Vows, which you, as I
thought with as spotless Zeal did eccho to but now thy
choyce, thy abject choyce declares thy Honour lost, thy
former Love Hypocrisie.



Good Heav'n! he thinks to palliate his wrongs with
a pretended Crime I shou'd be guilty of art thou grown
so hardned in thy sin, to prosecute it in the face of Heav'n
and all the world, and basely to justifie your injuries to
plighted Love, wou'd brand my Honour with Inconstancy.



to Mrs. Essence. Madam, your Charms do so sur∣prise
my soul, that without the blest enjoyment of your Love,
I shall be the wretchedst breathing as now by Heav'n
I am 





Lard Sir, your Complements are strangely ob∣liging 



Are they so? Very fine y'faith! 





That my Block-head were out of the way now;
well I must, I Vow, that's the short and long on't.




Courtship before my Face I cannot bear desist,
or thy speedy death shall justifie my Passion, and thou sha't
fall a Victim to my tormented soul 



Good kind heart, how Zealous she is in my Cause
still; well she's an excellent Friend, and a pretty Crea∣ture;
and had I been as high-spirited as she, the man had
been knockt o'th'head by this 



Do, take my Life, and glory in the act, and by one
fatal blow, cancel those Vows you made, and which are
lodg'd here in my heart Theodocia, then you may uncon∣troul'd,
possess your worthy choyce.




What a Medly is this? it madds me that I am
so disappointed 




Dont think that this pretended Anger, for I
know not what shall excuse the affront you have done me;
no, no, a Woman's a Woman, and has a Spleen as well as
man, understands points of Honour too; you conceive
me my Husband shou'd be my own but this lewd
Age yet I'le say no more 



I understand her not  (aside.) yet too true I
know that thou art false 





Witness Heav'n, if I am false, you show'd me the
way but to convince you, here take my Life and by my
death I will declare my Innocence.







Innocence! a good jest y'faith when you be∣come
the blot of my Scutcheon, and exalt my Horn above
my Neighbours; this is Innocence, is it but Cudslid I'le
not endure it oh good Sir, I forgive
Offers to strike Cou.
Courtly turns, he
cringes.
you, upon Rep I meant no harm; be
pleas'd to buy any good Gloves or Rib∣bons,
Essences for your Periwig pray walk in Sir Pox
on him 
(aside.


Oh are you come, that's well; there's your
man, do your Office 





Arrested! what means this Riddle?



Riddle Sir? you are like to unfold it as you have
my Wifes Riddle, Pox on your Learning for your pains 




What does my Sot design by this? I'le observe,
he's such an impertinent Ass, that I am asham'd to own him,
for fear this Gallant shou'd have the worse opinion of me for
his sake, and disappoint my Expectations 




Rascals, at whose Suit am I Arrested? and for
what?



Come, come Sir, I can handle and talk to you too,
now you are in the hands of Justice, as they say; you are Ar∣rested
at my Suit Sir 



At yours Villain, Slave, yours?



Even so Sir, at mine and my Wifes injuries, great
injuries you have done me, Rep must be satisfied.



What wrongs have I done thee? hadst thou af∣fronted
me, thou art a thing wou'd more deserve my pitty
than revenge and for thy Wife 



Dishonouring her, is I suppose a trivial thing, but
now you'le find the due reward for Treachery.



Ay, ay, he shall find to his cost, for I can prove
three thousand pounds worth of Assault and Battery Sir, you
have committed on my Wife.



I injure her! Villain, thou Lyest 




I swear, and so he does, for he has not done me
reason yet, as they say; but if he had, it wou'd have been no
Trespass, for I Vow he shou'd have had free ingress, egress,
and regress to do what he pleas'd had you not come as you
did 




Cruel Fair, wherein have I done any thing might
merrit this ill Usage.
(to Theo.
I injure thee! by all that's good, it is as false as thou art to
thy former Vows, oh Theodocia 



Hy day, I talk of my Wife, and he addresses
himself to Mrs. Theo 



Were not thy perjuries sufficient 



Leave fiddle faddle Sir, and answer to the point 
did you never lye with my Wife, ha? how say you, ha?



I never had so foul a thought towards Theodocia 



Look you there agen now tell not me of what
you thought of Mr. Theo. but of my Wife.



Of Theodocia your Wife, I was talking of.



Theodocia my Wife? ha, ha, he; sure the man is
madd.



Is not this Lady your Wife?



A Lady might have been my Wife, if I had been
kind, but that time is past.



I am amaz'd! then the Picture I saw in your hand,
you had from this Woman?



Ev'n so Sir this Whirly-gigg is my Spouse.




He tells you true Sir, and it is as true that I am
that Fellow's Wife, a base Rascal as he is to suspect my
Virtue.



Virtue! Au Lord! and have been Courted by a
Batchellour-spark of the Town! that is the common pre∣tence
of all the Whores, tho they have layen with half the
Town 




Sirrah, you think by accusing me, to excuse
your own base actions; but I'le not bear it, marry won't I;
I brought a good Portion, and will be respected and humour'd,
marry will I.



Yes, you shall be respected, but with a Cud∣gel 
if you go on Cuckolding me, I'le tell you but so.



What an unexpected change is here?



How have I been wandring in a Labyrinth of Errors
since I came to Town, and Theodocia's injur'd Virtue strikes
such a terror through my heart, that I am all Confusion 
Madam, can you pardon one who basely has suspected Virtue
and Innocence some small excuse I have, though not
  57
enough to justifie my wrongs to your fair self; for meeting
this Fellow with my Picture which I had given you at my go∣ing
out of Town, and he affirming he had it from his Wife,
and it being reported in the Country that you were Marryed,
made me conclude this was your Husband, which made me
act deeds I am now asham'd of 



Blest mistake! since it has try'd and prov'd your
generous Constancy, and I should rather ask your pardon
for having been the Original of your past troubles, tho not
wilfully; for Fainting last night at the door, and having
your Picture in my hand, I dropt it; but when I came to
my self, in vain I lookt, for I cou'd not find it.




At that very time I saw you in my Husbands
Arms; and suspecting him for Lewdness, I came with a
design to surprize ye together, but ye were too quick, and
there I found the Picture.



Au Lord, what will become of me now? the bur∣den
of all will light on my Shoulders.

Yes, yes Sir, 'tis too true what the Woman says and
here is the Picture.




Woman, you Clownish What-de-lack? no
Woman of your making 



Say you so, then it wou'd have been no news if
you had Cornuted me and I fear the mistake has gone
too far for my Rep, pray Sir speak comfort to a Jealous
mind; did you not revenge the affront I offer'd you, upon
my Wife? the truth good Sir, and I heartily forgive
you, for I was justly serv'd for being such a Coxcomb to con∣clude
what I had not thoroughly examined.



Friend, rest satisfied, I have neither injur'd you or
your Wife, but your Jealousie was enough to have made her
extravagant; therefore have a care how you provoke a Wo∣man
hereafter.




Ay Tommy, as this Gentleman says, take heed
how you stir up my Granam Eves curiosity in me any more 
if you do, I shall be for Forbidden fruit but I forgive you
this time, as you shou'd me, and cease to be Jealous, or I
shall be sollicitous for you know what Madam, I hope
you'le pardon my late miscarriage, I Swear I meant no harm,
not I, I Vow.



Sir, upon Rep I am oblig'd to you, and now 
my dear, let us embrace and sign peace me thinks this
looks like our Wedding-day if hereafter I break this
League of Amity, I give thee free liberty of Conscience.




Which I shall take, but till then Tommy, give
me no cause, and I will be yours, and only yours, till death,
Dorothy Essence.



Well said Chuck Enter a Boy, whispers T. Ess,
Sir your Servant; Mrs. Theo. your Slave: Customers are
come whom I must wait on Mrs. Theo. use my Shop, and
pray do you too Sir; upon Rep, I'le sell cheaper to you two,
than to any I know, for being the instruments of Reconci∣liation
between my Dolly and I.
(Exit.





Dear Friend, what news hast thou learnt in my
absence? does my Father cruelly persist in his design to
make me Loveall's Bride.



Madam he does but what's the meaning of this?
Mr. Courtly here? and reconcil'd? by what strange accident
were ye made Friends.



Our Stars only try'd our passions by some unlucky in∣fluences 
but Madam, if you please, we may frustrate
your Father's power if you will vouchsafe to make me happy
with your fair self.



The Proposal's good, embrace it Madam, and put
it instantly in execution; for shou'd either your Father or Mo∣ther
find you, you'd be in a desperate condition.




Mrs. Theo. if I can serve you, command me,
and Sir, you too may add yours to hers, and you shall see
how chearfully I will obey.



I am oblig'd to you Mrs. Essence, and Friend,
your proposal corresponds with my wishes, yet a Father's
anger, which will be enflam'd too by a disappointed Step-Mother,
may produce a fatal consequence to all my hopes.



Indeed your Mother is impatient for your coming
home, and I have promis'd to bring you; but to prevent all
danger, I have contriv'd a way to disappoint your Mother,
and Mrs. Essence may be Serviceable.




Which I willingly wou'd be, if it be an Intreigue;
for I love Intreigues with my heart, and if you please to walk
  59
into my house, we'l discourse further of it pray walk in
Madam Sir, I beseech you 



Ah Madam, this happy hour will make full satisfacti∣on
for our past misfortunes.








Now for the rifling of Loves charming spoyles 
Laurence, have you the Licence ready?



Yes, yes Sir, here is the warrant of Condemnation 
and the Writings from your Lawyer; he Swears he has tyed
you neck and heels look you Sir dear Parchment, to
the tune of Twenty Guynnies.






Mr. Loveall, your Servant; my Master is in
great expectation of you Sir, pray make hast to him, for he
is so humoursome, that should you be absent any longer, it
may endanger you the losing of my Daughter, and me the
Honour of having so worthy a person for my Son-in-Law 
which I'le prevent, if possible 




I am oblig'd to you Madam, and am glad to see your
health so soon restor'd.




Indeed Sir for the present I was Ill, but having
taken the Air, and lying out one Night from this close
Town 



In the Arms of your kind Friend Stanly. 





My health return'd, and I was loath to put my
Master to charges, which made me put off my intended
Journey pray walk in Sir 



your Servant Madam 


Love and Lau. goes
into the House.
Enter Luce with Mrs. Essence Maskt, with Theo. Cloaths on.



Here's Luce with Theodocia, 'twas well I shifted
him off before they came 



thy diligence shall be rewarded; Daughter, no words,
but along with me 
Now Stanly, I'le perform my promise 





So, this was a luckey Conveyance now to pre∣pare
for my own affairs 


Loveall, at last I've caught thee in my Net,
In vain you'le strive, for you're past retreat.







Old Mon. after him Loveall, Laurence.



Mr. Loveall! in good time Sir, I'le stand to't, I
have a quarrel with you; what, stay till the Canonical hour
be past? Absurd, absurd, I begin to suspect you have no
Love for my Daughter; if you had, you wou'd have made
more hast 



Not I Love fair Theodocia?




As I say, not Love her, or you wou'd have been
here sooner; but now Sir I am resolv'd she shall not be Mar∣ryed
till to morrow; for my opinion is, that all Marriages after
the Canonical hour are Unlawful; and consequently the Wo∣men
are but a kind of Licens'd Whores, which my Daughter
shan't be, if I may have my will; I will not bate an Ace of
the Canonical hour Sir, I am a Church of England man Sir,
I'le stand to't I am.



But under favour Sir, our Church respects not time,
but administration; if it be by One in Orders, and according
to the Ceremony of the Church, let it be at any time, 'tis
good but Sir, for fear some scrupulous man shou'd refuse,
what think you of taking a Coach to Pancras-Church, there
it will be done effectually, for that is a place of Priviledge
and Liberty to Marry without Lincenses, and at any time 




A place of Priviledge and Liberty? a place of
Debauchery, I•le stand to't what an age is this! that our
Mother-Church shou'd have Loop-holes as well as the Laws!
for those places of Liberty, as you stile 'em, serve only to De∣bauch
our Children from their obedience; for when they
have no mind to Marry the person of their Parents approba∣tion,
they run away with some indigent smooth-tongu'd Fel∣low
to your place of Liberty (as you call it) and Marry him
for Love forsooth, and commonly take their first tast of man
in one of the Bawdy-houses, near that Church, and I'le stand
  61
to't; I believe the Beds infect 'em, and make 'em turn
Whores, and Cuckold their Husbands, as most do 



Must then my happiness be deferr'd till to mor∣row
Sir?




Ay, indeed must it Sir, the rather too, because I
have not perus'd the Deeds of settlement yet.



Here they are Sir, and the License too.




Very good, very good, let me see 'em.

(Lov. gives Old M. the Writings, he peruses 'em.
Enter Mrs. Mon. Betty.



I have perform'd my promise, your Daughter
is within.




Oh Brother I am oblig•d to you 
now Mr. Loveall, you have nothing to do, but to
prepare to be Marry'd to morrow pray know
this Gentleman, 'tis my Wifes Brother, a notable
Wagg, I'le stand to 't and he disguis'd himself on purpose
in Petty-coats, to put a trick upon my Daughter, and cou∣sen
her into obedience come, come, I know you are sur∣pris'd,
and think it is my Wife, he is so like her em∣brace
I say, embrace him, I'le stand to 't, you shall 



By Heaven his very Wife▪ for I know no Brothe• that
she has however, since she has brought Theodocia home,
I'le favour her design, but I cannot imagine what will be the
end of it Sir, I must acknowledge the Obligation you
have done me, in bringing fair Theodocia to be my
Bride 






But now I have her in my power Old Sir, I am
resolv'd not to surrender her till I am assur'd of her Portion.




Thou art the notablest Lad I e're met with, but
to satisfie you, I engage before ye all, to pay down on my
Daughters Wedding day the Sum of Six Thousand Pounds;
besides, it may be, a settlement of my whole Estate upon her
and her Heirs for ever.




Done like a Father of so deserving a Daughter.



And I hope you'l say I do deserve your Daughter,
when you shall see with what obliging kindness I shall use
her and my Uncle too has made a Settlement of his whole
Estate upon me.




And you are resolv'd to give this Portion?




As I say, I'le stand to't 




Stanly, bring forth your Bride 


See Sir, as to my own particular, I have kept my word; but
my Friend here, has both won & Marry'd your Daughter, and
now I hope the Portion will be ready 



How! my Daughter Marry'd to that Hector?
Brother 




Mistake not Sir, now my business is done, I re∣sign
that Title, and re-assume that of a dutiful Wife; and to
say true, I never had a Brother.




Ha, is this true? was it you then that wore the
Breeches, and made me a Cuckold in my own House? y'are
a Harlot, I'le stand to't, and I'le take a course with you, for
I'le be Divorst if money and Law can do't; but first I'le can∣cel
the Settlement I made on thee, of my Estate for Life,
but it was with power of Revocation; and next, I'le turn
that graceless wretch out of doors 'tis well you have the
modesty to hide that shameless Face 









What will become of thee Laurence? for since thy
Master has mist of the Mistress, thou art in danger of losing
the Maid 





Fret on Sir, yet 'twill not do, for your promise
is good, the Portion must be paid, and Divorse when you
will, the Prerogative-Court will give me Alimony, and the
Chancery Separation money, enough to maintain a Gallant.




An absurd impudent Strumpet, I'le stand to't 
but I am well enough serv'd for Marrying when I was past the
use of Woman 



Was this the Assignation you made your Gallant,
Madam? 




The very same Sir 



Even so will; for when I came, her kindness turn'd
to this, and forc'd this Lady into my Armes to Marry, which
you may be assur'd I did very unwillingly; but as you say 
Persecution is come abroad, and we must suffer patiently 



Villain, thou never shalt enjoy her; thus I'le force a
passage to thy soul, and cancel all those Vows y'ave newly
made to this Lady 




Now I have possession Sir, I shall not easily resign
my Interest.





Hold, hold, good Gentle-men, Murder not one
another for me 








Nay, then take heart of grace good Laurence, for
there's hope agen; what Mrs. Essence!




The Milliner's Wife in Theodocia's Cloaths 
then I must rest content, since I am out-witted




Curs'd Stars, am I Cousen'd then?




Huswife, what have ye done with my Daughter?
you have her Cloaths 




Be not angry Mr. Monylove, she's gone about
a certain Intreigue, and to carry it on, she desired my
assistance: Now I, loving harmless witty Intreigues from my
heart, readily comply'd, and I was thus disguis'd, and
brought by Mrs. Luce to be Marry'd to a person in Mrs.
Thodocia's name; and I Vow, me-thinks 'tis a very plea∣sant
Intriegue.



A Devil on your pleasant Intreigue, I am like to
lose a fair Fortune by it; nothing Vexes me now, but that
I did not perfect the Marriage, that in revenge, when the
Cheat shou'd be discovered, I might have Hang'd thee for
having two Husbands 




I Vow Sir, I admir'd at your forbearance, & am
glad you did not urge it on me, for I fear I shou'd have
yielded, you Embrac'd me so passionately, and Kiss'd me so
pleasantly!



There's some hopes left, since she has mist of her
design 

(pointing to Mrs. Mon.

Joy, joy to you Stanly, you are the happy man to have a For∣tune
forc'd into your arms 







Well, I am Jealous agen, what a Devil shou'd my
Wife do with Courtly now? something more is in it than I
can at present apprehend and what their business is here,
for my blood I cannot guess 





What, what do I see, Mr. Courtly and my Daugh∣ter
together?



Who desire your Blessing, which is only wanting to
compleat and crown our Joys 



Then she's beyond all hopes, e're to be re∣triev'd 





Baggage, out of my sight 



Call my Wife names? that must not be Neigh∣bour
forbear Ill-language, or look you, de'fee, the Law shall
gagg you what tho she be somewhat faulty, yet my Wife's
my own Sir, and no one shall Correct her but my self 
Ha, Mrs. Theo. in my Dolls Pettycoats? 




What ayles the Fellow? shall not I Correct my
own Daughter? if you want your Wife Sir, there she is,
Marry'd to one of the Town-Hectors, I'le stand to't 



Marry'd! Marry'd! oh insatiable! what, two Hus∣bands!
is this true? confess and be hang'd, for so thou shalt,
if it be prov'd 




In vain are all excuses; go, go, I'le never own
you more, and your disobedience will justifie my intention,
to give my Estate to Mr. Loveall in satisfaction for the affront
you have done him.



First hear what I can say in Vindication of her actions 
she cou'd not otherwise have done in Honour, her Vows by
your command, being giv'n to her now Husband Mr.
Courtly but grant she had been free, yet Loveall cou'd not
have Marry'd without the forfeit of his Honour; to prove
the truth of which, read there the Accusation of his in∣tended
Perjury 

(delivers a paper to Old M.



Ha! this is the Widdow too true, 'tis she, curse
on her ill-tim'd presence had I been sure of Theodocia, I'de
have out-fac'd, nay, and out-ly'd the Devil before I'de
have resign'd that beauteous Treasure but now it is
too late 




Do you not know me Sir? view me well not yet
know me? to convince you, I am the person you have en∣deavour'd
basely to abuse see
here that Ladys Picture inclos'd
Shows a Picture and
a Letter to Lov.
in your Uncles Letter, which by Providence you left hehind
you at my house now did I basely seek Revenge, thy Life
is forfeited but Love in me's more powerful therefore
to salve my Honour, you must Marry me if not 



I am past evading it, nor indeed wou'd I, since I
have lost Theodocia, She's Rich and Handsome Faith
Madam I must plead guilty, I have been a very Villain, 
but then consider Widdow, 'twas Love, all powerful Love
of your sweet Self made me act so extravagantly; but if now
thou prov'st kind-hearted and forgiv'st me, I'le proclaim thy
mercy to the world, and Seal it in the next Church we come
to 




What's here? a Contract of Marriage between
William Lovett and Theodocia Landwell, of Stamford, Wid∣dow;
what is this to Mr. Loveall, Luce?



Sir, I confess it my hand, and intended for my name,
but that my Uncle had provided your Daughter for my
Wife but since that does not succeed, I am resolv'd to ex∣ecute
what I then design'd only as a Cheat on this Ladys Vir∣tue;
Widdow, your pardon; Widdow, your pardon.




How! is Luce a Widdow?



Yes Sir, this is the Widdow who formerly I told
you relieve'd me and my Man, when we were Rob'd and
Stript.




What a turn is this! a Rich Widdow my The's
Maid? a good jest I'le stand to't.



Thus disguis'd, I gain'd admittance into this Lady's
Service, to prevent my Disgrace, and her Ruin, as it might
have prov'd; for, by my contrivance, both yours and
your Daughters Honour is unsully'd, seeing she has perform'd
her Vows to Mr. Courtly 



The Widdow! what Ill-luck was it that I did not
get into my Masters Saddle.





Y'are a Witty pretty, Pretty witty Widdow, I'le
stand to't Mr. Loveall 'twas absurd, absurd in you to do
so ill an action however I'le stand your Friend to your
Uncle, and as I say, Marry her, and I'le justifie it 
Mr. Courtly, take my Daughter, and bless ye together, and
I hope you'le pardon my intention of Cousening you; I am
Old Sir, 'twas for mony, a greater Estate, a greater E∣state;
and you know we Old men are as amorous on mo∣ny
as you young Gallants on fair Maids; I'le stand to't, I am
Sir, as I say I am.



My Obedience Sir, for the future, shall shew my For∣giveness
of your intended wrong, since I have full possession
of my Theodocia.




Pshaw, pshaw Sir, your reasoning is vain, do
not I know the tricks of the Fashionable
Wives, they make nothing of marrying their Gallants now
a days, but I'le not allow it; you have m•rry'd her Sir, and
shall keep her Sir, for I'le have nothing more to say to her;
a fair riddance of her say I, and if she goes on marrying at
this rate, the Town will be but one great forked head of her
own making, upon Rep.



Essence, you must pardon your Wife, for what she
did was at our request, and innocently done.



Pardon her? not I, therefore take her to you
Sir, or I'le have her hangd Sir, and then I'le have the
Five hundred pound Lass, whom I was inform'd had but
three.



What she did, was at my desire Mr. Essence 



To gain time for our marriage, and to prevent
Mrs. Monyloves discovering us before our Joys were com∣pleat.



A Pox upon't, it was too true; you may take
your Jessamine butter-pot home, for any use I have made
of her.




I'le stand to't Neighbour Essence, she's a witty
discreet Woman, and it will be absurd if you do not par∣don
her.




'Twas only a harmless Intreigue, such as my
Neighbour Tattle and I us'd when we went Maskt to the
Galleries at the Play-houses, to hear the fine Gentle-men
talk None-sence, and Swear, to be thought Witts 
and this Gentle-man (if I am not deceiv'd) us'd to be one
of 'em.



Say you so? then I'me satisfi'd, since Rep is whole
agen but Doll, provoke me no more to Jealousie; and
doest hear, by way of prevention, go no more to the
Play-Houses maskt; for there is a scurvey Proverb, and
you may be caught at last Your Pitcher may be crackt
with often use yet I will not bar you of your pleasure,
  67
but be contented to go the seldomer, and I'le set you in
a Box, as well as our Neighbours Wives; for the Pit and
Galleries are become down-right Conventicles of Baw∣dery;
one cannot hear a Play in 'em, for the Chattering
of the fluttering Blades to a Company of Pockey-fac'd
Creatures in Vizards, upon Rep but Doll 


Use freedom with discretion, and you'le see

Tom Essence understands Civility.


