







2 THANKS to all-bounteous fate, whose index hand
Hath pointed out STRAPADA for my friend!

  2The moments sure were white and lucky all,3

When by the sleeve informing instinct pluck'd
BUCKRAMO'S soul, and cried, "BUCKRAMO, list!
"BUCKRAMO, take STRAPADA to thy heart  
Happy BUCKRAMO! Thrice more happy far

4 Than whisker'd Turk, who on Elysian plains
Satiates his fancy with immortal nymphs;
Or half-starv'd 'prentice; whose supplying purse
Can gratify, when tiresome shop is shut,

5 With tripe, or sausages, his craving maw  

6 But oh, STRAPADA! oh! my friend, amid
This flow of joy, BUCKRAMO'S soul is pierc'd,
As with a paring knife, or bodkin sharp.



O ye immortal powers! that guard the just,7

And govern all contingences below;
With careful watch beset BUCKRAMO'S soul,
And keep, for ever keep it free from woe!
What is it that torments STRAPADA'S friend?

8 Hath Put, or Cribbige, with insatiate sweep,
Of all thy coin despoil'd thee, left thee bare
And pennyless? or salamander nymph,
Inhabitant of DRURY, from thy fob,
With faithless palm, decoy'd thy gutless watch?
Or infidel retailer of INTIRE9

Denied a morning draught of purl on tick?
Say why is this? speak, speak, I charge thee speak.10




Yes I will speak; will to STRAPADA tell
The latent secrets of my inmost soul  

  4Know then   but by the sacred ties of friendship;11

By all the spangled train of glitt'ring stars;
By my grim father's shade, who pendent died12

On gallow tree, I charge thee keep it lock'd
From mortal cognisance, from human ear,
An alien   yes, STRAPADA   wouldst thou think it?
I am   yes, by the Gods, I am in love.



Ye heavenly powers, in love! astonishment
On my corporeal faculties hath made
Sudden arrest   unsay it, and I'm happy  
Thy head, with melancholly shake, confirms
The doleful truth   ah! what a falling off13

Is here   in love! O lost, undone BUCKRAMO!
But say; what witching nymph with magic glance
Hath stung BUCKRAMO'S soul?



What if it were
TRULLETTA   wouldst thou disapprove the choice?




14 By JOVE'S imperial bird, not I, not I.

15 For should the Wandring Jew, with restless search,

  5Rumage this ball of earth from east to west,
From south to north, thro' all its different climes,
He could not find a fairer, lovelier she.

16 No splendent pewter from the scourer's hand
Comes half so bright   shea's beauty might en∣snare17

A miser's soul, and make him leave his bags
At random, to be scuffled for by th' Mob.
So radiant is her form, so more than mortal,
That if perfection were with her compar'd,





Hold thy lavish tongue,
Or jealousy will mad my raging soul.



Far as futurity's untravel'd waste19

Lies open to conjecture's dubious ken,
It seems to me thou wilt not, canst not win
The peerless virgin, but by blood and broil:
For MADRIGAL, a Grub-street sonetteer,
Her senses fascinates with magic rhyme.
The bard incessant tunes the sapphic lyre,
And paints her in his song of mien divine.
Well-pleas'd she hearkens to the praiseful strain,
As venal statesmen to the chink of gold;
And deems herself the goddess he pourtrays.



Too well, alas! alas! too well I know
Her fond affection for the starvling bard  
Bard did I say? a ballad-monger rather!
A wilful murderer of sense in rhyme  
Now, by the powers! his ditties scarce outvie
The pasted ornaments of cobler's stalls!  
Do we not know that GARRICK hath refus'd20

The horrid fustian he so vainly stiles
A tragedy, at which the caitiff swears
That GARRICK is a dolt, a goose, a fool?



True, my brave friend: would she, like GARRICK too,
Refuse his suit  



She must; she shall, STRAPADA.
By hell! in spite of all her wayward pride,
I'll have her still   spite of her self, I'll have her:21

Tho' fate, and all the world should join t'oppose me:

22 Or, by the gods, I'll lay a scene of blood
Shall make her dwelling horrible to nature!  
I'll do't!   hark you, my friend!   this very night!
I'll put her to the trial   should the maid
With uncomplying stubbornness refuse,

23 On horror's head horrors accumulate
Shall wait her mansion   see this trusty bodkin,
And guess the rest.



What means my noble friend?



Blood! blood! STRAPADA, blood!   by th' powers of hell,

25 I will be drunk with vengeance! princely drunk
With blood's rich nectar   I will murder all,
That suck-in vital air beneath her roof!
Nay not a louse shall 'scape to tell the tydings.



How! not a louse escape! a single louse!

26 To what extremes extreme revenge impells thee?
What! turn a murderer ten thousand fold,
To glut thy vengeance on the marbled maid!

  827 Thy inclination to shed blood rides post.
Art thou so lost to virtue, to revenge
Thy slighted vows on a poor peaceful tribe;
A harmless people, that have wittingly
Ne'er done thee wrong?   Now, by my awl I swear,
Such cruelty ensanguin'd speaks a mind
Of temp'rament infernal   fare thee well!
I'll never hold communion with thee more:
But from the day-book of my dearest friendship
I'll cross thee out   I love thee yet, BUCKRAMO,28

But, never more be intimate of mine.







Like the faithless boy,29

Who hath by secret felony despoil'd
The feather'd parents of their unfledg'd brood,
To which his partner had an equal claim,
Thus, thus, I ring thee off.

joining his little finger to BUCKRAMO'S.



O stay! my friend,

30 Or thou wilt run me into madness   nay,
By all the shades of my great ancestry;
By all thy virtuous friendship to SCOURELLA,
The dame, who give me birth, my more than mother,31


  9Thou shalt not leave me thus!



Let go my arm;

32 Or, on my soal, this awl shall be thy end.



But, hear me, noble youth  




Hath reach'd the skies, and is recorded there
In characters indelible   forgo
Thy hold! nor vainly hope to shake my purpose.



But think upon our friendship  




What fellowship can virtue have with murder?
Still dost thou hold me!   think on what I've sworn;
Nor dare provoke th'impending blow   unhand me!
Or, by the gods!   nay, if thou'rt obstinate,
Take this, and this.
wounds him with his awl.






I'm hurt   but not to death:

33 Yet past all surgery   alas! I've lost
The dear companion of my early youth;
Life's now not worth a quid   O, woe is me!34

T'have seen what I have seen, seeing what I see!





TRULLETTA mournful on a couch; SCULLIONA and SCOURELLA attending: BUTTONELLI playing on a Jew's Harp, THIMBLETONO on a Strum.



35 SEE where she weeps!   lost even to mu∣sick's power  
SCOURELLA! try   strain every varied note:
First, in low sympathy of sorrow's softness
Sooth her desponding soul   then start at once
To swells of joy, and storm attention's ear.





AIR 1. Accompanied by the Jews harp.

36 Vain hoper, begone   stay, despair:
Despair, stay   vain hoper, go, go.
For sorrow no accents should hear,
But those of lamenting and woe.
Believing, farewel   the sure road
Is death all deceiving to shun;
Till plac'd in our clay-cold abode,
Joy flies man's pursuit like a nun.
  11
AIR 2. Accompanied by the Strum.
Away with your tears, where enjoyment should flow;
Bid defiance to pain   let her go, let her go:
Do the gods love complainers? No, no.
Away with your tears, from your eyes, have them bang'd:
Bid defiance to pain, let her go and be hang'd;
Let her go, let her go, let her go, let her go,
Let her go, and be hang'd, let her go, let her go:
Do the gods love complainers? No, no.



Away   she rises   angels, that have tun'd,
Reward the vocal magic of thy pipe.







When next thy too-officious kindness tries
Th' harmonious charm of jew's harp, strum, or voice,
Let me have musick solemn all and slow,
Sad-suited to my thoughts   no tydings yet
From my dear father, or my dearer bard?



Our emissary yet hath hardly reach'd
The street Grubaean,37 residence of bards.



Ah me! the lazy minutes seem to halt38






39 Thus they ever seem to grief.







Queen of the verseful kingdom's lord: his heart's40

High empress, hail!   this tender greeting sends
Thy bard enamour'd   tho' his bosom feels
Th' incessant flame of love's devouring fire,
Tho' much he wishes to behold thy beauties,

41 As much, I think, as a fond lover can,
And bask him in the sunshine of those eyes;42

Yet necessary prudence stays his visit,
Till night hath spread her sable mantle o'er
The azure hemisphere   this afternoon  

43 O horrible to tell! most horrible!  
Nine of the verseful train   by all the gods,
Not less than nine   the tuneful sister's number  
Unwary, unintent, uncircumspect,
Or deeply wrapt in meditation, fell
In legal ambush, and were vilely dragg'd
To spunging dome by slaves, that know no mercy.



Ice at my conscious heart were warm com∣par'd44


  13With what thou chill'st my soul with!   hapless nine!

45 My tear-touch'd eye, in sympathetic woe,
Wails their disaster.



More I would unfold
Of misery poetic; but my stay
Admits no farther parle   illumin'd maid,
Adieu.
Exit.



O iron-hearted law! what cause
Have bards to curse thy rigour   SCULLIONA,
Thy arm   to my sad chamber guide my steps  
Griess rush on griefs, on passions passions roll,
And in the rapid torrent whelm my soul.











THUS far into the bowels of this street1

We've march'd without impediment   O night!2

Alternate regent of the lapsing hours,
Sister of chaos, e'er the upstart sun
And world had being, thou, with sable sway,
Didst rule the uncreated mass of things.3


  14What golden 'vantage from thine eyeless reign
To mortals flow! beneath thy friendly veil
The meagre bard oft 'scapes the prying ken
Of lurking catchpole, and eludes the touch4

Unhallow'd. City prigs, of sober seeming,
Quaff their nocturnal beverige, and reel
Unnotic'd home. The painted courtezan,
Who with her quartern, and the liquid food
Of Indian shrub, repels the keen attacks
Of raging hunger, all the live long day,
Now in full blazon, with alluring leer,
Patroles the slippery streets   the   but that lovely vision TRULLETTA appears at the window.


Forbids all further simile   she beckons  
He comes, TRULLETTA: most refulgent maid,
Thy MADRIGAL   with hasty strides he comes  

5 Now, would the sun, in his meridian glare,
Suffer eclipse from her more radiant eyes.







O! Mr. MADRIGAL, I'm glad you're come.6




Thanks, gentle SCULLIONA   for this kind∣ness,
And all thy other curtesies, e'er long
I will fulfil my promise   thy bright charms
Shall be the subject of my tuneful song.
For thee I'll strain each faculty of thought,

7 Till my brain burst with thinking   every tongue
Shall chaunt the beauteous SCULLIONA'S name.
In verse immortal I'll record thy charms;
And when dear8Ally Crocar is forgot,
Thou shalt be hum'd, or warbled thro' each street,
From IIyde Park Corner to Limehousian Hole9.




10 That will be pure!   but come; TRUL∣LETTA waits.









My fair TRULLETTA! embracing.



Oh! my MADRIGAL! embracing.



Thou nature's whole perfection in one piece!11

I'll hold thee thus, till we incorporate,

12 And make between us an hermaphrodite.
So closely will I clasp thee in my arms,
That the big wedge, which cleaves the knotted oak,
Could hardly rend me from thy lov'd embrace  
Oh! my TRULLETTA, let me press thy lips,
My eager, my devouring lips to thine,

13 And eat thee with my hungry kisses   Now
Ye envying deities Olympian!


Aquatic! and Infernal! see, behold!

14 Look down, look up   confess   but speak the truth  15

Say, would you not ungod yourselves, to be
The happier MADRIGAL? to clasp her thus?
Thus, thus to strain her to your panting bosoms?
To suck th' Ambrosia of her Hybla lips?
To banquet on her eyes? to be, like me,

  1716 So more than most superlatively blest.








Sorrow's sad offspring, speaks thy tender soul

17 Lab'ring with woe   thy brilliant eyes appear
Studded with pearly drops   oh! let me kiss them off,
These richer jewels, than embowell'd lie
In pregnant India's gem-prolific womb  18

Why all this grief?   and is it thus we meet?  
Yes, I must chide; perforce, must chide thee, fair one:

19 For, oh! our meeting is not like the former;
When every look, when all our talk was love  20

Yes, changeful beauty! once there was a time,
When my TRULLETTA rush'd into my arms,
Swift as the iron messengers of death,
Forc'd from the mortal engines, whose wide throats21

Th'immortal JOVE'S dread clamours counterfeit.



Well might'st thou think my heart en∣crusted o'er
With marble; or insensible, as rocks,
Should my unfilial niggard eyes refuse
To sympathize my father's threaten'd ruin.
Thou know'st the angry sentence of the law
Hangs heavy o'er him, like a gather'd cloud;
And, e'er to-morrow's journeying sun hath made
His lucid progress to his noon-day summit,

  18His thread of life, like an unheeded remnant,
Must by the law's fell shears be cut in twain  
Ye gods! what havock does the22 halter make
Among your works!




Even with a more, far more than filial woe,
I mourn the good old CABBAGINO'S danger:
For, should the fatal noose   the stinging thought
Alas! hath bred ten thousand scorpions here,
And given my very soul a fit of th' gripes:23

That curs•d mercer for a web of velvet  
Web, did I say? by all the gods a remnant!
A paultry remnant! scarce a yard! to bring
Thy venerable father to the tree;
'Tis such infernal cruelty, and ire,

24 As circle-bearded Israelites would scorn  
Yes; he shall feel the terrors of my rage  
The slave shall feel   I'll tear him all to pieces.
By hell's grim king I will   in black and white  
I'll have a hundred hawkers bellow out,

  19Before his doors, the venom of my page,
In roar most dreadfully vociferous  
Oh! how I'll gall him   may this carcase rot25

A loathsome banquet to the fowls of heaven,
If e'er my breast admit a thought to bound,
A single thought, the progress of my rage.



May the revengeful bloodhound never feel
A moment's respite from his gouty pangs:
And all the racking pains, that flesh is heir to,26


27 May he accumulated underbear!
Eternal moths and mildews haunt his shop!
When, o'er his pipe, th' exhilerating juice

28 Of punch, that compound manifold, he sips,
May my dear father's grinning spectre rise,
And snatch th' uplifted nipperkin away
From his untasting lips! when from his glass29

Of life th'out-hast'ning sands are shook, may fiends

  20Hurry the wretch into a hell, more hot
Ten thousandfold than elemental fire:
Then snatch, half-roasted, snatch him to a mount
In icy Zembla's keen-congealing clime:
There let him freeze, ye gods! unpitied freeze, kneels

With shiv'ring limbs, blue nose, and chatt'ring teeth,
A spectacle of horror!



Amen to that, sweet pow'rs!   thy filial prayer
Is register'd above; and he is doom'd
To suffer all thy imprecated curse  
But come, my dearest; dry this crystal sluice!
Thou hast been tender over much, and mourn'd,31

Even too profusely mourn'd, thy father's danger  
Madam, 'tis prudent, I confess it is;32

But is it loving, as true lovers ought,
To be so very prudent in our loves?
What interruption this?33





MADRIGAL, TRULLETTA, SCULLIONA, SCOU∣RELLA.
















A secret to disclose, that would awake you,34

Were you already dead.   My dearest master  



Alas! that I should ever live to tell it!  35




The best of masters, and the best of friends 



The sweetest, kindest, gentlest CABBAGINO 



Is now  O savage, marble-hearted fate!  



Is now   I cannot tell it for my tears  








O ye immortal gods!37




Despairing of reprieve (the turnkey thus
Reports) and nobly scorning to be dragg'd
A publick spectacle up Holborn Hill,

By plenteous draughts of Juniperian juice,
Death-dealing liquid, his undaunted soul,
Freed from corporeal limbo.
















The deed was worthy of a Roman soul:39

And sad necessity makes all things just.40




Oh! 'tis too much; and life and I are lost.41faints.




Alas! she faints: she dies:   SCOURELLA, haste;
Swift as a witch upon a broomstick fly;
Nay, swifter than the lightning's swiftest speed,
And bring a son of Galen to her aid  42

The dedication of my tragic piece
To him, who saves her   draw thy smelling phial,
And try the odoriferous charm to lure
Her fleeting spirit back   alas! she's gone!
Gone! irrecoverably gone   she stiffens
A monument of grief   her eyes have lost
Their fire   ah! where is that Promethean heat,43

That can their light relumine?   wake, my fair!
Shake off that ghastly ravisher, grim death;
Whose ruffian arms detain thee in his clasp,
Or thy bard rushes on his point to join thee  44

She hears   the fair one hears my well-known voice  
She breathes   she wakes   returning colour 'gins
T'illume her reddening cheek.









This heart-felt woe   to her apartment lead  
I'll hence, and for th' interment of thy sire

  23Make preparation   lovely nymph! farewel!
'Tis heaven to have thee; and without thee hell.45












A Yearning fondness hangs about me still:1

I'd give the empire of ten thousand worlds2

For privilege to unswear what I have sworn  
His father was my friend, and taught me first,3

With curved awl, to pierce the rugged foal,
And join the horny bristle to the thread.
Such benefits demand no vulgar gratitude  
His mother too   be hush'd, my fluttering soul  4

GOOSINO tells me, he resolves on blood;

  24A rival's blood: yet, which of them must fall
None but th' Olympian gods alone can tell.
Th' event of battle, like a growing foetus,
Lies 'prison'd in futurity's dark womb,
Till midwife time do bring it into birth  
Whoe'er the conqueror, BUCKRAMO dies;
For should he MADRIGAL'S quietus make5

With a bare bodkin, justice acts the second,
And brings the victor to the shameful tree  
It is resolv'd6   I'll watch him to prevent
His rage, and save him from the double danger
Of steel and hempen noose   It shall be so:7

Madness in taylors must not unwatch'd go.







My ears deceive me, or I heard the voice
Of dear STRAPADA once; but, now alas!
No more my friend   'tis he   avenging steel! puts up his bodkin.

Rest here unseen   his lab'ring mind is lock'd
In contemplation's closest cell   I'll try
To rouse him from this trance of thought what, ho!
STRAPADA!



Ha!   BUCKRAMO!   Thou wast once
My trustiest friend: in my heart's core I wore thee;
Ay in my heart of hearts.8







And all ye gods, and goddesses: peruse
The folio of my past and present thoughts!
Peruse it page by page, or in the way
Of modern connoissieurs, videlicet,
Run o'er contents and index   if you find
A wish, unless to have TRULLETTA mine,
Preferr'd to good STRAPADA'S dearest friendship,
Hurl my thrice-thankless spirit vengeful down
Into th' infernal pitchy lake, prepar'd
For negro-soul'd ingratitude.





His mother's in his face   the dear SCOURELLA  
It is too much to bear   spite of my vow

11 I must, I must relent   there is a way
To reinstate thee in my love: be virtuous.
The friends of virtue are STRAPADA'S friends  
Forgo thy black design on MADRIGAL,
And be as dear as ever   what incites thee
To seek his blood?



He robs me of my mistress:
And in return I rob him of his life.
The robber rob, and robbery grows virtue.12




The subtlety of schools may paint this maxim;
The schools, where learned error stalks abroad13

With such gigantic strides, in wisdom's garb;
But truth, and sound philosophy, disclaim
The paultry dawbing   know, blood thirsty youth!
Know, thou death's orator! dread advocate14

For bowelless severity! forgiveness
Is greater, wiser, manlier bravery
Than wild revenge.



Ha! whither would'st thou lead me?



To virtue, to forgiveness   talk no more
Of fell revenge.



Not talk of it, STRAPADA?
I'll talk of it, tho' hell itself should gape15

And bid me hold my peace   not talk of it?
Not of revenge? the attribute of th' gods,16

Who stamp it in our natures to impell
Mankind to noblest darings.




The attribute of devils, stamp'd on man
To draw deluded mortals to destruction.



No more, no more   tempt me no more in vain  17

My soul is wrought to the sublimest rage18





And thou art fix'd
On bloody purpose?



Fix'd as Cambrian mountain
On its own base, or gaming lords on ruin.19




Then all my flattering hopes of thy reclaim
Are lost; and my shock'd soul akes at thee20: yet
Attend my last request   defer thy purpose,
Till the cold earth, in her parental bosom,
Receive thy venerable master's corse.
E'er long the sad procession will begin:
Then do not with unhallow'd broil prophane
The dread solemnity of funeral rites:
But lend thy kind assistance to support
Thy sorrowing mistress thro' the mournful scence.
This thou wilt promise?



By yon silver lamp,21

Which stringless hangs, or hangs by string unseen

  28In azure firmament, I will!










Farewel!   till then farewel!   so hot, my friend?
So very hot?   no matter   let him cool  
He thinks my reason a meer babe, a suckling,
To need the leading-strings of his advice  
But to th' interment   if I should appear
In this unseemly dress, they'll think I come
To laugh and fleer at their solemnity.22

Custom, that great, that venerable tyrant23

On such occasions, asks, requires, demands
A coat   a coat!   alas!   I have no coat.24

Oh insupportable!   oh heavy hour!
Methinks it now should be a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, that the affrighted globe
Should yawn at the alteration of my dress  
Of all superfluous cloth necessity25

Hath stripp'd me. My incarcerated coat
Lies in that infidel confinement, whence26

No captive e'er returns unransom'd   how
To fetch the pris'ner thence puzzles the thought  
Lost in a labyrinth, I wander on

27 Without a clew to guide   O dark estate

  29Of dull mortality! where reptile man,
With all his boasted intuition, is
More blind than reptile mole   GOOSINO'S counsel
Must guide me thro' this maze.




An apartment hung with black.


weeping over a coffin.
 28 Hail venerable ghost!
Hail heart-wept Manes of my murder'd sire!
O earth-wrong'd goodness!   in Newgatian cell,

29 That subterranean sepulchre of peace,
That home of horror, hideous nest of crimes,
Guilt's first sad stage in her dark road to hell,
Whose thick-barr'd, sunless passages for air
Do keep alive the wretch, that longs to die,

30 Was thy majestic eye-beam clos'd in gin;

31 In gin, that bliss, and bane of human life  

  30O could my pious drops recall thy breath,
My sluicing eyes should pour such cataracts32

Of ceaseless tears, as would redeluge earth,
And pickle the huge mass in human brine  

33 O all ye sleeping gods! why did you thus
Nod o'er your charge supine, and suffer one,

  31So sagely form'd, to close his death-shrunk reign,34

By copious swill of gin lethiferous?
Ye should have dash'd the untasted moisture from him  35

But hence this prophanation! 'tis impiety
To question the just gods, since reason's line36

Wants depth to sound th' Olympian will.










  32What would your awful messenger?38





Thy father's spirit, doom'd for many years
To fry in liquid lakes of subtlest fire,
T'attone my manifold, my deadly sins
Of cabbage, and high bills.







My furlo from my prison-house is short:
Brief let me be   I come to warn my child
Against   but hark! th' infernal boatswain calls! A whistle within.

He pipes me hence!   my wasted respite grants
No longer stay   again!   relentless dog!
I come.   but this short prayer   not for my self;
Not for my self, but thee   hear me, all-gracious  






'Tis wanting what should follow   Jove should follow;39

But 'tis torn off   why should that word alone
Be torn from his petition?40   why, indeed?








Hail to you horrors! hail thou house of death!42

And thou, the mournful mistress of these shades! 
But, ha! what means this quivering in thy limbs?
This terror in thy eyes? these ghastly looks?

43 Even such a form, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,
Drew PRIAM'S curtain in the dead of night,
And told the mournful tale of blazing Troy.



Alas! some sudden ruin waits TRULLETTA 
My father's spirit hath been here to warn me
'Gainst something fatal, but I know not what;
For just as he began the tender caution,
A noise, not much unlike the catcall's knell,
Abridg'd the mournful tale, and down he sunk
Reluctant; yet obedient to the sound.



O day and night, but this is wond'rous strange!44

The world's last groan, wrapt in surrounding fires,45

Had less amaz'd me!   was he cloath'd, or naked?



Cloath'd in his 'custom'd garb from top to toe.



Wore he his beaver on his head?   or cap
With cat-skin lin'd?



His head arm'd cap a-pe.




With, or without his apron?







His sandals   shoes, or slippers?







His beard was red?



It was, as thou hast seen it,
Almost the colour of the rising moon.



Seem'd it not sing'd?46




Not in the least.



That's strange!  

47 I would I had been here!   it must portend
Some festinating evil   but to whom,
Or what, my comprehension fathoms not:48

This is however sure, so sage a ghost
Would hardly come on an unmeaning errand.
But more of this hereafter   come, my Love!
The sad procession waits   now summon all
Thy reason's fortitude to grapple with
Affliction's potence   hark!   (Bell sounds.) that dreadfull knell
O CABBAGINO, is thy passing-bell.


End of the THIRD ACT.










THY last sad duties to thy sire are paid:
The grave hath op'd its consecrated maw
To swallow down thy father's hallow'd corse.

1 The Stygian tar no longer can refuse
His spirit passage to th' Elysian shades.







Oh! Sir, these wretched eyes have newly seen
BUCKRAMO skulking 'hind a cobler's stall.
Some hint's officious note had reach'd his ear2

That you was here   In his right hand he bore,
Most terrible to tell! a glitt'ring bodkin;
And ask'd, if I had seen you: I replied,
(Forgive me, Jove, the pious falshood!) no:
On which, with sullen aspect, he rejoin'd;
"Well! I may meet him e'er the noon of night."3




Where is the stall, my gentle SCUL∣LIONA?

4 Haste me to know't, that I with wings as swift
As meditation, or the thoughts of love,
May fly to my revenge.





Heaves panting at my heart!   Indeed, my Love,
You must not hence to night: the time is big
With danger.



What! be coop'd within these walls;
Thro' fear of one base cross-legg'd animal,
But the ninth part of manhood?   by Alcides!

Were there a hundred of the prick-louse tribe,
With each a hundred bodkins in his hands,
I could, with steadfast, and advancing scorn,6

Stare in each phyz, full-sighted   I'll be gone,
And sacrifice a hecatomb of taylors7


8 To my wak'd wrath, while mercy's faintest glympse
Shall shun to reach them.9





And do not rush on such eventful broil.



If all their lice were lives,10 my great re∣venge
Has stomach for them all.



And canst thou leave me,
Disconsolate to mourn thy rashness?   hast thou
So soon forgot me?



Do not rive my heart11

With such unkind expressions   Didst thou say
Forget thee?   much indeed must be forgot,12

E'er MADRIGAL forget his fair TRULLETTA  
The gods, that pry into the close recesses
Of every heart, can evidence the love,
The wond'rous love I bear thee   Now, even now,
A flow of fondness gushes from my eyes:
And did not honour's call command me hence,
I would not leave thee for the laurell'd wreath,
That binds a MILTON'S, or a SHAKESPEAR'S brow;13

But, throwing thus my arms about thy neck,14

Would play the boy, and blubber in thy bosom
Till I had drown'd thee with my streaming tears.



And is it possible that thou should'st love,
Yet leave me thus inhumanly?





This unprevailing woe   Alas! 'tis more
Than death to see thee weep!16   but we must part  
O! I could curse this idle bubble, honour;
This fashionable frenzy, that enslaves
The mob polite, that tears me from thy arms?  
Farewel, my Love!   why dost thou hang upon me?  
Release me! give me way!   let go my arm!



Thou shalt not leave me.



Shalt not! have a care;
Thou'lt wake the slumb'ring lyon in my breast:17

Do not provoke my rage too far   thou know'st
My hasty temper   quit thy stubborn hold,
Or, by the gods, I'll force thee to forego it!



Behold my streaming eyes  



Ha! shall the tears18

Of abject importunity detain me,
While vengeance, striding from his grizly den
With fell impatience, grinds his iron teeth,
And waits my nod, to satisfy his hunger?  
Not all the tears, that ever yet were shed,
Could stop my rapid course   May JOVE exhaust19

His thunder on my head! may hell disgorge
Infernal plagues to blast me, if I cease
To persecute the Prick-louse, till his blood

  39Assuage my parch'd revenge   Oh! my TRUL∣LETTA!20

Or give me way; or thou'rt no more my friend.



Help, SCULLIONA! SCULLIONA, help
To save my raging bard!



To save me so,21

Were but to lose me surer   quit me, fair ones!



For pity's sake  



With thee a kneeling world22

Should sue in vain   Unhand me, gentlewomen!23

By hell! I'll make a ghost of her that lets me!  
Nay 'tis in vain to strive   no force can hold me  
Let BROUGHTON, or let SLACK do what he may,24

The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
breaks from them.







Then go, inhuman bard! begone for ever  
I vainly hop'd TRULLETTA'S eyes had power
To check th' impetuous sallies of his rage  

  40So have I heard, with equal suddenness,25

Ebbing prodigiously the sea withdraw,
And quite defenceless left the scaly race.
The huge scate, which e'er while with wanton pride
Spread his broad fins, and lash'd the foaming tide,
Vainly essay'd to suck the faithless flood
With heaving gills, and tumbled in the mud.
The lobsters, whose great trunks the stars could reach
Flounc'd their huge claws, and panted on the beach.
So have my hopes, whose waves e'er while ran o'er,
And to the skies my towering wishes bore,
Retir'd, and left me gasping on the shore.








26 Where is this hero, famous and renown'd
For killing vermin, and for botching cloaths?  
What ho! BUCKRAMO!







Ha! who calls BUCKRAMO,
With lungs so loud, and vehemence so great?

  41Is it the voice of thunder, or of man?27




Of one, that comes to scourge thy insolence,
Presuming arrogant! unletter'd slave!28

Thou little more than a bare tythe of manhood!



The lewdest sland'rer, that e'er broach'd abuse,29

Came short of this   Take note, take note, gods,30

Of this reproachful calumny   This railer,
With breath envenom'd, impiously affirms,
Your human figures are but decimals,
But tythes of manhood   Vile, licentious cur!
The very dogs would spurn thy wretched carcase;
Because   it scarce would furnish out a meal.
Go hence! buy food! and get thee into flesh!31

'T would grieve my very soul to grace a gibbet
For killing but a shadow.




Thou seeming semblance of the human form,
Made from the shreds, and clippings of mankind!32

Are not thy cross-legg'd tribe th'unsifted mold,

  42The dross, the leavings of humanity?
Nay, by the powers! your composition is
Of baser matter still, the lumpish dregs,
The refuse vile of animal creation!33




Dost thou compare the fashioners of man
With these base botchers of the verseful train?
What are ye but a shrivel'd, half-starv'd race
Of living skeletons? shadows of shadows?
With brains of whirligigs, and limbs of reeds?
A cringing, lying, snarling, monkey tribe,34

That, pack-horse like, jogg thro' the stage of life,
Proud of your senseless jingle?




Of HOMER, SOPHOCLES, EURIPIDES,35

VIRGIL, and HORACE, MILTON, SHAKESPEAR, POPE,
Hear this blasphemer of the gods and you!
Was it for this ye toil'd, incessant toil'd,
To polish, and refine that lump of oar,
The mind?   immortal shades! ye gods on earth! kneels.

Look down from your blest thrones, or laurel groves,

  43And make this sland'rer feel, to poet's ears,
How sharper, than a serpent's tooth, it is36

To hear a thankless railer   rises.


No single life can expiation make
For this abuse   chuse thou a hundred Knights
Of Cabbage, skill'd in chivalry and arms;
My self, in opposition, will select
As many Garretters   To morrow night,
At twelve, our different prowess shall be tried
On Smithfield's flinty plains   Dare ye the combat?



What is beyond the daring of my tribe?
Why, I will meet thee at West-Smithfield then.37







To-morrow   oh! my better stars, to morrow! 38

(My gracious stars! I mean to-morrow night)
Exert your influence! shine strongly for me!  
But, wherefore should I doubt?   now will I steal
To my dear Love, and with assuasive sounds
Allay her sorrow's ferment   knocks at the door.

Gone to sleep!  
She cannot yet!   again   once more  
knocks.






That comes so rudely to disturb the house?



'Tis I   the bard.



You have no business here;
My mistress ne'er will see you more   good night.



Blast to my soul's best hope!40   ne'er see me more!  
Chaos is come again41   and I am   nothing  42

Henceforth I'll live a sad recluse from man,
And in some shady grove, or lonely cell,
Or garret of stupendous height, inclos'd,
(Retirements blest!) where CLIO, heavenly muse,
To whom the rapt'rous charms of song pertain,
Holds frequent visitation, will I write
Ten thousand ditties in TRULLETTA'S praise  
TRULLETTA! most irradiate nymph, in whom
Perfection centers: in whose form the gods
Infus'd an angel's soul: whose fulgent eyes,
With brilliant sparkle, strike adorers thro'
The heart, the lights, the liver, and the   guts:
With her my ditties shall begin; with her
My endless ditties end. Her I'll pursue
Thro' all the vast infinity of thought.
Till death to worms, insatiate cannibals,
Consigns this frame, and sends my widow'd soul
To regions unexplor'd; to realms opake,
Where boiling Tartarus roars   Oh! how unlike
The bubbling musick of a purling stream,
Or gently-murmuring rill! to quaff, instead
Of Helicon, whole gulps of brimstone down  
Unfragrant bev'rige! unpoetic juice!







O miserable hour! ill-fated maid!



What of my Love?   O my portending soul!



Ah fatal day to me! poor SCULLIONA43

Now touches her last moments   as she climb'd
Into the garret, her too-faithless foot
Slipp'd from the ladder's topmast round; she fell,
And with the fall expires.








I saw her in her pangs   her out-stretch'd eye45

Strain'd with a death-mix'd tenderness on mine  
But thy relenting mistress craves an ode,
From thy great muse, for her endanger'd friend.
The pious maid a holy visit means
To Guildhall's dome, with solemn invocation,
To sue the GOGAN and MAGOGAN gods,46

For danger'd SCULLIONA'S lengthen'd life  
Haste to the cheerless maid, while I in quest
Of barber-surgeon trudge   O cursed spite!47

That ever I was born to fetch the wight!

An Invocation to GOG and MAGOG.
End of the FOURTH ACT.











HEaven's! 'tis a fearful night!1


Scour. Tho' age hath snow'd2

Almost thrice twenty winters on my head,
I never saw a night so terrible  
Most terrible indeed   The moon's eclips'd;

3 The stars sleep in their sockets: scarce a ray
Of light t'illume the welkin's pitchy cope,
But what the sheeted light'ning's flash affords.
The bursting thunder roars with frightful crack,
As if heaven's magazines were blowing up.
The blust'ring Boreas, like a bully, storms,
And threatens to unhinge earth's mass, which rocks
Affrighted on its axis, like a sign.
Owls, magpies, ravens on the chimney tops
Screech, chatter, croak: geese cackle, crickits chirp,

  47Dogs howl, cats mew, pigs squeak, and asses bray,
In concert dissonant.4




'Tis said, strange sights5





Ten thousand hags and wizzards,
On broomsticks mounted, thro' the frightful sky
Gallop apace their fiery footless steeds  6

Squadrons of bodkins, press-boards, yardwands, sheers,
'Gainst penknives, sheets of paper, inkhorns, quills,
Appear drawn up in battailous array7  
Such sights seem certain prologue to the fall
Of mightiest empires, or the crush of worlds.



What is this puny tempest in the sky,

  48To that my bosom feels! my mind's surcharg'd
With ominous presage   No joy, no comfort
Remains, but what the hopes of lengthen'd life
To SCULLIONA leave   would I were plac'd
With my dear father in his cold last bed!  
I shall not long survive him.




TRULLETTA, SCOURELLA, BUTTONELLI, THIM∣BLETONIO.



And THIMBLETONIO, have you seen my bard?







Thanks, BUTTONELL; and, gentle THIM∣BLETONIO.8




Thanks, THIMBLETON; and, gentle BUT∣TONELLI.



Is he alive and well?




With each a hundred squires, are now preparing  



For dire encounter on the plains of Smith∣field.




O fly with me, TRULLETTA! and prevent
The broil fraternal.



Broil fraternal! ha!  

9 Let all, except SCOURELLA, leave the room   
Exeunt But. and Thim.

What mean'st thou   by fraternal?




The secret I'll unravel as we go.





MADRIGAL, LYRIC, ACROSTIC, FUSTIANO, EPIGRAM, and their party.




The storm subsides: the full-orb'd moon illumes,
With silver beams, yon cloudless canopy,
And seems, my friends! to smile upon our cause10  
My fellow-warriors! brethren of the muse!
Remember this is the PHARSALIAN field,
That must immortalize the name of Bard,
Or blast it with eternal infamy  
But hark! yon trumpet speaks th'approaching foe  
Charge you their right, ACROSTIC   I and LYRIC
The center   FUSTIANO, you the left  
You, EPIGRAM, must wheel your phalanx round,
And, as your rhyming custom always is,
Gall, sting them in the rear   now draw your ink∣horns,
And on them make this great, this solemn vow,
(Or else my penknife, with unbatter'd edge,11


  50I'll sheath again undeeded) that each bard,
Who 'scapes the battle's rage, in pompous lays
Will paint the glories of a brother slain;
That every son of verse, who falls this night,
May live immortal in a brother's song  12

Your inkhorns to your lips13   this do you swear;14

As rhyme and numbers at your most need help you.







Then let us all embrace.












Clio, and Trulletta's eyes.15





BUCKRAMO, GOOSINO, BODKINDA, PRESSBOARDA∣LIO, YARDWANDELLI, and the rest of their party.




Thy train-band lore in martial science asks
The chief command, GOOSINO   be it thine  
BODKINDA, PRESSBOARDALIO, YARDWANDELLI,
Sons of the needle all, the foes at hand.
Now act like men; or by yon azure heaven  16




The word of onset?



Cabbage, and Saint George.




Then, slaughter and black vengeance, fall on gruff;
And damn'd be they that first cry, hold, enough.17

fight off the stage.




BUCKRAMO, and a TAYLOR.


Haste to GOOSINO, bid him turn his force
On EPIGRAM, or all is lost: our rear
Gives way   by hell, they fly! the dastards fly!  
Perdition! sulphur! vengeance! death and de∣vils!18









19 A shield! a shield! my Genius for a shield!
I think there be ten BUCKRAMS in the field,

  52Nine I have slain to-day instead of him.
A shield! a shield! my Genius for a shield! Excursions.





EPIGRAM, BODKINDA, and three of BUCKRAMO'S Party.









Doth hedge a bard, that my great spirit smiles21

At your drawn bodkins, and defies their points  
The gods take care of EPIGRAM.22




Then this all wound him.

To try their care. all wound him.




And this. all wound him.




And this. all wound him.




And this. all wound him.




Et tu, BODKINDA?   then fall EPIGRAM.23Dies.




This for thy coat unpaid   thy waistcoat this  24

And this thy breeches   now to further slaughter.
Excursions.




MADRIGAL, LYRIC, and Bards in pursuit,




25Victoria! Victoria! they fly!
Like hares pursued the base plebeans fly!  

Io triumphe!   such another blow
Will end the war, and crown with victory
Compleat our arms puissant   valiant LYRIC!
The greatest chief, antiquity can boast,
Might wonder at the wonders thou hast done.
How shall acknowledgment enough reward26





You touch me there,
Where modesty most exquisitely feels.27

You bleed, my prince!



A scratch from BUCKRAM'S point:
No more.







Away, my chief; the day is lost!
GOOSINO to the flying foe oppos'd
His ireful point, and cut off all retreat  
Like hunted boars, in wild despair they turn'd
On their pursuers, madly fought, and conquer'd  
Heaps of Parnassian carcases are pil'd

Olympus-high   ACROSTIC bites the plain  
FUSTIANO fled   scarce half a score of bards

  54Are left alive to grace the victor's car.



Death and damnation! oh!28





Yet heavier tydings   With dishevell'd hair,

29 Thy mobless queen rush'd through the ranks of death,
Almost alone, amidst a croud of foes,30

In search of thee   a random bodkin reach'd
Her tender bosom   but I can no more  
Tears choak my utt'rance.



O ye cruel gods!









Now have I reach'd my wishes utmost goal31

To die in MADRIGAL'S blest arms.





32 The iron hand of death is on thee   e'er
Life's lamp be quite extinguish'd, speak, oh! speak
Some peace, some comfort to thy mournful bard!



May the shrill catcall's knell, the boxes sneer,33


  55The hiss of faction, or the templar's groan,
Ne'er blast thy muse's offspring on the stage!
But heels, sticks, hands, in thund'ring peals, attend
Thy race dramatic to their thrice-third night  
May ever-blooming laurels crown thy brow,
And fame   immortal fame   the rest is silence. Dies.




Dead! dead! oh dead!   is there no death for me?34




Hold thy rash hand   this widow'd isle would mourn,

35 In tears of blood, the loss of such a bard.
Think of immortal fame, and deathless honours  
Live, and pursue the labours of thy muse;
And all eternity is thine.





The thoughts of death in friendship's soft persua∣sion!  
Yes thou hast rous'd me into life again,
And last posterity's posterity37

Shall bless thee for thy counsel   Gods! cruel gods!
Take notice, I forgive you38   yet, my LYRIC!
Something like poison courses thro' my veins,39

Boils in my bowels, and works out my soul.



'Tis fancy all   and yet thy looks are chang'd.



Let me sink gently down on the cold ground  
O I am all on fire! a thousand hells
Blaze in my bosom! streams of molten lead40

Hiss thro' my veins, and burn my body up  
LYRIC! I die   my posthumous productions41

I leave to thy correcting hand   with care,
O! with the greatest care, my dearest friend,
Revise, and to the flames commit whate'er
Shall seem unworthy my great muse   my fame
Is in thy hands   Remember the vast trust  

42 My grateful ghost shall rise to thank thee for't.








Got by a templar, while my father liv'd43

In cruel exile on Columbian shores!44

Then I am sentenc'd to eternal woe!  
Eternal? yes, eternal, and eternal  45


  57Honour'd SCOURELLA, had I known but this
A little hour ago46 we might have liv'd
In amity fraternal   but alas!
When stern BELLONA seem'd, with step-dame look
To lour upon our arms, I daub'd this point

47 With unguent, bought of mountebank so pois'∣nous,
That if the Aesculapian deity,
Instead of my poor brother, had been scratch'd,

48 In half an hour the god himself were mortal.



Then thou hast done a deed the very devils
Would startle at   secure the murd'ring chief.




(raving) Ha! who art thou with catcall in thy hand,49

Whose looks malign, and yellow eyes bespeak
A jaundic'd mind?   by hell! thou art the monster
Yclep'd a critick   seize him, devils! seize him!
Whip him with scorpion's stings, and rods of iron!
Roast him in elemental fire, and baste
His hissing frame with boiling sulphur, mix'd
With his own gall.



O my poor raging child!



O monster! monster! beats his breast.





Zembla's isles of ice
Are in me   how I shiver!   cold! cold! cold! (50Ghosts of Cabbagino and Trulletta rise.)

Angels, and ministers of grace, defend me!  51

They wave me   stay, ye dear illusions; stay!52

I come to join you. Ghosts descend.




Help! O help to hold him!



Hark! how it thunders! what a flash was there!
The temple's all on fire   see how the naked clerks
And gownless vestals from the windows leap,
To 'scape the flaming ruin   off your ruffian hands,
Ye damn'd inhuman dogs   ye shall not part us  

53 Nor life, nor death, nor heaven, nor hell shall part us  
TRULLETTA   oh! they tear they tear thee from me  
My feeble arms can hold   no longer hold thee  

54 Oh my TRULLETTA   TRULLY   TRULL   oh! oh! Dies.




He's gone! the great, th' immortal bard is gone!



There crack'd the cordage of a noble heart.55




Then drag your chief to justice.





I've done the craft some service, and they know it.
Once in the noon of night, at Southwark fair,
When a malignant barber sadly maul'd
A taylor's 'prentice, and traduc'd the trade,
I took by th' throat the circum-dusty dog,
And smote him thus. stabs himself with his bodkin and falls.








Draw near, STRAPADA   nearer yet   at∣tend
My last request   comfort my mourning mother  
Thou long hast lov'd her   take her to thy arms,
Dispel her griefs, and   cheer her orphan age.



Thy will shall be religiously observ'd.57





58 Thus let me thank thee   and   the rest is   oh! Dies.




Alas! that in one circling sun alone,
A poor lone mother should her two sons lose!



The gods enable thee to bear the loss  

  60Let us, my friends, about the sad interment
Of this unhappy pair   BUCKRAMO'S suicide
Forbids the holy rites of funeral  
From hence let fierce contending lovers know
What dire effects from rival discord flow.
'Tis this that shakes each country with alarms,
Gives up hot youth a prey to youthful arms:
Produces fraud, and cruelty, and strife,

59 And robs the guilty world of a BARD'S life.




