







COME, bustle, bustle all to your several oc∣cupations. Bless me, who'd have thought of Sir Hervey coming home: go enter the house, and prepare for his reception I'll wait his arrival here.






Good morning, good old Geoffry.  I have once more eluded the vigilance of my per∣secutor once more stolen forth from the castle, pur∣posely to visit this spot; and if my father hears of it, I hope he won't be angry with me: though he denies me his protection, surely he will not pre∣clude me from contemplating scenes that remind me of him and my dear Mother! why, what's the matter? you seem agitated.



Well I may, Miss Juliana your father
  2is arrived from Italy, and I expect him here this very day.







Ay; after an absence of thirteen years, I expect Sir Hervey once more at Sutherland-house:  look, here's his letter.



(snatching the letter, reading and kissing it).
Oh, I'm so happy! I shall at last behold, perhaps embrace him.



Nay, I fear otherwise; Sir Hervey is of a most unforgiving disposition, and the wrongs your mother put upon him were of a nature not easily to be forgotten.



Wrongs! what wrongs, Geoffry? is the dark tale for ever to be concealed from me?  I am deserted by my father, and not to know the cause! Come, good old man! remember, you pro∣mised you would one day tell me, and since we are alone, and may not have another opportunity, come now unveil the mystery how, how did my mother wrong him?



Well then, to keep my word Sir Hervey ever was, and I fear ever will be, a dupe to fashion and its follies: he gamed, he intrigued and though in his heart devoted to Lady Sutherland, he forsook her and his home for scenes of riot and dissipation.







Lady Sutherland a long while bore this with fortitude and resignation; but young, beautiful, and accomplished, surrounded by admirers and neglected by her husband, she at last listened to the addresses of an artful and designing villain, who convinced her of Sir Hervey's infidelity, and, by means of forged letters and other artifices, persuaded her to elope with him.







'Tis too true, madam; but her guilt was of short duration: in a few days she came back to that house, all penitence and shame. I shall never forget the day. I told Sir Hervey of her return, and he in a fit of rage and madness bid me shut the door against her; this she overheard: 'twas too much for a tender nature like hers: she fled, and soon after died died of a broken heart!




Oh, for mercy!  my poor, poor mother!



You were then but eight years old, and till that hour the idol of Sir Hervey: but your likeness to your mother soon making him wish to avoid you, you were removed to the castle; where he invested Mrs. Dazzle with the unlimited power of a guardian over you, and which I fear she has exerted like a tyrant.



Yes. Sir Hervey could not mean that I should be her prisoner! But go on: he went abroad 



He did   to Naples, where he has ever since resided: and now, what think you, madam? do you blame the living or the dead?



I have no right to condemn either but in my mind the husband who neglects an amiable wife is responsible for all the evils that ensue.  Died of a broken heart! oh, that he had but par∣doned her! then he had had a wife, and I a mo∣ther to console me! but now Do I indeed resemble her?



You do you do.



Thank Heaven! I may forgive her, though my father never can.




This way, my lad this way.



Ha! there's Sir Hervey! though I wish, you don't know how I dread to see him: let me be gone.



No, 'tis only Worry, his old faithful fol∣lower; honest soul! he and your father were fostered by the same nurse; and, though long since in easy inde∣pendent circumstances, he still follows Sir Hervey from motives of affection. Suppose you ask him to be a mediator for you.



Not now another time, another time  I must return to my prison: but though I shed tears over the fate of my mother, don't fancy I up∣braid my father. No! I feel for both and let him still avoid, still punish and abandon me, I know his motive: and the fond hope that he will one day prove a parent to me, will make me bear even greater ills with patience. Oh! may that day be not far off! for 'twill be the proudest and the happiest of my life.






Mind, do as I order you; when the baggage arrives let me know. (Exit Servant.) What Geoff! give me your hand, old Geoff! Sir Her∣vey is but a stage behind. 'Slife! I thought we should never shake hands again.



So did I; 'tis thirteen years (shaking hands and looking hard at Worry); but, heyday! how you are altered, Master Worry!



Yes, I'm not the same man I was.



So I see; but how has it happened?



I don't know I lead a different sort of life I think; and I'm afraid I drink a great deal.



You drink! you that used to be the most temperate, sober 



Ay; and I used to hate cards, you know; now I could play all day: I used to break ap∣pointments; now I come an hour before my time;  and I that always laid in bed till noon, now con∣stantly rise with the crowing of the cock.



Why, what the deuce, are you mad?



No I'm married. I've got a loving jealous wife! and whilst Sir Hervey is continually miserable because Lady Sutherland ran away from him, here am I I tell you what, Geoff if Mrs. Worry were to run away from me, I'm sure I should be too much of a philosopher to repine on the occasion.



What! and is Sir Hervey likewise al∣tered? or does he still go on rioting in dissipation and extravagance?



Worse and worse only yesterday he employed Mr. Alltrade to raise five thousand pounds for him on his bond offered a premium of fifty per cent. and the moment he receives the money, away it will go in galas or at the gaming table No, I beg pardon not at the gaming table now a days no money ever goes there.



What! have they left off playing?



No but they've left off paying; and that's the reason the faro banks are knocked up  when people only play for love, friendship won't induce them to keep open house. But Miss Suther∣land there's Sir Hervey's greatest plague. A meeting with her was his chief motive for leaving Italy, and now we understand she vindicates her mother, and takes part against him.



She is belied, cruelly belied!



Nay; we have it from the best authority,  Mrs. Dazzle the lady who brought her up, and for whom I have a message but of this be
  6assured, Geoff; Sir Hervey's case isn't half so desperate as mine: he's only tormented by a daughter who will try to break his heart, but I've got a jealous wife, who will actually break my head, heart, and purse strings.





Sir, the baggage is come.



You hear Mrs. Worry is arrived. Come, will you go and be introduced?



With all my heart but mind now you'll one day find that Mrs. Dazzle has traduced Miss Sutherland, and only because she was a great favourite of her late husband's. He was a distant relation, you know, and I did hope would have re∣membered her in his will but no he, like the rest of her family he has forgotten her!



To be sure; who ever got any good by these distant relations? Mrs. Worry has a little thousand; and do you know my apartments are so constantly cram'd with cousins, neices, uncles, aunts, and grandmothers, that at dinner-time I never get a chair to sit upon I eat flying! And talk of the comforts of a fire-side, curse me if I've been within ten yards of mine since the day I was married: not that I complain of cold though my house is warm enough, I promise you: but come along; and sorry am I to be convinced of Miss Sutherland's ingratitude. Were she the girl you describe, I would not only be her friend and advocate, but if Sir Hervey refused to protect her, I would myself be a father to her.





SCENE An Apartment in the Castle.




Even so, ma'am; Miss Juliana first robbed you of your husband's friendship, and now of the Captain's love.



Oh, the little viper! but I know how to be amply revenged: the great object of her life is a reconciliation with her father; this I have already prevented, and will still prevent. But the Captain, Betty do you think he has serious views?



He serious! what Captain Lavish prefer Juliana Sutherland without a shilling, to the widow Dazzle with a nett estate of five thousand a-year!



That's true: I married little Jerry for his fortune, and I am certainly sole hei∣ress to be sure I hav'nt yet seen the will, because he died in London: but I expect his agent Mr. Alltrade with it every moment, and then, Betty! poor Juliana! I hope the Captain will allow her half pay.



Oh you're too liberal, ma'am but see! here comes Mr. Alltrade with the will.





Well! madam, as good as my word, you see: this moment arrived with my friend Sir Hervey.



You are very kind, Mr. Alltrade; but there was no occasion to be in any hurry every body knows how little Jerry loved me.



Oh, there's no doubt that the will is completely in your favour; but you had better open it, lest there should be any small bequest or legacies 



Well, to oblige you I'll just cast my eye over it  (takes the will from ALLTRADE)  8Poor Jerry! he used to say he should fall a martyr to love. (Reads will): By this my last will, I Jeremiah Dazzle give and bequeath all the pro∣perty of which I die possessed unto that most lovely and accomplished of her sex Spare me spare a poor widow's blushes, Mr. Alltrade.



Nay! it's not more than you deserve.



Oh, Sir! (curtseying then reads on:) "unto that most lovely and accomplished of her sex, Juliana Sutherland" Juliana! why, Mr. Alltrade! (Half crying.)








Juliana Suther∣land, whom being deserted by her father, I take a pride in adopting. But my will further is, that she hold the said property no longer than she re∣mains unmarried. In case she marries, I give the same to my widow Deborah Dazzle. And my only motive for thus tying up my cousin Juliana, is to save her from entering into a state to which I fell a martyr.   Why it's a forgery! he could not dared not!



Nay there's no doubt that it's genu∣ine but be composed doesn't Miss Sutherland live in this house?







Then it dawns! it glares upon me! Mark if she marries, the estate devolves to you are not these Mr. Dazzle's words!



They are: and I only wish I had been behind him when he wrote them!.



Well: be patient don't destroy the will, because that's a serious business (pulling up his neckcloth): only conceal it till you get Juliana a husband then she forfeits the legacy, and you become heiress to a hundred thousand pounds.



Why that looks well but how? the Captain won't marry her.



No, but I will; in the first place her being in this house will give me numberless oppor∣tunities; and in the next I am employed by Sir Hervey to raise five thousand pounds for him on his bond now if we can get Juliana to join in it, I shall have them both so completely in my power, that if I fail in the character of a lover, I may succeed in that of a creditor: you understand.



I do excellent! and as a re∣ward for your trouble 



I only ask a third of the estate.



Granted it is a bargain.



Say you so? then let's to work in∣stantly and look here comes one who, from his influence over Sir Hervey, we must secure as a confederate.





Worry, my old acquaintance! I give you joy of your marriage, and sincerely wish you may never know the pangs of widowhood.



And so do I with all my heart, Worry.



And I wish with all my soul you'd both keep your wishes to yourselves. (Aside.) But I wait upon you, madam, from Sir Hervey: from your account of Miss Sutherland's undutiful and indis∣creet conduct, he persists in not seeing her, and therefore while he stays in the country, he begs she may be more closely confined than ever.



I'll do all I can; but she is so art∣ful and designing, that for my part I don't think she'll ever be safe till she gets a husband to pro∣tect her.



Nor I; and I'll tell you a secret, Worry I love her, and wish to be that husband: and since, from my humble birth and inferior situ∣ation, I cannot aspire to gaining Sir Hervey's con∣sent, will you aid and assist the marriage?



With all my heart the more matches the better. When one's in a scrape oneself, nothing's so consoling as to see all one's friends in the same situation. (Aside.) I'll assist you but about the bond have you raised the five thousand pounds.



No; and I despair of success the friend I applied to wants Miss Sutherland to join.



She join! why she's as poor 



I know but he says she has rich re∣lations may have a handsome legacy in short, it will mend the security: therefore let Sir Hervey know this, and he will see the necessity of com∣manding her to sign instantly.
(WORRY is going.)



Good day, Worry I shall be al∣ways glad to see you: and because there's a hatch∣ment over my door, don't fancy this is absolutely the house of mourning.



No, ma'am; I I 
(laughing and try∣ing to conceal it).



Why, what do you laugh at? speak out you won't offend me.



Shan't I, ma'am? then begging your pardon, you need'nt have caution'd me; for I al∣ways look on a hatchment outside of a widow's house like a sign over an inn a certain emblem of revelry and good cheer. And when I'm a widower oh! oh! oh!
(shakes his head, sighs, and exit)



So far, so well; he's in our interest but to get this bond out of Sir Hervey's hands, we must at least advance a few hundreds, and where to raise even those for my part I haven't a guinea.



Nor I now a shilling!  (sighing) nor do I know where to raise one?







No; unless indeed Mr. Mist the manager of our country theatre 



What! the quondam silversmith of Cheapside! he's an old friend of mine,



Is he? then you may aid my suit. You must know, smitten with the love of same, eager to acquire the reputation of wit and genius, I have written a most magnificent play, which of course I am all anxiety to see acted; he has already promised to come and read it, and if it meets with his approbation, very likely he may advance the money necessary to pay Sir Hervey.



True suppose I hasten his visit I'll seek him instantly; and whilst you keep Juliana out of sight, I'll keep the will out of sight  (put∣ting will in his pocket). And with regard to the play, if you get money by it, depend on't you'll get reputation also; one generally follows the other.



So it does and how the case is alter'd? formerly wits had no money, and now he that has no money has no wit; for whilst a bad joke will be applauded from the head of a great able, a good one will be lost if spoken by him who has nothing but wit to recommend him! but away to the manager let the war begin, and doubt not our victory!





SCENE Outside of the Theatre.





Pooh I'll sit there picking my teeth no longer; stay for ever, there won't be a place taken; for well as Mr. Mist might understand conducting a shop, he knows so little how to manage a theatre, that during the time I have been prompter, treasurer, box-book-keeper, and deputy manager, there have been only three boxes taken and they were by particular friends, who thought they did him an honour by coming in with orders psha! I'll go heh? who's here? aha? a flat at last!





This way, Sir, there's the office have a front row in any part of the house, Sir 



Sir, I want to speak to Mr. Mist where is he? (STOPGAP holds down his head). Why don't you answer me? where can I find him?



He's walking on the London road you'll find him there, all anxiety, looking out for the new Harlequin whom we expect every hour by the slow waggon.



Expect Harlequin by the slow wag∣gon!



Yes, Sir: and between you and me, 'tis high time he came; we play to shocking houses last night to Hamlet we were obliged to make a shew, by shoving the band into the pit, the orange women into the boxes, and the door-keepers into the galleries. Indeed no wonder at it, for Mr. Mist himself played Hamlet.



The old tradesman act Hamlet!



Even so he always will act the best part but here he comes, and spite of the bad houses, all bustle, life, and animation!





Damn that slow waggon not here 'till season's over however, sure of tol lol house to night fine day strong bill nothing against what Jack! Jack Alltrade! why what brings you to this oh! oh! sly dog! written a Farce can't get it acted in London and so come 



Not I upon my honour.



Want an engagement then! what's your line? Ben, Scrub, and Calliban; or Richard, Romeo, and the tiptops no difference though tragedy or comedy play which you will, Jack sure to en∣tertain audience he! he! he!



Why 'Slife here's an alteration! when I last saw you, you were leaving off trade with a capital fortune, and retiring into the country free from the cares and vexation of business.



Hem! much you know of the matter when I lost care and vexation, lost my two best friends.



Care and vexation your best friends!



Yes: couldn't tell what to do with myself all day long watching clock, or yawning at street door could'nt bear it hardly alive thought of opening new shop when one lucky day! play house put up at auction always had theatrical twist so bid handsomely knock'd down at large sum to be sure but what then? been happy ever since had care and vexation in abundance but
  14mum shan't stop here London Covent Garden Drury Lane they're my object!



Indeed! then why not make them your object now? why not engage London play∣ers?



Um! (snapping his fingers) that for London players and that for London authors soon have best actor and finest writer living heh: know who I mean?
(mimics Harlequin.)







Right back his wooden sword against their wooden heads bring all Europe young and old boys little babies, and full grown babies: and then for salary only twelve shillings a week, and fare of slow waggon whereas these London gen∣tlemen, with their ten pounds a night and post chaises and four besides, won't do here? don't I come from London? don't I act Hamlet, and to what? not enough to pay the lighting? but can't stay must go look after the tricks must get all smooth 'gainst great man's arrival.



Nay: I've an invitation for you Mrs. Dazzle is extremely anxious about her play, and requests you'd wait upon her.



I wait! who's manager? besides d d stuff I suppose.



That I can't say but when I tell you, she is a lady I have the greatest regard for 



Enough come this evening be there before doors open till when, in the words of Hamlet, Remember me!



Hamlet! in the words of the Ghost, you mean.



Yes: but when I act Hamlet, play the Ghost too always take every good speech in the
  15play and whip into my part I'm manager he! he! he!



Well, adieu and after the reading, I'll look in at the theatre.



Do shan't cost you a farthing put you in at stage door, and sit in my box Strong bill to∣night Beggar's Opera in two acts Filch by a gentleman of the law, being his first and last ap∣pearance on any stage after which, a grand spec∣tacle of my own writing, called Gulliver the Great. In the first act, all the characters will be killed in the second, introduced their execu∣tors, administrators, and assigns but come and judge. I say though, when new pantomime comes out, trouble you not to walk about the town, Jack.







Why! who'll pay to look at my clown, when they can see you for nothing he! he! he! come along, Stop.



