The ARGUMENT.ANtonio complains of his misfortune, and realates his love, and his courting of Rosabella the daughter of a Noble man of Portugall, who dying at Fess, did commit her to the trust of his brother Roderigo Torcol, who exercising the trade of a Pandar at Burdeaux, would not sell her under six hundred Crowns, which Ignoramus the Lawyer residing then at Burdeaux, for the compo∣sing of Differences and suits at law, did bargain to give unto him; Neverthelesse Antonio doth rejoice that he and his love have already plighted their troths to one another.


What but two hours! must I live but two hours longer? woe is me; If I go without thee Rozabella, I go without my life; my Fa∣ther neverthelesse commands me to be gone; Him I must obey; but love doth enforce me to stay whether I will or not; what shall I doe? whether I go or stay I am undone; I must obey my Father, This only doth remain to give him the last Farewel before I go hence and die; for that my hopes are quite lost, the bare Dis∣position of the most impure Portugall, Uncle to my Love and who now liveth with him, doth prompt me to believe. He pretends him∣self to be a Merchant but is indeed no more then a Bawd; his name is Torcol so called from his w•y & distorted neck & maners: did you but see him you would say you never saw an uglier Bulk of sin; but be he never so deformed, he as yet gives an honest & a civil entertainment to my Love, and will dispose of her in mar∣riage, as becometh his Brothers Daughter; for a noble Portugall the Father of Rozabella dying at Fess (to which place the rougher hand of war and conquest brought him) left his Daughter as a Ward to his tuition being his brother, and then at Fess: she be∣ing now the most beautiful of her sex is courted by many who would be proudl• glad to marry her, though without a portion: But the greedy and covetous Pandar will have money for her; I therefore who would morgage my life to have her have con∣tracted with him to make her my wife for six hundred Crowns.
  
The bargain was struck but on this condition to pay him the mony within the space of a month. I have ever since made it my business to procure it but could not effect it; He therefore takes me to be unable, and himself deluded, and is making a new Market with an English Lawyer, who being sent for from thence with many others of his Nation and Profession to compose some differences between some of their own Nation here at Burdeaux, hath that leisure forsooth to fall in Love, and indeed is inflamed to a madnesse with the beauties of my Mistresse; Instead of Latin he speaks no∣thing but Barbarismes, A meer Kickshaw, and an Asse laden with Gold; and to be a short a Lawyer. But this doth much re∣joice me that our Hands and Hearts are linked, unknown to him, unknown to my own Father from whom I carefully do conceal it. But whiles I am speaking my hour is slipt from me, a poor horari∣ous man. I will make hast unto her, but who is this? Ignoramus the Lawyer; This is He who would take my Love from me, but I may chance meet with him.








Woe is me my Father calls.











Come hither to me presently.
Exit Anton.





The Argument: Ignoramus having called his two Clerks, Dullman and Pecus, doth relate unto them his love to Rosabella and laughes at his third Clark Musaeus, as a predicable and an University man.

Ignoramus, Dullman, Musaeus, Pecus.


Fy, Fy; Tanta pressa, tantum Croudum, ut fui penè trusus ad mortem; Here is so great a presse, so great a Crowd, that I am even thrust to death. I will have an Action of Intrusio a∣g•inst all and every one of them▪ Aha Mounsiers, will you thrust par joinct Tenaunt. It is a plain Case, Il est point dr•ite de le bien
  
seance, I sweat extremely; O Hot, hot! precor Deum ne mel∣•avi meum pingue, pray God I have not melted my fat. Phy, phy: In the Name of God where are my Clerks? Dullman! Dullman!







Vous auez Dullman, Meltor Dullman meltor rubba me cum Towallio, rubba, O Dullman, I am melted, Dullman, I am melted, Rub me over with a Towel, rub me Dullman, where is Pecus.







Fac ventum, make a wind, Pecus, so, so, where is Fledwit?



He is not inventus.



Put your Cloaks upon me now for fear I take cold. So, so Ainsi bene faict, Amongst all my troubles and punishments it doth much rejoice and comfort me at this present that I have made a good agreament at the law amongst our English here at Burdeaux; a good agreament, Aggreamentum quasi aggregatio mentium. Well  too morrow hoyfabimus vela we will hoyse sails, and return to London; It is high •ime we came hither Octabis Hilarii, and it is now almost Quindena Pasche.



I Swear unto you Master, this day you have tickled the point of the law to some tune: titillasti punctum legis Master.



He He, I think I have tickled it; Si le nom del granteur, o• grante soit raze, ovinterline, on faict pol, le faict est grandement suspitious.



And then again, non obstant si faict pol; And that, also in Coin.



But that above all, D'vn faict pendu en le smoake, nun∣quam audivi titillatum melius, I never heard a Case better tickled.



And what do you say Musaeus?



I understood but little Sir.



You are a Galltierista, vocatus a Coxcombe, Musaeus; I shall never make you a Lawyer.



Never, never; He was a praedicabile; he, an Universitant.



They are pitiful Cle•ks, and great Idoets these Uni∣versitants. I do wonder quomodo spendisti tempus, how you did spend your time amongst them?



For the most part I studied Logick.



Logick!  What Village, what Town is this Logick?



It is one of the liberal Arts.



Liberal! So I thought; in the Name of God, study Arts thriving and gainful: Non est mundus, This is not a world for liberal Arts.



I was addicted also to the love of Philosphy.



Addicted to love! what? Are you pro Strumpotis & Baggagiis? Strumpets and Baggages; if you take bad courses, you are not for me. I will return you back again unto your parents.



God keep you in that mind.



Quotu est Clocka nunc? what a Clock is it now?



Between eight and nine.



Go therefore to my lodging with your Bags and your Rolls: what is that? let me see that Instrument; man• petit, mane  stay a little, stay I say whiles I put my spectacles on my nose: Oh ho, ho: now I know it; This Indenture made betwixt Roger Rattledock of Caxton in the County of Brecknock, O ho: Richard Fen, and John Den: O ho; proud Buzzard plaintiff a∣gainst Peagoose defendant. O ho, look you here? Here is one letter faulty, mend it, mend it; for in law but one Comma mis∣placed, overthrows a whole plea. Now go your wayes. Do you take this? Do you ingrosse that, and do you Pecus trusse up the Portmantles and put all things in a readinesse for our journey.
Exeunt Dullman, Musaeus, Pecus.
Ignoramus alone.
Hoy ho, Rosabella, Hey, ho; I am not going now to the Courts at Westminster but to the joyful Court of Venus held at Torcolls; Cupid her Sheriff would never let me alone till he found me in her Bailiwick: At the first time when I loved Rosabella but a lit∣tle, he sent me a little Capias, and then a great Capias, and after∣wards other Capiasses, and more Capias and innumerable Capias, till at the last capavit me ut legatum, being bereaved of all Sense and Reason; so that I am now but just as a Fly without a head; Buzzo & torno, I buzze up and down, and I turn here and I turn there, but I know not what I doe my self. When I am drawing up an Instrument, if a woman be named, I write Rosabella; For Corpus cum causa, I write Corpus cum cauda; for Nouerint universi, Am a verint universi; for Habere ad rectum, Habere ad lectum;
  
and so I spoil the whole Instrument: Hey, ho, ho, hey ho.






The Argument. Torcol the Bawd brings in his Wenches to salute Ignoramus, having first related the story of his shipwrack, and the reasons that put him upon such a dishonest course of life: He bargains with Ignoramus, that if he either brings, or sends six hundred Crowns with the Instrument and private token he shall have Rosabella, which Ignoramus doth promise to perform.




Pseca•, See that Corinna doth use this Wash, and Sabina that Vermilion; let Coelia wear this Dresse to day, and Cor∣cas that: when you are ready (Girles) come hither,; for I will have you sing and play and dance before me, such Arts make shipwracks of your Lovers. I have been wrackt my self, but not by such Syrens: Returning once from Fess to Portu∣gall, a shipwrack made me poor, and did inforce me to such vile Arts as these; therefore with that small stock was left I hired Wenches from several Countries, and as different in language as in habits, They are all adorn'd in their own Countries fashion. The smell of gain is sweet from any thing; But the spotless Virgin my Cosin Rosabella, I hope this day to marry happily to Ignoramus, and I am to receive for her six hundred Crowns in Gold But who is this, O Seignior Ignoramus, the most honoured Man of all men; Are you here Sir, Bazo las manus Seignior, I am the servant of your servants.



Sure this is the Pope.



What service will you command me my Lord and Master?



Ha, he, he; I will give you a Supersedeas for these Com∣plements, I believe you have put your neck into so wry a form, with your congying and your cringing.

He lays his leg over him.


Sir, It was a misfortune I got here at Burdeaux by ma∣king
  
once a trial of a parcel of wives if they were good or not.



Will you not have a Breve de recto for it?



Whether I am streight, or whether I am crooked, I am yours all over Seignior: where are these Girles? why come they not forth, O Seignior?
Enter VVenches.




Forbear I pray your Cringes and your Cruragies: But what Females are these? Are they your Goods and Chattels?



Sir, I am both a Merchant and a Musician: I keep here a School for Musick.



There is no trusting to a Fiddle-string. Of what Na∣tion are these?



She with a Harp was born in Greece: The other is a German: She with a Timbrel is an Hebrew: She that stands by her, is an English woman: She with a Flute is a Spaniard; and those two with Lutes in their hands, the one of them was born in France, the other in Arcadia; the other four, a Venecian, a Per∣sian, a Turkish Damosel, and a Moor. Join hand in hands, and lead on the Dance.



They are very pretty Minstrels: Are you their Master?

They dance and sing.


Well done my Girles, in earnest: Now go in, but first every one of you in an humble posture salute this Gentleman.

All in their several languages salute and kisse him.


What do you make account to do with me? Habetis war∣rantum de osculando, Have you got any warrant to kiss me? what I vi & armis too; you are good ones I dare warrant you: but who is this that cleavs so close to my lip?
(the Moon kisseth him last of all)
phy phy, Away, away, It is the wife of the Divel. But tell me Seig∣nior, Do those never play at unlawful games against the Statute?




Believe me Sir, they are unstained, and sealed Virgins.



Sealed! I believe they are sealed with the common Seal. Ha, ha, he.



Neither they nor I admit of any such loosness Seignior: God buy to you.



Nay stay a little! what are you angry! I only frangebam jo∣oum did but break a jest, which with us in both is instead & ought to be done although on a mans life; and you take it in bono serio,  
in good earnest, Come  be merry, And tell me how doth my Rosabella?



Oh, she Seignior, because she is no Maid is to marry a∣nother.



But are you in sobria tristitia; speak you this in sober sadnesse?



Diable! what Fraud, what Covine, what Deceit is this? was there not an Indenture made betwixt you and me, that if I gave you six hundred Crowns, I should marry your Ward Rosabella; and was not this dies appunctatus the appoint∣ed Day for the payment of it? Is not this true?







Well, do what you will, I have your Indenture and Obligation safe and sound, signed and dated, and delivered with your own hand? And if you deliver me not Rosabella, you will forfeit the Obligation which is no lesse then a thousand Crowns. What say you now, there is but one Law, and but one King, you will find no mediety of language to defend you. What say you?
He thinks all things are transacted here as in the Courts of England, but if you bring me this day the six hundred Crowns I will not alter my resolution.



You do well; it is agreed already, and condiscended to; therefore if possibly I can, I will come my self in my own person this day with the mony; if I cannot, I will send one of my Clerks unto you with it.



But I know none of your Clerks.



And none of my Clerks know you, Sed est totum unum pro eo, It is all one for that; He shall bring you the six hundred Crowns, and the Instruments, And I will tell him that the better to know you, you have a crooked neck; Do you fear any thing?



Yes, I fear Antonio, and the most cunning Trico, who everywhere lie in wait to take Rosabella from me, I cannot take heed enough, and be so wary of them as I should be when I am most heedful; It is safest therefore to agree upon some private to∣ken; for to add a Caution unto a Caution is to be doubly cautious.



Although it be needlesse, yet if my Clerk Dullman shall come unto you from me, he shall give you this private token. He shall take you thus by the Nose.



Content; Be it so with all my heart, And take heed that you tell no man of it.



What? Do you take me to be an Ideot?



You shall therefore this day have her; she is my Cousin, and, by all that's chast, a Virgin.



Ovy dea, Ovy dea; Too morrow I will return to Lon∣don with her, but I pray you call her hither a little, that I may have a sight of her; for hoc est longum & breve, It is the long and the short of it, I do lov• her: Do you enjoin her therefore that she return unto me the love of avoir dupois, weight for weight, Do you understand me?



Ile bring her to you presently.
Exit Torcol.



I was never so enamoured before in all my life, I am now bestialiter inamoratus most beastly inamoured: But Torcol pre∣sently will bring unto me Corpus cum Cauda, cum Causa I would say. Oh that I had one Habeas Corpus now, Ha, he. Whiles I do think on't I do tread on thorns.





The Argument. Rosabella is brought in weeping, her Vncle in∣forceth her to love Ignoramus, who courts her what he can with Verses, and fair Words, and relates unto her what a Jointure he will give her. Rosabella is committed to the Charge of a Female Dwarf called Surda; who, being extremely deaf, under∣stands all things by nature: Ignoramus goes for the six hundred Crowns; Surda continueth with Rosabella.





Why do you weep so? you stubborn Minion: Have I brought you up so virtuously & so carefully that you should be so disobedient to me, and stand in your own light as much as in mine: Either be well content to marry him, or per aquesta cruz de Dios I will carry you back to F•ss, where I will either sell you, or prostitute you: I wish you well; what will you have him? Speak.



Uncle you are wise: what seemeth good unto you shall be as agreeable unto me.



Why, now you speak well, and as it becometh you:



I must dissemble my love I see, for fear it be worse with me: my dear Antony shall I never 



I have placed this little Dwarf Surda to be as a Spy over her, who although she hath been deaf these three Months, yet she is faithful, and understands by signes very exactly.

He makes signes to her.


I understand you well, that I should have a diligent eye over her, and suffer her not to go far abroad.







And that I permit not any young man to speak unto her.







Assoon as Ignoramus hath done speaking with her, that she presently goe in again.



I, with all speed, otherwise I will whip thee unto Death.



What you command shall be performed.





Seignior, my Cosin here doth love you above all crea∣tures in the world; make trial of her: I have some businesse that calls me hence, but remember the sign and the mony.



There shall be no default.



Surda be careful of what I told you.



I will not fail in it.



He, ha, he, my Rosabella, hem, hem, hem: Madam and you my Masters of the Jury, This is an Action on the Case. Fy, Fy, my tongue repeats my old accustomed words; I think I am plea∣ding with her now.



As far as I can see he's but a Fool.



Madame, pardon me, I was never in love before: But to come to the point, shall we joyn issue Madame, will you marry me?



I am not worthy of that honour.



Truly I do love you better Rosabella then I love Rosa solis, I will tell you what; your love hath made me a legi∣timate Poet, will you accept of some Verses I have made?



Hem, hem, legal Verses on Rosabella; hem, hem,
Si possem vellem pour te Rosa ponere p•llem,
Quicquid tu vis crava, & habebis singula brava;
Et dabo Fee simple si monstres Loves prety dimple,
Farthingalos, Biggos, stomacheros, & periwigg•s,
Pantaflos, Cussos, Garteros, Spanica Ruffos,
Buskos, & Soccos, Tif•nas, & Cambrica Smockos,
Pimpillos, Pursos, ad ludos ibis & Vrsos.


Are not these good in law?







Thou shalt go to Playes, to the Bulls, and to the Bears; Thou shalt doe what thou wilt, my Girl, only keep thy Court shut unto others; Here take these Verses, est Billa vera.



I will keep them in my Brest.



Dost thou love me?



Who can choose but love you?



Sayst thou so? I will make thee a good Jointure, faciam ut ames me plus & plus, I will make thee love me more and more. Hear what a Jointure I will make thee, and for the better credit of it, it shall run in Latine my Girl: Mark it; Ego Ambidexter Ignoramus infeosso te uxor•m meam Rosabel∣lam in Taile speciall de situ Manerii de Tongwell cum capitali Mes∣suagio; Et d• tibi omnia & singula messuagia, Toftos, Croftos, Cottagia, & Columbaria, Molendia, Fulloni•a, Aquatica, Venatica, Gardin•s, Tenementa, Boschos, Suboschos. Jumpnos, Brueros, Moros, moriscos salsos, moriscos frescos, Juncaria, Turbaria, Alneta, Mos∣cheta, communiam pasture, liberam warrenam, piscariam, faldam, & Dec•mas herbarum, bladorum, granorum, agnellorum, faeni, lini, Cana•is, & Tellonium▪ Stallagium, pontagium, picagium, esc•eta Catalla Felonum, aviata extra Hara•, wreck maris,





O 'tis too much.



Stay dum capio anhelitum, till I take breath, and I will give thee ten times as much.



He makes me smile although my heart doth weep.



Is the man in his right wits? he is more pratling then a Chandlers Mag-pie or a Parrot.



Give me your love now; Quid pro quo is fair play.



You demand what is but right.



Give me a kisse then, prethee doe.



What shall I do? O my fine sweet-heart, and my Uncles foul Avarice.



I read fair lines in your face.

He offers to kisse her.






I have a quare impodit for you Surda, I will seal and deliver a kisse unto you Rosabella.







Adieu (my dear Rosabella) till by and by. Hoc oscu∣lum mihi facit bonum apud cor, This kisse doth me good to the heart; I could fly on the wings of the wind: But I will be crafty enough for Torcol; for when I come into England, I will marry a rich wife, and then I will keep this, only in commendo, for a Tran∣si-tempus.



I perceive you love him.



I love Death better.
Exit. Ignor.



You do well to love him, he will give you 







And do you love that Man Antonio?



As I love my own life.



You seem to hate him, you doe well in't; Beshrew my Masters jealousies who so unjustly doth suspect you.



How much am I tormented that Antonio doth not love me? that he makes not so much as any show of love unto me al∣though it were but meer Dissimulation; But I for my part must play the counterfeit, that so being free from all eyes of suspition, I may then more opportunely fly unto him, •hen I am to be led a wretched Bride to Ignoramus Bed. I heard that Antonio was on this day to set sayls for London; How perfidious would he prove if he should forsake me now: He hath given me his Troth, if he leaves me now I am undone.



If you marry Ignoramus you shall flow in wealth.





The Argument. Trico the crafty servant of Antonio, doth in∣struct him by what Arts he may deceive Surda, and have a Con∣ference at the same time with Rosabella, by speaking what they pleased, but in such angry and discontented Gestures that Surda observing it, should not suspect any thing of love betwixt them; In the mean time Trico himself doth pretend love to Surda, and showing her a Ring doth grow upon her credulity, that he cour∣teth her in way of Marriage.

Antonio, Trico, Rosabella, Surda.


Sir, Ile warrant you, Take care for something else; I will not fail in this service to you.



My Hope is all in thee Trico.



This day with deceits I will overcome Deceit it self: But whom see I yonder? Master wipe your eyes!
Enter Rosabella.




My dear Rosabella! How happy a man am I? And how opportunely now I encounter you, if that old bitch would give me leave but to speak unto you.



Fear not Master; she hath no teeth, she may bark, but cannot bite.



But she may give her Master notice of us by her barking.



I will give her a Sop for that, by pretending love unto her; she is always puppying: In the mean time you may hold con∣ference with Rosabella, but let your gestures expresse much discon∣tent and choler, that so she believing you to be at great variance, may permit you to talk more freely.











Touch me not! what do you mean? Forbear your sawcy hands!







You hurt my hand! Be gone, and be hanged.



Rosabella threatneth Antonio; I like it well.



this Fool loves me: He shewes me a Ring too: I will
  
not marry, no not I.
She folds her Arms.



O the sad Fate of Lovers!



He sighes, poor Fool I appear beautiful, and thats the reason I am beloved: I am not so old, as some do take me for.



O the Fate of Lovers!



How thick he draws his breath! poor man, I pity him.



O lips of milk, nose of purple, eyes of a sheep, thigh of an Emmet, feet of a Calf, Hands of a Mole, Brest of a Grashopper, pap of all paps, oh neighing Mare, O gruntling sow! Harrow the Flames that me consume!



He is now praising my Beauty; I apprehend him, I am handsome enough, I thank my stars for it.



Oh most diminitive of all perfections, deaf and thick, and hopper-ars'd, old, and hairy, drunken, and apish. Oh my heart, my heart.



He is struck into admiration with my Beauties; Oh that I were not deaf that I might hear my own prayses: I hope they will call me Dwarf no more.



O the pangs of Love!



Alas, Alas he weeps, I am compassionate; He is ready to swoon away, Revive thy self my servant, I do love thee, I doe.



Pretend to be passionately angry with me!



I tell thee I do love thee, take heart of grace, Oh my dear friend and servant, I will not suf•er any to die for love of me, Charity forbids it.



You are mine then for ever; I hardly am able to forbear from laughter, Ha, ha, he: O my heart, my heart.



Fear not, I do love thee; wo is me, I must be gone, yonder's Antonio high in discourse, of whom my Master charged me to beware: well done Rosabella, you seem to be angry, and incensed against him, Chide him, Chide him, doe!



But in earnest I now must chide you Antonio, Have you no remorse to leave me here in all my sorrows, and by going to London to destroy me? Do you now retract from all you have done and spoken, and leave your protestations to the winds and clouds to be dispersed in the Air and lost? Are you so forgetful of them! But Heaven and Faith will remember them, wo is me, what trust is there in Men that are composed only of Cruelty and per∣fidiousnesse. Oh.



See how he beats his brest; I cannot blame him; monster of impudence!



Oh my dear love!



Oh my love, I am undone, I am fallen in love just like a wasp into a pot of Honey.



I gave you my faith Rosabella, and striking thus your hand, I now again confirm it.



How inhumanely he struck that young Lady! were I a man, I would fly in the very eyes of him: But in true Love there is no Danger; we are more happy, we  



She sighes just like a Sow that hath lost her first litter of Pigs; Oh my dear heart !



My sweet Love !



Pardon me my life, My Father commandeth me to be gone, neither prayers, nor tears can prevail upon him, I take Faith her self to witnesse, I go unwilling from you.



Unwilling! Love cannot be compelled; but by degrees it may languish into nothing. You do not love me.



If I love you not most 



No more! I do believe you.



Woe is me; Love like a hot pot doth boil and bubble in my Brest.







He noddeth and winketh, How prettily he noddeth and winketh; I will nod and wink on him also.



But why do you not take me, from this impure place; Fie upon't.







I live here under the Command of a wicked Uncle who hath lost his honesty with his estate. O beast! why shall I call him a man, who hath nothing of Humanity in him? O my Fa∣thers Manes to whom did you intrust me: but though you would be gone Antonio, I will tread in your steps, and follow after you: If I may not live chastly, I will die chastly.



O virtuous manners and resolutions; my heart with grief doth cleave asunder.



She hath touched him home, he beats his brest, and tears his hair, O shamelesse Man!



O the Fire and smart of Love!



Do not sigh so! Dear sweet heart; Just like an Italian Lover, in glancing eyes he showes his wounded heart: It showes handsome in him, I will return the like unto him.



Had you but satisfied my Fathers avarice with six hun∣dred Crown•, I had not now been miserable.



I protest most solemnly unto you, I could no where pro∣vide it; my Friends would not trust me, my Father was inexora∣ble; what should I doe?



I know not; but this I am certain of, that my Uncle by writings hath contracted with Ignoramus for me, who hath pro∣mised this day either to bring the Mony himself, or to send it by his servant with a secret token which they have agreed upon be∣twixt themselves.



What is this I hear! Do you know what the token is?



That is concealed from me, but here are his dainty Verses.



I shall peradventure extract something out of them.



She hath rejected his Letters: That is well; His eyes are red with choler, he stamps on the ground, he is mad I think  O my dear Love Trico I mark you for all that.



Who can see this? who is able to endure it?



Be of good Courage, I will so far prevail, that you shall not go to sea to day, nor lose your Love Rosabella.



O that it so may come to passe.



Trust to this head, this day it will doe wonders.



Strike not your head so hard! I do love you, indeed I love you, I was afraid, lest he would have gone neer to have swound away again.



My little tender piece of old, and tough mortality, I am not able to forbear laughing at you outright.
He Laugheth.



Ha, ha, he: And I cannot chuse but laugh too.



She neigheth I think: But you! it is now high Time. Be gone both of you. This Creature is my own 



You say well, Let us go.



But she will cry out 



Fool not your selves, but put that to the triall.



What do you give me a Ring too? marry I thank you for it:
  
Now I am yours; do you wear this handkercher for me.



What do you mean that you are not gone? will you marry me presently?



Give me your right hand, and good luck with it.



To be well ridd of you.



Let us seal it with a kisse.



O sweet kisse! it makes my mouth to water.



Eh, Eh, I have got a sluttish Cough of late, Eh, Eh.
O Rottennesse why do you stay there still? be gone I pray  you will loose the opportunity.



Come! let us go! O joy incomparable.



Snailes as you are, you have your selves undone.





The Argument. Torcal intervening disturbeth all things, Surda is beaten and Rosabella carryed away.

Torcol, Antonio, Trico, Rosabella, Surda.


RUn after them, come back you Fugitive baggage, come back. Help me?







Why do you beat me so?



Keep off Antonio? Oh excellent Guardian, he beats her Surda! who shall keep the Keeper? O thou Witch thou!



Beat not me so, I am not to be beaten by you, I am to be Married anon.



In the mean time you shall be married to this Cudgel.



What do you mean to use me so? I tell you again I am to be married this day, whither you will, or not; upon my troth I am. Nay, I am even as good as married already; look on this Ring else.



A Ring Oh the tricks of Trico, but I shall  



St! Husband help me? do you hear?



Get you in yee paire of strumpets; do you bind them fast in bond•, and keep them safe till I re•urn.







St, St, Trico, Do you so forsake your wife? woe is me.



With what confidence dare you vile Torcol?



Circle me round you Serjeants,
Exeunt Rosabella, Surda, and one of the Serjeants.

And guard me safe from dangers.



Drag hence my dearest love, I looking on 



Pray Sir Depart▪ And mind your own businesse, as I will mine, I have nothing to say unto you.







O you are to marry my deaf Dwarfe, I shall beware of your tricks Tricol.



I may peradventure be too hard for you anon for all this.



He who threatneth his Enemy doth give him a sword to out his own throat.







Stand further off, and speak there, if you have any thing to say.



No, I will speake it softly in your Ear, Torcol you are a vile pan-dare.



A stranger must gently alwayes put up all injuries; Seig∣nior Antonio, I would not hold any difference with you: I have many other delicate beauties under my tuition; you may make choice of which you will of them to be your wife.



I am much beholding to you



Seignior, A la buena ventura.







Servidor, signior, queda con Dios.






Go and be hang'd!



This day I have very warily observed him.







Have you but a good courage, and leave the Event to Fortune and my Brain.



I must be gone, my Father expecteth me.



Go then! I will be ready to observe all opportunities; for cau•elous I must be that my Master Theodore see me not talking with you: He begins to suspect me already; look where he comes; I am gone, I am gone.




The ARGUMENT:Theodore the Father calleth miserable Antonio a Ship-board, and sendeth Trico to his Country House.


Theodorus, Antonio, Trico, Bannacar, and a Marriner.



YOu Trico, Trico, whither are you going, I see you well enough, Do not hide your self. Is it he, or rather a painted sign in the wall? It moweth not, I will draw neer: O Villain! what a face he makes! but look on him.



Truly Master, I was almost quite besides my self, so de∣voutly I prayed to Almighty God to prosper your sons voyage by Sea.

He brusheth and takes the li•t from his Masters cloaths.


You are very pious!



I am not usually so, I tell you the truth Master.



You take the dust from my cloaths, but cannot brush a∣way the dusts of suspition which cover my doubtful mind? you corrupt my son, sirrah.







What excuse can you make to help your self, if I do think so?



Truly Master being so honest to you as I am, you would make me doe that 















That at last I become stark naught, and as naughtily de∣ceive you.



I apprehend you; Get you therefore to my Countrey House, and work there, but be sure you return before the Eve∣ning.



Will you command me no other service?



Bring my Tenant in the Evening along with you, I will
  
make even some odd Accounts betwixt us.



I will acquaint him with it. Is that all Sir?



Let us go now to the Ship Antonio; wher's Bannacar to bring the Trunks and Portmantles after us.







These Letters to Dorothaea, these to Antonine, these to his wife Katharine; remember my love to them, and to all my friends.



It shall be done. Father farewell.



Chearfully spoken; I like it well.



I will see thee on ship-board my son; see here one of the Sea-men!



By my faith and troth La, why what do you mak ac∣count to do my Masters? The wind and the ship stayes for you.







But I unto my Death unlesse Trico 








The ARGUMENT.Theodore being satisfied of his sons going to sea, returneth home with his servant Bannacar, whom of a Mahometan he had made a Christian.




MY Son (God blesse him) is gone to Sea, I saw him shipped, and the Ship under sayl and lanched forth; I have since dispatched some Affairs in the City, according to my own mind. Now I go home with an untroubled heart; Banna∣car, thou knowest how I received thee into my own House, being a poor Vagabond, and wanting all things, and what is most of all, I made thee a Christian who wert before a Mahometan.



Sir, I must acknowledge I owe unto you not only my life,
  
but my soul also, I will persist therefore in the diligent perfor∣mance of whatsoever service you shall command me.



Go in! I shall immediadiately find an Imployment for you.
Exit Ban.

He that will thrive must be to work inclin'd;
For sloth corrupts the body and the mind.





The ARGUMENT:Trico in a Boat overtakes the Ship, and brings back Antonio, they enter into Counsaile for the gaining of Rosabella, Trico promi∣seth to effect it by the means and help of Cupes, a Hawker, or running seller of Pamphlets; Trico in the mean time receiveth the ten pound in Gold which was given to Antonio by his Father for his Journey, and repaireth to a Broker.




STay a little, whiles I look round about me, Here is no body! Come forth here is not one stirring, not one as I can see.



The Phrygian Troops I circumspected have.



What say you Master? Am not I Trico tbe great?



Trico the most wonderful.



When I saw your Father go towards the Ship, I stole privately after you and followed close, like a sneaking Dog with his Tayl between his Leggs; As soon as he was departed, I presently threw my self into the next Boat, and with wind and sayles made up unto you; comming to the Ship I pretended that your Mother and her Family were newly arrived, and therefore your Father sent for you again that you might not lose your Journey; Thus in one Boat we both came back. The ship steer'd on her course for London. But what saith your Father to his Neighbors now? My son Anto. is now sayling to London, God speed him well; my servant Trico, my excellent servant Trico is toyl∣ing
  
and sweating poor man at my Country House? this shall be your Country House that I will be at this day, Master Theodorus.



As yet, it moveth handsomely; but what shall I do now? wherefore have you brought me back, shall I enjoy Rosabella.



Trico (as I hope shall bring that to passe also.



I would he could.



Did not you see me speak with one just now?



Yes, yonder Hawker, who cryeth and selleth pamphlets up and down the City.



The very same, his name is Cupes, and you hardly will believe it, he is a greater knave then I am.



No, Torcol is the great knave.



To one great knave, there must be put two half knaves, such as I and Cupes are. Give him but a little money before hand, and he will do wonders.



Here are ten pieces which my thrifty Father gave me for my journey, I have no more.



'Tis enough. Give them me; with these will I suborn Cupes, and afterward discover the whole design unto you; I must now addresse my self to the Broker to furnish our selves with Cloaths for the play, and this design we will carry on very hand∣somely. Do you bestow yourself in some private Friends house hard by, and there conceal your self that your Father may have no notice of it; As soon as I can, I will attend you, and laugh at me, if I effect not your desires.



Say you so, If you make me so happy I will 



No more but be gone.



Let me not live if I fail to 



Why do you stay so long?



I go my Trico.



Cupes this day promised to assist me, I have told him all; see where he comes with his basket of books in his hand.




The ARGUMENT.They plot how to disguise themselves so handsomely as to personate Torcol, and the servant of the Lawyer Ignoramus, and to be sure to remember the Horn if Ignoramus comes himself▪ Cupes ha∣ving received eight crowns to make his scolding wife more tracta∣ble, doth promise most solemnly his utmost diligence▪ Trico go∣eth to provide Ornaments, and disguises for Cupes and his VVife Polla.




BOoks, Books, who buyes my books, new books, witty books, witty and new, new and true, come who buyes my books, new books new!







O Trico, I will come to you presently. As I live, I have most pitiful books here to day.







I cannot sell one of them; prethee stay a little.







Come! who buyes my books, here is the Eele or Grigg of Equivocation, or of the Art of lying confidently cum privilegio, by the Reverend Father in the Divel Andraeas Belzebub, and Jo∣hannes Cyd•nius; come who buyes my books? who buyes Bel∣zebub?







I will sell them to you almost for nothing? for three souce, two souce, one souce, half a souce, a un-grand Diable.



Have you the Divels club?



The Divels club  let me see  there is such a book, but it is prohibited, what would you do with it?



With that Divels Club I would bea• out the braines of Andreas Belzebub the Divel of Divels.



Tut, you could not hurt him.







His Head and Face is all of steel; Come who buyes my Books; who buyes my book of the way how to hold the Eel of Equivocation by the tayl.



By the tayl, by the neck as well; I will buy it, by and by.



Come my fine Books. Pellio the Skinner, versipell Pellio or the way of turning the skin by Pellio himself.



Prethee name that Pellio no more, lest he spoil our Co∣medy, as heretofore he did the Comedies of Plautus, It makes my heart ake to think of him.



I am no body to day.



I would I had his skin stuffed with straw.



Straw! Hold thy peace. I tell thee Strawes make saints now a dayes; will you have the Apology for Garnet: There is a conceited straw for you.



Cupes; There is some hope that you and I may be saints also.







Because we are such very reprobates.



Come, my brave books. The Canonizing of Saint Gar∣net, of Saint James Clement, of Saint Rauiliac, all three from the Vatican Library; Here is Schioppius, the Night Owl, Come who buyes Schioppius.



Not one buyer all this while O wonderful!



The flatterer or Schioppius, the art of flattering; A manu∣script.



Let me see that book: Fie upon't! how it smelleth of the sloven that did compose it? he wrote it with his own Urine.



Come who buyes, who buyeth it, I am undone.



Enough you now have read over all your rank poysons.



Would these pamphlets were all burnt for me, what have I done? what have I said? that they should undoe me with these paultry pamphlets.



Take heed how you trade in them for the time to come; O Wretched writers! O Generation of Scriblers, Incendiaries, Disturbers of the World, Insuarers of the People; Destroyers of the Nobility, Murderers of Kings, and Advancers of the Pope.



Away with them all? the Annalls of Volusius, mais quoy
  
vanno via manniconia; but I have some books here worth any money; Here is the Prologue Caballin, or the Metamorphosis of Messe Davy, also his milleloquy at supper. The tilting of Messe Davy, and his Syn-Coriatical peregrinations.



Both he and his books deserve to be tossed together in a blanket.



But now, behold my books. Cupes of the art of drink∣ing, inlarged, revised and purged from a hundred faults▪ toge∣ther with an Addition to it, and a Commentary on it. Cupes de cupediis.



Doth so poor a man as you love Delicats?



I hate these grosse fed Parasites, when I have money, I feed on nothing but choice meats, and daynties.



But Cupes, Cupes, long not for Phesants you have scarce two Farthings to buy a half penny Loaf.



Why, I may have a good mind to them for all that.



And why so Cupes? Are you a Cupedinarian?



I was one heretofore, I have been of a thousand professi∣ons; when I was a young man at Paris I was a player.



Thou hast made me happy then; for this day thou art to act the part of many persons.



At Venice I served a Confectionary; there I made Wafers, Marchpans, Macaroons, Suckets, Dry and VVet, and all manner of Sweet-meats.



There you could lick your Fingers.



But that which I most affected was at Tholouse, where be∣ing servant to a Vintner, I fragally sipped every day three or four Gallons only of Wine, till at the last my master broke; af∣ter that I ran away into Holland where I carried about an Ape with a Gay Coat on his back; at Rome I was leader to a blind man.



He gave you therefore but blind obedience.



At Rome? why? He who is most obedient there, is most blind.



What did you do in England?



O la bonne terre d' Angleterre; I first was there a Sowgel∣der in the Country; afterwards I was an under Butler in the Inns of Court amongst the Lawyers.



Were you ever in Spain?











I cannot be contented with three Raisins for my Supper Trico.



'Tis well, but do you remember, what I told you of, even now?



I do, and I promise to perform it, by putting on a dis∣guise to personate one Torcol.



But with a crooked and a distorted Neck.



Why thus▪ how do you the posture?







Afterwards I am to counterfeit the servant of a Lawyer.



But if Ignoramus comes himself, be sure you do remember the Horn.



Remember it, I will warrant you; not any one of them knows me.



And thus disguised you will be the more unknown; but you must teach your wife also how to personate Rosabella, she is apprehensive I know, and will be apt to follow your instructions.



She is, but I am affraid I shall not be able to perswade her to it, she is so unreasonably obstinate, and alwayes scolding, nay she will beat me also.



VVhat is she a Fury?



A Fury Trico; she is all the Furies in one.



If I had three such VVives I would give two of them to the Divel upon a Condition.







That he should take away the third.



Let him take her.



But I will give both her and you, that which shall over∣come you both, look you, here is eight pieces in Gold.



Give it me, and I will bring my Dame.



I conjure thee Cupes by thy bowels.



You have conjured me by that which is most dear unto me.



That you will be careful in the performance of this.



It shall be done.



I will go and procure the cloathes and properties for you and your wife. Be you alwayes waiting here to prevent all in∣conveniences, and to provide a Remedy upon every Emergency.



I will, but this night we will sup together; it shall be a night of mirth.



Your words are full of Hospitality, may all things prosper with you.



Farewel, I will now call forth my wife and overcome her with gold; for without that she will do nothing: I know she will scold as her usuall manner is; she is alwayes mutte∣ring and murmuring, like a Weesil crushing the bones of a Mouse; Polla! wife Polla! why Polla I say.




The ARGUMENT.Polla at the first rants it, but having received the gold, she flatters her Husband; And if Cupes, in the mean time, will bring no Wenches into his House, she promiseth that in other apparrell she will personate another woman, and so be delivered to one whose Name is Pecus.




POlla, Polla! what a hooping and a hollaing is here? what are you got drunk again?



I would I were, my Polla, I have not drank one drop of wine this day?



Why dost thou stand so idle here thou swilling-tub? Hast thou sold any Pamphlets this day? Hast thou got any money thou drunken Sot, thou?







How! I shall 



Would the pamphlets were all burnt, and the writers of them hang'd for me.



And thou hang'd with them, sometimes thou pawnest my
  
Books, sometimes my Cloaths to the Vintners in their Taverns.



'Tis true my Phillis, I have done it, and thou hast soundly Cudgelled me for it.



I have, and will soundly Cudgel, and Cudgel thee again. Shall I sit spinning with an empty belly all day at home, when you in the Taverns are all in a hoyt, dying the pavements with Claret Wine and Muskadine; but if ever I see you set but your foot again within a Tavern. 



What? not so much as my foot.



I have said it.



Then kill me without any more adoe; But clear thy brow, my Dear, what wilt thou drink Sweat-heart! •ell me my Love!



Away with these flatteries; If my Cloaths be not redeem∣ed 



Sweet Love, they shall be redeemed, look thee what here is 



What Gold! where didst thou get that Gold sweet Man?



Now I am your sweet Man. O Gold what canst thou not do? will you have half of it?



Yes my dear Soul.



Dear Soul! O thou most dissembling Woman! well, you shall have half, if you will do me one small courtesie.







Nothing, but a little to put thy self forth to a Friend of mine to use thee.



O wicked man; what wilt thou put forth thy wife to use, thou thy self knowing it?



You do not rightly understand me?



What, if I should now make thee a Corn-elius of a Cupes.



I would then make thee again a Corn-eli• of a Poll•.



Tell me what sayst thou? hadst thou rather be Publius Cor∣nelius, or Cornelius Tacitus?



Oh, Cornelius Tacitus by a great deal, but I think no Man will make a Whore of such a pittiful Jade as thou art, Ha, Ha▪ He.



Pitiful Jade; Dost thou laugh at me, thou ugly Tankerd-bearer?



No lovely and fair; I do not laugh at you, you do much mistake me.



What dost thou mean by it, tell me then?



Canst thou in another Habit personate another Wo∣man.



Is that all? very easily.



And make a surrender of thy self to one Pecus; he will neither tempt nor force thy Chastity, never fear him?



Fear him? shall I fear any one Man who have beaten a thousand?



Me, I am sure on't, you have full often.



Well give me the Gold, and I will warrant thee my Cupes; Never doubt it?



Look you here then? here are two pieces for you; af∣ter you have effected your businesse, I will give you two more.



Agreed, but on this condition, that in my absence you bring none of your Wenches into my House as your usual man∣ner is.



O vainly Jealous! Why I sleep always with you, all night long?



You sleep indeed, I had rather that you should wake by half, but if I take any of your Wenches in my house; by Earth and Air, and the Heights above, and the Deeps below 



O swear not downwards.



I will drag them out into the streets by the Hair of their Head▪ where I will so belabour them, that they shall not be able to stir a Foot.



You shall never find me with any.



On that condition, I will assist thee according to thy ex∣pectation.



Let us go in my Phillis, where I will give thee more full instructions.




The ARGUMENT:Antonio, and Trico do borrow cloaths of a Broaker, and for a pawn they give him a Brasse King with a counterfeit stone in it, Cupes goeth to make himself ready.

Antonio, Trico, Pyropus, Cupes.


THe plot you told me of pleaseth.



Pyropus, the Broaker will be here presently.



But what pawn shall we give him for the cloaths we are to have?







I have given you all the Money I have.



Have you no Rings, nor Jewels?







But Trico, Master, hath a Ring.



A Brasse one peradventure.



But double-gilt with a brave stone in't.



Some Counterfeit I believe.



Pure glasse Sir, finely cut and painted; it sparkles so, that any may may be deceived with it.



Trico, Let me see it.



Put it on your finger, and pretend that you value it at a very great rate; It is ten to one, but he will swallow it: St, no more words▪ here he comes himself s•ve you Pyropus.



Save you Sir; Come hither Boy, and show the Gen∣tlemen the Cloaths you have brought.



Quickly; for I am in great hast at this present.



Come sirrah, dispatch; what a fu•bling do you make; Give them me; Look you Gentlemen, There is no man in all Burdeaux that can shew you better, or hath more choice.



Master This is a very good suit to travel in.



But observe the fashion, and the workmanship of it.



Cupes shall wear these, and Pollo these; And this shall serve for the other.



I have brought all you told me of.



Well, well, go too  give us the price?



But onely for one dayes wearing.



Shall I be at a word with you verily.







Shall I be at a word, verily shall I be at a word with you?



You kill me with delayes.



Well  Verily and indeed la, you shall give me Forty shillings.







You cannot give me lesse verily.



Verily saith well Master.







Pray Sir then make short with verily.



Well  I will give it.



I do value them all at fourscore pound.



The man verily saith well.



If you cannot spare so much money, let me have but a sufficient Morgage.



And Verily▪ what needs that, my Master being one of the chiefest Merchants son in all the City?



What do you doubt me?



No Sir; but the Custome of our trade expecteth some security.



I have a Ring on my finger which I value at a very high Rate.



What, that Master, with the rich precious stone in't?







'Tis worth at least three hundred pound.



Let me have that?



What, a Ring of so great a Value; How shall I be sure to have my Ring again?



I have a shop verily.







You will not trust me being a Gentleman, why shall I trust you being but an ordinary Trades-man?



I know not what to say more ; pray give me my Goods again!



Master you may trust him, The Man is an honest Man ve∣rily, I have known him along time.



Do you know me verily?







Upon your word I will trust him with it.



Verily how it shines, and glisters, and sparkles?



It doth verily flammas{que} imitante Pyropo.



Gentlemen, God be with you?



Let your Boy first convey these things for us into the next Lane, and leave um 







At the Sign of the Anchor.







Farewel my Fine City-wit verily.



I hope now that all things will answer our expectation; But what if Ignoramus should now come himself 



We will fright him hence; Be you but vigilant and lie close, and we shall doe wel• enough.



I will be all eyes my Trico.



And • and Cupes will lie in Ambush here.



But what if I light upon my Father?



I presently will instrust you how to circumvent him. Go and make your self ready.







If any thing falls out crosly, you must with patience en∣dure it; for Fortune sometimes will faulter.



Be no bad Prophet Trico.; Fortune I hope will assist us, but make what hast you can unto me; for without you I am but a blind-man without a Guide.



I will be with you again immediately. Doe you hear Cupes, Cupes, Take these Cloaths, and presently attire your selves.



It shall be done in an instant.



But whom see • here? my best and familiar Friend Milsalis▪ He promised to assist me; I peradventure may drain something from him as often heretofore I have done.




The ARGUMENT.Musaeus complaineth of Ignoramus, and what a slavish life he leads with him. He propounds him in a Riddle unto Trico, and in∣forms him, that Ignoramus is coming with six hundred Crowns, Trico sends Musaeus to Antonio, and Cupes, to acquaint them with it.




I Would my parents had broke my neck when they first placed me to this Fool Ignoramus; Let me say, or doe what I can to please him, he is alwayes exclaiming against me; How ill favouredly doth he carry himself? This is my fine schollar; he neither knows how to put a Bridle on a Horse, nor to ride him, being bridled, nor mend a broken Girt; where are your Syllogismes now, you Vniversity-Coxcomb?



Musaeus how do you?



Well Trico, were it not ill with me in having so bad a Master; I would he had his due for me.



What is the matter?



He doth so torment and confound me with his babling.



Why, Is he not fluent, accurate, and eloquent?



There be others indeed that are so, but he is nothing lesse; he doth all things so perversly, he puts his Cap on his Feet, and his shooes on his Head.







Trico I will read thee a Riddle, and do you solve it?



Let me hear it.



What is that which liveth by Right, and by Wrong, which hath a great Heart and no Heart, which is both an Ambidexter, and a Bifront, which speaketh Much, and speaketh Nothing; which is Jest in Earnest, and Earnest in Jest; which speaketh English, Dutch, French and Latine, yet speaketh neither English, nor Dutch, nor French, nor Latine; which writeth Lawes that they may be mis∣prisions, and which writeth misprisions that they may be Lawes,
  
which maketh a Finite Infinite; Truth, no Truth, and no Truth, Truth.



Which maketh Truth no Truth, who should this be, but Belzebub Cydonius?



It is he, and it is not he.



Who loves to speak in an unknown Tongue  It is A Popish Priest.



It is something like him, but not the same.



What a Blockhead am I? now I have it.



What, or who is it?



It is your Master Ignoramus.



You are an Oedipus.



Who was Father to this Monster?



Francus Soloicophan•s, his Mothers Name was Barbara Latina.



Where was he born?











Either Aurelia, or Argentina.



What doth he feed upon?







Is he not Learned? Doth he not know the seven Liberal Arts?



The Seven Arts! why, I tell you, he knows all letters.



Good God! what all letters?



Why There are but four and twenty Letters in all.



He is a Man of a Thousand!



Certainly there are but few such as he is; Every Order neverthelesse hath both good and bad, both wise men and fools; In good corn there are some bad ears, and in bad some good ones; It were foolish therefore and inhumane (although many are guilty of it) to inveigh against whole Societies and Orders, and the studies of many Men for the extravagancies of some few persons; If need were I could number up many excellent Men of this Order so transcendent for Wisdome, Learning, and Piety, that they are hardly to be parallel'd, who have both learnedly expounded, and sincerely delivered the Laws of their own Coun∣try, then which there is nothing more just, or righteous: These
  
Men we alwayes prosecute with deserved honour; for they pro∣ceeded from us, and are for us. No man is an Enemy to Learn∣ing but Ignoramus; Let Ignoramus therefore and such as he are, who desire the Ruine of the Church and Universities 



Be for ever banished.



Nay, let them go into Morbonia.



They will be angry with you.



Ignoramus will, but no man else; but what he thinketh or thinketh not, is all one to me.



To bring such a man upon the Stage were dangerous.



Not at a jot, why all the world is but a Stage where e∣very mans a player.



Come Musaeus we grow too serious, Tell me what is thy Master Ignoramus now about?



He is coming unto Torcol; He hath told the Money just now.







I came on purpose to acquaint you with it▪



And why with a pox no sooner? make all the hast you can to Cupes, and bid him be sure to remember the Horn.







VVhat is that to you; He knows already what is to be done, let him immediately acquaint Antonio with it, let them be both in a readinesse.



I fly, may some evil fall on Ignoramus, I heartily do wish it.



If he comes not immediately away, the whole plot is spoyled, Woe is me, Ignoramus is come already.




The ARGUMENT.Ignoramus brings the six hundred Crowns which he bargained for Rosabella, Trico the more to delay the time untill they can be dressed in their disguises propoundeth a ridiculous case in Law to be pleaded by Ignoramus, which when he insists upon longer then ordinary, Trico, to requite his patrons courtesie, acquaints him what Antonio hath contrived against him, and that he had sworn to geld his Rival Ignoramus wheresoever he could find him.


Ignoramus with his Money, Trico.



HEre is the legem pone, Here are the six hundred Crowns, which just now I intended with Torcol, for my Sweet∣heart Rosabella.



He hath brought the Money, I am undone.



If I live, Rosabella my stella▪ d•nsab• veteres mensuras, I will Dance my old measures with thee.



They have watched him well 



This is the Indenture, and the Obligation of Roderigo Torcol, I will go to him in propria persona.



Out upon't, what makes them stay so long? I must detayn him with some discourse or other Save you Sir.



Sirrah who are you, Hah.



A poor man Sir,, that hath spent all his Estate in Law.



Oh, oh; In forma pauperis, Abi via, Abi via, Away, Away.



Sir I crave your Counsel.



My Counsel Knave, Legem pone, Legem pone.



We must give a Sop to Cerberus, what shall I do? I have some brasse money about me, I will sling it away on him; Sir I am a very poor man.



A poor man   That signifies nothing.



But because Sir, you are well vers'd in Causes, I must be∣seech you to hear my Cause, And what Money I have left is here at your service.



Oh well, well, Have you joyned Issue?



Issue What shall I say now? yes Sir, Issue, Issue.







My Grandfather Grunnio, the son of Bore, had an Uncle called Hog.







You say right Sir Quondam Uncle, but the Quondam Un∣cle of the Sister of my Quondam Grandmother, who was Cousin German, to the Grandmother of my Quondam Father.



Well said Quondam; Allo••s.



Did bequeath unto me a black Horse; the truth is, he had but a short come off: why shall I dissemble? he had no Tayl, but what then? should any man put a Nettle under it?



In Tayl speciall, In good Earnest by Right he could not do it.



He did neverthelesse, but he did. VVince and Kick, and fling his leggs aloft.



Take heed of that.



And he kill'd the Deer and Phesants.



O Dammage Faisant Here must be a demur.



And certainly the Kalendar lyed abominably; for I well remember it did Hayle.



A good circumstance, and which maketh for you.



Slow man of Burdeaux▪ what not yet Sir? And he not only put a Nettle under his Tayl, but he repleated all his mouth with pepper.



Repleated? a replevit will not serve in this case.



So I thought, but he having before his eyes the Figure or copy of a white Horse.



O What Copses too, it is in tertio Richardi primi potest Copitias Toppare, Loppare, & abscoriare, He may Top them and Lop them, and do what he will with them.



He did not though I lost him that year, who can help it what do you think of it Sir Snayles! we are undone.



What do I think of it? was not that black Che•all your Chattle personal?



Chattle, yes Chattle indeed, but I am affraid of the pep∣per Sir.



You say well and there is the point indeed; for this is your case, If John an Oakes in•eoffat John a Stiles de Black Acre, and John a Stiles capit Black Acre & VVhite Acre, in this case Tout is void, All▪ All.



I think they are asleep But the pepper being snuffed into his Nose did make him stand an end on his Leggs before, and break wind backwards.



Snuffing, and Leaping, and petting is a good Tenor doubt it not.



But I am still affraid of the pepper.



What need you fear. But take out a subpena for him, and if he doth not return black Cheval, and white Chevil cum costis ad pinguebus dammagis, with costs and •at dammages, say that Ignoramus non habet Lex.



I thank you Sir.



Farewel, For I have some businesse must be dispatched.



But Sir, For the good Counsel you gave to me, I have some good Counsel, to requite your love, for your self, And what much concerns you. If you are Ignoramus, make all the hast you can away, Fly and be gone.







You love Rosabella that liveth here hard by.







Antonio also is deeply in love with her, and in my hear∣ing did swear most seriously that He would dismember Ignoramus wheresoever He could light upon him.



It was but in Jest.



But do you get you gone in Earnest, and have a care of your self; for that most dissolute Cutter hath gelded very many that I know of.



You have put me in a bodily fear, and because I am in a strange place, I am in a greater doubt; look yonder Fabula est in lupus.



He comes at last. 






Antonio, Cupes, Ignoramus Trico.


WHere is that old Whoremaster Ignoramus, who would defraud me of my Love? If I serve him not as I would a Hee-goat 



Do you hear now?



Doth he use to be as good as his word?



He never breaks it.



He is not Compos mentis, I will have a Breve for him.



I have brought the Sowgelder along with me, he will be here presently.



Client Trico, I am in a great fear Client.




Cupes within sounds his Horn like a Sowgelder.




I hear him now.







Client Trico, Tremblo, tremblo, I tremble all over, what shall I doe?











Hide your self here behind me, lest they discover you quickly, quickly, and as covertly as you can, quickly I say.



What do we stay for? I have all things here in a readi∣nesse, Look you here else.



Friend, do you hear? Did you not see a Lawyer herea∣bout?



Say I am gone to London?



He is gone to London.



I heard he was here but just now.



Say I am gone home then.



He is gone home.



He shall no• so escape Ile warrant him.



Client, go sidelong, that I may make an escape.







Something goes yonder, what is it?



Here he lies, Lawyer! How dare you be so bold?



Shew me your Testatum est latitare.



But you shall have but little to show before I have done with you, Let us go in with him.



Come to the Court Lawyer.



I command you in the Kings Name to keep the peace.



You prattle in vain.



He is my patron, I beseech you Gentlemen.



You pray in vayn.



What do I pray? what will you not look upon the Al∣manack first?







Why? Upon my Honesty you will find the Sign in Scorpio.



'Tis full of Danger then.



Take heed what you doe, If I die within a year and a Day 



Your words move us not.



What will you judge me non audita querela?



No, no, you shall be judged by your peers.



I beseech you Gentlemen, I beseech you for him.



If we should let him go, he would presently come snea∣king hither again.



Client Balliato me, pray bail me Client.



I will engage for him that he shall come no more.



I swear most solemnly, If ever you find me here again 



What do you run away?



Follow him, follow him, whither runs he▪



I am safe and sound now, titillabo vos, monstrabo tricum de lege, I shall tickle you for this isaith, and show you a trick of the Law; but because I have sworn, I will not go my self, but send my Clark Dullman for Rosabella.



He is gone, he he.











You are gallant Watchers, How well did you attend his coming?



I was ready, and at hand, and heard all your discourse till I was ready to burst with laughter.



He is now possessed with such a fear, that he will send his servant, do you Cupes therefore and your wife attire your selves in such habits, that you may be taken for Torcol, and he for Rosabella.



I go, it is done me thinks already.



Master, and let us be jogging too, I will tell you in the way the rest of the fallacy, I must go now to the painter, and take you along with me.



What shall we doe with him?



He shall paint a little Mole in your Cheek, Let us go, I wil tell you what you shall doe if peradventure you shall meet with your Father in the way.




The ARGUMENT.Whiles Antonio in painting the Mole in his cheek, Trico proceed∣eth in his deceits; Dullman cometh with the Indenture, and the Crowns to take away Rosabella, he asketh Trico of the Portu∣gal; Trico makes answer that the Portugal with his wry neck is his Master, and shews him the verses which Ignoramus gave to Rosabella.


Trico, Dullman, Cupes, within.


I Have well instructed my servant Antonio, the Paint∣er is now painting the Mole upon his Cheek.



I see here no body, but by the Masse I am in a great fear, for there are many Ins•n• Pilei, called Madc•ps here in Bur∣d•aux.



What Bird have we here!



My Master Ignoramus swore that they would make a Gelding of him.



He is a st•anger.



A fine Riot, was it not, to take away our instruments.



He holds the writings in his hand.



My Master therefore gave me a letter of Atturny to take s•l•in of a certain Virgin called Rosabella, whom I never saw.



Certainly this is Ignoramus servant; Cupes, Cupes are you in a readinesse?



At hand quoth pickpurse.



Here is the servant of Ignoramus.







I see one yonder, I will demand of him, if he knows his messuage to whom I go; my Master said he was a Porsugall with a wry Neck, I have no other knowledge of him, Hoh, honest man,



Who would you speak with Friend?



He is a man of a good behaviour, I would speak with one whose name I do not know, do you know it?



What a Blockhead 'tis? of what Country and complex∣ion is he?



He is a Portugal,



With a wry Neck?







Tis ten to one, but tis my master.



It may be so.



Do you remember the first letter of his Name?



Puto, facio, I believe I do.



Doth it begin with a B?



























T  stay • yes, T, T.







Torcol, Torcol, A pox on't; I have his name here in black and white; are you his servant?







In bono tempo, what is your Name?



What shall I now say Mendoza.



Mendoza; in bono tempo.



And what is your name, I pray you?



Dullman, the Senior Clark to Ignoramus.



Dullman Clark to Ignoramus, in bono tempo, have you brought the Crowns with you Du•lman?



Six hundred Mendoza, and the Indenture with them.



In bono tempo, Do you know whose hand this is?



I marry do I, It is my Masters hand.



Tis right, he made these verses on our Rosabella.



Pimpillos, pursos, ad ludos ibis & ursos; Right, Right, you say very well, they are his verses indeed, I would I could make such, but I pray you call your Master hither, to tender a Delivery of Rosabella to me.



He will come presently.



Est hic honestus sodalis warrantizabo▪ An honest good fellow this I will warrant him; I would Rosabella would come with him, I seem for the present to be in a Forrest, I do so fear the Tax of Horngelt.




The ARGUMENT.Cupes enters with a wry Neck counterfeiting himself to be Torcol, and to carry on the deceit more handsomely he speaks some Frag∣ments of the Portugal tongue; they both of them deceive Dull∣man, and fish out of him the Indenture, the Crowns and the sign whereby Torcol might be assured that he is Ignoramus servant.




LOs Diablos te gannan picar•, you Rascall have you no more manners in you?



This is the Portugal with the crooked neck; I conceive him to be, but I am sorry he is so impatient with the poor man his servant.



Sirrah can you not bring the friend of my most honou∣red Lord (save you Signior) into my house, you Rascal, that he may tast a cup of Wine after the English Fashion.



I thank you Sir.



There is no such fashion in our Countrey.



Trunkan Villaco! what stand you still, and dumb like a dog? where is Diego? where is Alonzo? where is Piedro? where is Guzman?



I know not Master, I.



You know not Master! just so I thought, but I shall 



Master Torcol I pray, noli chafare propter me: chafe not for me I pray Sir, your man is a good servant truly.



A good servant with a Halter but Signior have you brought have you brought Signior?



Ovy, Ovy dea, yes, yes, Signior, my master hath sent you here six hundred Crowns.



So he is bound to do, you Sirrah? watch-I-call, you   Mendoza!











Here is your Indenture also, look you Sir, here is your own hand, and your own Seal to it.



(He looks upon it) Hum Roderigo Torcol; it is as you say.



Deliver now Rosabella to me for my Masters use.



Stay a little  and first tell me what is the private to∣ken which was agreed upon betwixt your Master and my self?



You say well, and that no Breve Erroris be here com∣mitted, I am injoyned to give you a sound tweak by the Nose.



By the Nose Seignior?



Your Nose must come into the Court Nasal, and pay Homage Nasative, come Sir, ha, ha, he, My Master is such another merry Man, come Sir Here I have it, I faith now.



I know it was the token, I only had a desire to know, if he had given you any Item of it, it is the token in earnest.







I have told the Crowns, but this is a good on?



Current upon my life.



Tis well; Friend what is thy name?



Dullman, And your servant Sir.



Well! Take this for thy pains, and be Dullman still  Nay take it I say. Bring me now Rosabella hither, and a Flag∣gon of the most generous Wine; Sirrah do you hear, bring also some Sack with you.



What would you have Sir?



Sack you Villain, according to the English Fashion; Sack I say, wellcome Signior.



Indeed Sir it is needlesse, est postremum quod feci; it is the last thing I did.



Nay what do you mean, mend your draught I pray, you shall you have a cup of Sack too, my friend Dullman.



Est valde curtesius homo. A Noble, and a courteous Gen∣tleman I'le warrant him.



Desire your Master for my sake to love my Rosabella well, I brought her up for my own Daughter; my heart doth earn within me to think of her departure from me, but I am confident he will be very tender over her.



You may assure your self, she shall receive all the courte∣sies that the customs and Country of England can afford her; my Master will give her a good Joynture, I know it well, for I have ingrossed it, but I pray deliver me the counterpane of my Masters Indenture.



On my troth I left it with my Notary, but presently I will either bring it, or send it to you.



Then give me an acquittance.



Do you hear (sirrah) Bring hither some more Wine and Sack, where is this Knave now?



Veni presenter post me quaeso; I pray you Sir make hast after me.








The ARGUMENT:Polla is introduced weeping and disguised, and is deliverd to Dull∣man for Rosabella; Dullman is dismissed full of wine and sack.

Polla, Trico, Cupes, Dullman.


DO you understand me Polla?



Is it not possible for you to hold your tongue?



But be sure you have tears enough in store.



No more; for on my faith, if you provoke me!



You muzzle me to a silence.



Look! Here he comes.



Deliver her unto me.



Rosabella my dear Cosin, nay rather my Daughter, I here deliver thee to this Man, that he may conduct thee to thy Hus∣band. And must thou now leave me my Dear? I cannot forbear from Tears for my own part; but do not afflict your s•lf, if you love me.



My Uncle, nay rather my Father; although I shall be Married to another, and though it be never so well with me, yet to leave you 



You do increase my Tears.



Oh Dullman, Maudlen Dullman, who can refraine from weeping?







No more can I Dullman. Well you have got a Mistresse of a sweet disposition.



Certe videtur tenera & amens pecia, quanquam maskata est; She seems indeed to be a very loving and tender piece al∣though she is masked.



It is the custome altogether for Virgins in these Countrys.



And a good custome it is.



But on better considerations, we should rather rejoyce then weep to see her well Married.



And you say true by the Masse.



Why let us be merry then.



You speak very well Sir.



























And good Sack too, Seignior Dullman.



Even what you please Sir; I am prepared to pledge you.



Well then Give us some Sack! Here is to you Seignior Dullman.



I thank you Sir.



Some more Sack, Fill it up according to the English Fa∣shion, Fill up the Glasse I say; 'Tis sweet Sack, my sweet Sig∣nior.



So, so; Ad te Magister contra es dispositus, Sir unto you against you are disposed.



I thank you, you do but sip; drink deeper, where's this Varlet? some more Sack for my Friend.



I have done very well Sir, I must now take my leave of you.



God, buy good Signior, Good, buy, sweet Cosin; I shall long to hear how you thrive in the world.



God, buy, God, buy.



God be with you Master Mendoza.



But my dear Signior, take this one Glass before you go.



And with much thankfulnesse; I will drink your health in England for this.







Farewell, Quam curtesii; How courteous are these Men of Burdeaux.

















He knows not of what cup he drinks; intemperance hath of∣ten disgraced the high atchievements of the English in their wares.



More Sack, more Sack, you Rascal! How sweet it is; Give me leave to kisse thee my mingle?



No more of these reiterations, I will now go, and put on other cloaths, and counterfeit my self to be Dullman.



O, Sack for Dullman, you know the sign.



If I do not soundly twinge him by the Nose let me 



I will take the Crowns along with me, and this writing.



Writing! Indenture, Trico, I remember that word, and many more ever since I was an Underbutler in London, I have many of the Lawyers phrases still by heart.



I am confident, the Pandar Torcol doth not know Dull∣man very well.



And me much lesse.



Why, if you are taken, you can tell a handsome lye for your self.



I have learned that out of the books of the Jesuits, and will give place to none but Belzebub Cydonius.



My prote•s, we lo•se ourselves in vain discourse; I will immediately addresse my self to Torcol, and pretend I come with Counsels and Conditions very advantageous to him; and as you see occasion, do you intervene?



I will attend the Scene with my best dilligence.



We being thus united shall circumvent him with the greater dexterity of deceit.



I go to attire my self.



And I to Torcol, I am affraid he is not at home. Tick, tock, Tick, tock, he knocks at the door.




The ARGUMENT.Trico endeavoureth to circumvent the pandar Torcol who will give no ear unto him, as knowing very well what Trico is; at the last Trico seems to be angry, and doth curse him.




I am a Prophet; my mind gave me that Trico was here, and here I find him.



Signior I love your Maid Surda, I love her most intirely.



You love Surda, Go, go, I am now awake.



But now Sir I come unto you on businesse of importance which deeply doth concern you.



O Signior you cannot deceive me Signior.







You spoke it this morning.



I spoke it but in Jest.



But I in earnest I will be careful of you, go about your businesse, go when I bid you.



I have but three words to say unto you, hear me I pray you.



I can hear nothing, especially of Rosabella.



What hurt did I ever do you?



Nay then? VVhat good did you ever do me; when I see you, I see Dammage and the face of Destruction.



You will believe me by and by, I do assure my self.



Indeed, I shall not.



I come now unto you with a gallant condition.



What have you any gold or silver for me.











Stay a little! after Antonio understood that Rosabella was to be given to Ignoramus, being scarce master of himself, he laid throughout the whole City for money, at the last he borrowed of a Friend a Cabanet full of Gold and Jewels.







He will morgage it unto you.



Trico, what do you make of me? do you think I do not know for what you come?



Do you think, I come to cousen you!



O Trico, you who have Gold, and Jewels, and yet have no Monies; as much Money as a man hath in his Chest, so much reputation he hath.



What! I come to deceive you Signior;



If you could I believe you would.



Six or seven of the chiefest Merchants in this City shall passe their words for me.



It is all one; your tricks shall not deceive me Trico, and to be short with you, I must tell you that Rosabella is married to Ignoramus.



O Man of Men; it is now coming out 







Thou wicked man, thou sink of all Vices.



You prevaile nothing: I pray leave me?



Why what's the matter with you?



I pray be gone.







It is in vain Signior.



Thou monstrous piece of crookednesse.



Now rayle at me.



And if I be not even with you.



What? do you threaten me?



M. be. M. be.




The ARGUMENT.Cupes in the habit of an Inkman pretends himself to be Dullman, and Torcol both by his hab•t and his language, doth conocive him to be the servant of Ignoramus. Trico endeavours to take him off from Torcol, that so he might the lesse suspect the contrivance of the plot; but Cupes having delivered the money, and the In∣denture unto Torcol, and given him the private token which was agreed upon betwixt Torcol and Ignoramus (which was that he should pinch him by the Nose) although Trico did forewarn him for that purpose, he was hired by him, yet he is admitted to Rosabella to take her away; Cupes goeth to observe Ignoramus.




THou are very conceitedly attired Dullman in the ha∣bit of an Inkman.



I and you see, I have not forgotten to carry my pen in my ear, look you here, come, let us go my little Dullman.



May I speak now with Surda Signior.



I am deaf Signior to that proposition; but what man is that yonder?



He hath the face of a stranger.



I would fain understand what Countryman, & who he is.



I would beseech you Signior that you would understand what more peculiarly belongs unto your self.



I see a good observation for a Treveller, and I will write it down.



He is some Traveller (as I conjecture) and observeth I know not what my self.



He seems to be a fool. How he gapes, and stares about him, and carrieth his pen in his ear.



But where shall I find him; I am so sorry I have lost my direction▪



By his speech and habit he should be the servant of Igno∣ramus; I think he hath his writing too.



I know not who it is.







An Englishman living in this City, my Friends Friend; do you go in and I will accost him.



Trico begins to smell the businesse, I will now stay.



Hereabouts he said the messuage was



It is the very same whom I expected, he comes accord∣ing to my wish.




It is Ignoramus servant, I am undone.



He hath smelt the Game, and lost it.







How pale he looks.











Friend a word with you.



By your leave Sir, I believe I am the man you look for.



Sir, I shall give you better satisfaction.




I presume your businesse is unto me.



Who is it that you look for, ask of me, and I wil resolve you.



Nay rather ask me? let him come to me, why do you hinder him?



Which of you can certifie me, where is the messuage of a certain Portugall



A Portugall said you.



I can certifie you, it is not here; the Portugalls dwell a great way from this place.




Take no notice of what he sayes, he will deceive you.



Cur me mockatis ita, qui moccat moccabitur, why do you mock me so, he who mocketh shall be mocked again.



Trico, Trico, you cannot be too hard for me; you see this is Ignoramus servant, and faine you would withdraw him from me; I see it plain enough.







Now he is vexed; I am glad with all my heart it was my fortune to be here.



Estis fl•utatores ambo ego ibam viam, you are both flou∣ters, I will be gone.



Come to me Friend, whom do you look for?



Who does he look for? what's that to you? pray go about your businesse, I am able to answer him.



I look for the Portugall Merchant.



He looks for me.



For you? he does not Friend.



How gladly would you glose with him



Follow me, and I will bring you to his house.



What doth this fellow mean?



Ha, ha, he, stay a little.



Follow me I say, and in the way I will give you Wine and Sack, good Sack boy.







Ha, ha, he, Wine, and Sack boy.



By his Physiognomy I perceive, hic est nebulo in grano; this is a Knave in grain.



You may be sure of it.



A venegance on't, you are the man? how doe you Sir; by my troth Sir I scarce knew you.







You know me? do you take me to be a noverint uni∣versi?



Did you never know me in England, look on me?



I shall look on a Knave then Sir I look for such a man as you are with a wry Neck.



He looks not for you Signior, but for such another man as you are, a friend of mine, and I will direct him to his house.



This is very likely, ha, ha, he.



You take this man to be Ignoramus servant, he is no such man Torcol.



Who 〈…〉 I come from my Master Ignoramus, with an Indenture and six hundred Crowns; what doe you behind me? why do you kick me? cur joggas, & n•ddas, why doe you jogg, and nodd, and wink on me so.



Ha, ha, he, Ho, so.



Do I touch you, do I wink, or nodd on you, you Asse you.



I am to crafty an Asse for you.



I would speak with you.



Ha, he, Now he is mad, now he gnasheth his Teeth.



You Ignoramus servant? I know you are not, Come  lets go to the Tavern.



With a mu••ain to you, what have you to do with me? why do you make signes, and wink, and nodd your head so?







All the dumb Rhetorick of your motions will not pre∣vail Trico.



By your Neck and fashion, you should be the man whom I do look for.



Do you know his Name?



It is, it is 



Who is it? 



Now I perceive it is not he, he knows not my name.



But I have it here in the Indenture.



You have if I had met him a little sooner, how easily he might have been prevented.



I have his name here in the Indenture; it is Rodrigo Torcol.







Are you the Man?







He hath swallowed the bayt, hook, and all? but what is your name Friend?



Dullman, at your service Sir, I bring you a message from Ignoramus Sir.



Where is the Gold? where are the Writings?



Here is the Indenture, see your hand seal.



This Indenture made the Nineteenth day of April, betwixt Ambidexter Ignoramus on one side, and Rodrigo Torcol on the other, Hum, Hum, Signed, Delivered, Hum, Hum Rodri∣go Torcol, Hum, it is as you say.







Trico is stark mad now; but what private token have you besides? I would have no man make a mouth at me?



A mouth No, it is your Nose that I demand; Let your nasute Nose Nasative, come into the Court, and pay Nasal Ho∣mage; he tweakes him by the Nose.



Oh gently, gently I pray, oh, oh, oh.



Is not this the token? he drags me by the Nose about the stage.



Oh, oh, yes, it is the Token Oh what do you mean! Oh, no more I pray.



You thought I did not know it.



But I find to the contrary.



'Twas only for a good Memento.



Do you not perceive, you fool, how he mocks •ou, and leads you about by the Nose like a Bear.



No, he who hath no Nose is led about by the Nose; is it not alotted for every man to have a Nose, I have one Trico.



I see you will be cousened.



Be cousened; you are mistaken, you may see I will not be cousened.



You may remember that I told you this morning.



That you would deceive me, I remember it very well.







Yes, ha, ha, he.



I do cousen you at this very instant.



At this instant sure you don't.



I tell you this man is not Ignoramus servant.



You do not here me say, he is, do you  Ha, ha, he.



He is a mear Cheat.







And one whom I hired on purpose to deceive you.



Are you su•e on't?



Upon my faith I speak the truth.







Yes, and you have not the greater care, he will take Ro∣sabella from you too.







This is strange that you will not believe me, when I Swear unto you.



Swear no more I believe you Trico I believe you.



This is a good Nose, I will ingrosse it.



Upon my faith, I do cousen you now, now, at this very instant.



You cousen me upon your faith now? is not here so much Gold? Are not here the writings? did he not tell me the very private token we did agree upon? how am I deceived Trico;



But take heed it be not Aurum Tholosanum.



Upon my credit it is very good Gold, & all in Rose No∣bles



What? am I cousened now?



Yes, and 'tis I have done it.



What will you stand prating with him all day long; de∣liver R•sabella to me?



It shall be done immediately.



For I have a great deal of businesse at home to ingrosse Agreements, Quibbles, Indentures, Pilicocks, and Callimancaes.



But tell me, what was't I pray, that even now you wrote down in your Almanack.



Oh ho, only a travellers observation; I wrote down in my book, that on the fifteenth of May I saw a Portugall with a wry neck so apparelled, and that he being a cunning Knave would Cousen you; I will put it in print.







But Signior, with Rosabella you ought to give me the Counterpane of my Masters Indenture.



You shall have both as soon as I have told the Gold; let us go in.



Are you going you seed of all wickednesse, accursed sacrilegious Caytiffe.



I am deceived, Trico, I am deceived.



Trico may be even with you for all this Signior: Re∣member it?



I will remember it Signior; I am going now to Surda, will you command me any service to her Signior?



M. be Dor, m. be he, ha, he, the more caution the cautelous do use, the more they are deceived; but I must now be gone to observe Ignoramus, least he comes before Cupes leads away Rosabella; Afterwards I will repair to Antonio. That Mole on his Cheek doth extreamly please me, with one deceit thus I do Coyn another.




The ARGUMENT:Cupes bringeth Rosabella to his own house, and locketh fast the dores, and hasteth away to the Tavern.



HEre is the Counterpane of my Master Ignoramus his In∣denture; ha, ha, he, I have made a pure mouth of him.



But tell me I pray you in earnest; will you be as good as your word, and bring me to Antonio?



If thou wilt my Girl, I will have thee my self.



Although clouded under many sorrows and misfortunes, I would have you to know (whosoever you are) that I am not dis∣cended of ignoble parentage, And though I am poor, I have yet a dowry, which is modesty, and ingenuous manners.



What do you boast of modesty in a Bawdy house?



As the beams of the Sun are not defiled on the Dung∣hil, no more are chast minds amongst unchast persons.



Ha, ha, he, women are like to Venice-glasses; keep um with all the Care that may be, and lock them up, you cannot keep them from breaking, they are but brittle ware.



My Father was a personage of Honour, and brought me up accordingly, And this man my Uncle, although a wicked man, yet he hath not violated my Chastity.



But I cannot bring you to Antonio presently.



Deprive me then of my life, and cut my throat.



I had rather carry you back to Torcol.



O, doe not, I beseech you; For he, kept me of late bound with cords, he now will use me worse; if there be any thing of ingenuity in you, kill me outright, and I shall take it for a Courtesie.



Be of good courage, I spake all this while but in jest, I will bring you to Antonio presently.



Mock me not I beseech you.



So God shall help me, I speak the truth unto you he will be at my house presently.



O Hope unlook'd for!



Let us hence least we be taken; Do you go in there?



Deal civilly with me! pray you.



I willing g•od earnest; I will lock the dore, and by and by I will return unto you again; I will now to the Tavern, and refresh my self; This day I will dedicate to mirth with wine and good cheer, but I will first change my cloaths in the next room.




The ARGUMENT.Ignoramus receiving Polla for Rosabella, beateth Dullman, who runs away; he groweth afterwards outragious with Polla, who could not abstain from fighting with him, and departing from him, acquaints the whole parish that he is possessed with an evill spirit.




MMaster, I cannot find Dullman.



No; F•cias tuitissimum, & clamerum post eum, Do you hear Sirrah, make a Hue and Cry after him.



I think he is run away.



Cause him to be attached Pecus?



It shall be done Master.



What a misprision, what a Deceit is this? In the Divels Name who art thou?



I am Rosabella▪ Seignior.



Rosa-bella, Rosa Diabla; without doubt thou art some Ribalda that liveth in Tiplandis, & lupanaris.



I, a Ribald that lives in Tipling houses, and Bawdy houses, I would have you know I am Rosabella, aliÃ s bella Rosa, Seignior.



You, a sweet Flower? you a Rose? you look like an old Cow, your Face I am sure on't, non concordat cum Recordo.



For all that I am Rosabella, my Seignior.



By your face I should swear that you are a Hag, and a Hobgoblin.



You speak such strange hard words Seignior, I cannot understand them.



Do you not understand them, I tell you then again you are a Sorceresse and an Inchantresse.



Ha ha he  Do you call me Witch and Inchantresse?



Do you laugh, I will indite you for a Sorcerss as you are, viz. That you Spinster (I shall learn your Name) not having the fear of God before your eyes, but seduced by the Instigation of the Divel, have practised the wicked Arts of the Divel, vocates Witch-craft and Sorcery, in, upon, and against the person of Am∣bidexter Ignoramus. Ponam te super patriam si vivo, As I live I will put you upon your Country.



What sayes my Dear?



My Dear off with your hands  you ride in the air super broomas, on brooms and staves.



My Dear Love  why are you so angry with Rosabella.



O ho, Are you still Rosabella? I am not compos mentis I; in good Faith I think I am bewitched in good earnest, Why do you glote so on me? I feel something within me, I know not what my self. But if I can but first draw bloud of her I do not care, I will adventure it; but I dare not doe it: But I dare though: Putana de Diabolo.



Forbear a little till I put off my Sandalls.



I will scratch thee for a Sorceresse as thou art.



What do you threaten me? Nay then have at you, Ile teach you to strike a woman again, you base hen-hearted fellow!



Oh so▪ what vi & armis, & manu forti, some moderate mer∣cy I beseech you, At least so much fair play as leave to rise again.



I will paint your face, you wizzard you.



Keep the peace, Keep the peace? O for a supersedeas de non molestando!



Am I not Rosabella now? what say you?



Een who you please O Lord, I am maimed, I will to the Office presently and have an appeal for blows and maims.



The Divel's in you I think.



Well, well sum vade brusatus, I am horribly bruised, I will een go home, and say my prayers, but you shall repent it, you Sorceresse.



Do you Chatter you Monkey? Upon my faith I believe he is possessed with a Divel. He speaks Magick words too; I will be jogging to my own house and desire my Neighbours to have a Care how they keep him Company; but see my dore is shut, I did ill, that I took not away the Keyes with me, but some body peradventure is within, I will knock, Tic Toc, Tic Toc.




The ARGUMENT.Polla coming home, and finding the dore to be locked, and Rosa∣bella at the window conceiving her to be her Husbands Lemmane, goeth amongst all the Houses of the Victuallers to look him out.

Polla, Rosabella, at the window.


WWho is there? what would you have?



Why  This is handsome, is it not? A strange Woman demands of the Mistresse of the House who she is, and what she would have? Nay then  who are you? and what have you to doe in my House with a mischief to you?



The Master of the House will be here presently himself.



This morning I even read my own Fortune, This is my goodly Husbands, goodly Harlot.



Speak more civilly. I am not I, for that filthy trade of life.



Was this the businesse that he so suddenly commanded me out of dores to bring this creature in? What will he keep his Whores here before my own eyes? shall I live to endure this?   Thou whore of all whores I shall presently be with thee.



Speak not so ill of me, I am not that creature which you suppose me to be.



What in my own House? was it not enough for him to wast my portion in Taverns, but he must whore it away also?



Oh, woe is me, woe is me! To what a man have I intru∣sted my self?



What? do you weep you Baggage? but I will make you, and them, and all of you weep, and by and by; O that I could break the dores!



Woe is me  this woman is mad.



I will go over all the Taverns in Burdeaux, but I will have him; Oh that I could find a good handsome Broomstaffe to revenge my self upon him; Oh that these Nails were a little longer.
Exit.




The ARGUMENT.Polla finds Cupes with a Victualler singing a Song of her and laughing at her, she soundly beats them both and the Fidlers that were in the room; she throws down on the ground the Capons, Pheasants, and much other good cheer, she poures out all the wine, and having got the Key of her House, she throwes Rosabella out of dores for a whore, who poor wretch knows not whither to go.


Cupes, the Victualler, Fidlers, Polla, Rosabella.



OH happy Holy day Things answering my expecta∣tion so successively, I have bought much good Cheer, I have hired Fidlers to make me more merry; But why are they not come yet? O my Priests, these sacrifices you offer, these Wine and Capons are very acceptable to me your God. O you Ca∣pons, Pheasants, and Partridges, how do I love and honour you? you are of the Nobility of Birds? how richly, how magnificently are you cloathed? how greedily do I wait upon you? as for Ducks and Geese, and such kind of Fowl they are clownish and rustical I care not for them.



I have found him at last. Hay day  what a Banket hath
  
the Knave prepared for his Whore, I will here obscure my self, and listen a little to him.



O my Beloved fat Friend, my dear Capon, how fairer art thou then my wife Polla?







How willingly do I kisse you? what a sweet kisse is this? much sweeter then the kisse of my wife Polla.



What do you prefer a Capon to me, I shall speedily be with you!



Sure you have some foul slut to your wife Seignior.



And I shall meet with you too.



A foul slut there is nothing like her; she is a Gob∣lin, a Gorgon; Styx, Scilla, a Hydra, a Harpy, a Monster all over.



What shall I doe, I am not able to contain my self!



Cupes, Let us sing that song I pray of your wife Polla.



What? that which I made in the Tavern, the other day?



The very same, Let us have it I pray you.



What have they made a Song of me too? wo is me▪ but  indeed, woe unto them.



Let us sing it.



But what, if she should over-hear us?



What if she should?



She is a roaring Lioness, I had rather dwell with winter, or the Northern wind then with her.



You speak truer then you think for, you shall feel me thundring presently about your ears.







I will first look if she be not lurking hereabouts to observe us; I tremble when I think on her.



St, I will hide my self that they may not see me.



Here is no body; Now my Minstrels, for a sprightful fit of Mirth? let us have it?



I See! I am become a Song throughout the whole City; but I shall inchant the Chanters by and by.
Cupes and the rest sing.


May Polla wife to Cupes break
By some happy fall her neck;

  And may all wives that like her be
Perish so, as well as she.
They all laugh, whooh, Ha ha he.





Oh for a Thunderbolt to confound them all at once.



Come once more;   May Polla wife to Cupes break &c.



I can forbear no longer, Ile break your neck if I can.




She hath kill'd me.



What shall become of me? O my head.



Woe is me, O my neck and shoulders.



I am sore all over.



This is a new Song for you Fidlers.



I am undone, she hath broke all my strings, my lively∣hood is lost, what shall become of me?



Why do not you sing now?







Do I appear so foul a slut unto you? Hagh.



Oh me, Oh me.Exeunt Fidlers.



Must I be sung about Town by such a Kenn•l of Rascals? Oh that I had a little more breath, How I would be labour them?



If any man should ask me now, in what place of the world I am, I am not able to tell him, I am so confounded with amaze∣ment. Will you drink any Wine my Hony?



My Hony, my Gall, will you drink to me, and invite me to Supper with a Company of Whores?



You have thrown away all our good cheer, have you any Impe∣riall missives that you act so uncontroled? if you are a good woman, restore us our Victuals again; what do you spill the Wine too? I am undone At least spare that; woe is me, Look on that Fla∣gon yonder, How it vomits forth its purple soul. Kill me Polla, that would be pardonable, but it is unpardonable to kill the Wine.



Now go call your Whore to that Supper she is worthy of.



Upon my life, Wife, she is no Mistresse of mine.



Give me the Key, Give it me, I say, I will break open the dores else. Here will I make a way for my fury to enter in.



She is deaf with Ra•e; I forgot to tell her before hand, that I was to bring Rosabella to my own House.



Whore  Come out of my House Come out of my House you Whore.



Woe is me, whither do you throw me?



Into a Bawdy-house, the only place fit for you.



Good woman I am innocent, and you are much mistaken in me, whither you will have me go?



To Bridewell you prostitute.



I had rather you should kill me.



Get you gone you whore you, Get you gone?



Woe is me, I go, I hope unto my Grave.



What have you turn'd her out of dores? you have un∣done me then; It is Rosabella, and not any that I make love to.



I shall pluck your fair Rose  you wish my death you Rogue you.

May Polla wife to Cupes break
By some happy fall her neck.




O my wife  If you did but know the Cause why I wish'd your Death, you would not be so angry.



Say you so; what is the Cause?



It is the fashion now for every man to wish his wife dead.



Do you so purge your self? she beateth him again.



O Lord  O Lord  what do you make account to doe, to lay on so unmercifully. A right Megaera.



As you like this first course, I will serve in the second.



Thank you sweet Poll; I do not like the first so well.



I have now a little revenged my self.



A little  say you; If this be your little, what is your Great deal?



I will now step in, and if you follow me not immediately, I shall give you such another entertainment when ever I have you within dores.



What shall I doe now; Let me think a little with my self of this brave Supper which I have lost, Pheasants  hum  Partridges  hum  Oh but the Wine  woe is me.




The ARGUMENT.Antonio asketh Cupes concerning Rosabella, who being very me∣lancholy for the losse of his good Cheer and Wine, gives a very imperfect answer to every thing; This being discovered, An∣tonio goes to seek out his Mistresse.




CVpes but now informed me that Rozabella was safe at his own House, which if it be so, there can be no man more joyful or more happy then my self; but here he is, he look∣eth sadly on it, I do not like it.



Oh happy you who have my Supper eat!















I would there were, all is thrown out of dores.



What! is all nought?



Here is nothing but destruction, ejection, and miserable confusion.



Woe is me what hath there bin any effusion?







What of her bloud?



Worse, worse, of bloud, gravy and all.







The flesh and bones, and all, most cruelly dispersed.



O monstrous! How came this to passe?



With hands, and feet, and blowes, and boxes▪



O my dear Rosabella!



O my wine, O my dear wine!



Without thee I cannot live!



Without thee I cannot drink!



Who hath committed so great a villany?











In this very place look you here▪







It was wine, But O most unfortunate to say it was!



But I speak of Rosabella!



But I of my wine, and delicate viands.



Away with your wine, and your delicate viands!



Away with your Rosabella and your delicate Loves.



Tell me, you afflicting Knave, where is she now?



I brought her hither, but my wife suspecting her to be my Curtezana, did beat her out of dores.



O Beast! did she not dread so divine a Beauty?



What she that did not dread so divine Cana•y?



Tell me Villain where is thy wife? I will troun•e her!



She will trounce you; touch her not; no nor so much as provoke her if you be wise: She will overcome a hundred Anto∣nies and Cleopatraes also.



Which way did Rosabella go?



This way, but whither she is gone I know n•t.



Wretch that I am to commit so great a Treasure to a Drunkard, I will go, and find her out my self? but which way shall I turn? which path shall I first tread in? shall I take this way? or that way?




The ARGUMENT.Antonio complains of the losse of Rosabella; Rosabella of the loss of Antonio, and Cupes of the losse of his •ine & Supper▪ Antonio goeth to seek Rosabella; Rosabella to seek Antonio, and Cupes to supply himself with Monies whereby to provide another Supper.




FOrtune is composed of gloss▪ which when it shines most it is presently broken; I who, but even now, seem'd to touch hea∣ven with my finger, how suddenly am I thrown headlong down as it were to Hell; where now shall I 〈◊〉Antonio• it is uncertain:
  
but certain I am to find, either Death, or him.



With what amazement shall I contemplate on the losse of my Supper? Multa vini virtus animo, multus{que} rerursat Dentis honos  haerent caponis pectore vultus.

The generous virtue of the wine I find
And the tooth's valour running in my mind,
My eyes still dwell upon the capons brest.




I wander from street to street, and enquire if they saw a young Lady go that way, in such a 〈◊〉, and such a hair, and complexion, they tell me that but even now they saw such a one; This way I hope to find her.
Exit.



Quam sese ore ferens, quam forti pectore & alis?
What's this a Foul, O fair, O goodly thing!
How strong a Brest, how full and large a wing?



What shall I doe? I cannot find him for my life; but if it be my happinesse once more to see him, Ile never lose him af∣terwards.



O mihi post nullos perdix memorande sodales!
O well fed Partridge, that art still to be
'Bove all thy Fellowes to be prays'd by me.



Heavens grant me the happinesse to find him; grant me (I beseech you) the reward of my Chastity? forsake me not you powers above, I will now try this way.



It is sure enough that I am evil, I am so, I confesse, I am evil, and this evil is justly come upon me for my Evil. But O

Dic quid fecerunt optima vina mali.
What evil hath been done, or meant,
By Sack so good and Excellent.




Woe is me, I cannot find Her, but if ever again I enjoy the honour of her company, he that shall take her from me shall take my life along with her, I will give my self no rest untill I have found her out; Heaven send me good Fortune, I will now down this Lane 



Oh the good Wine that's lost, and the bottles thrown down, and batter'd.

Convivae fortaesse tui meruere perde,
Sed quid fecerunt optima vina mali.

  The drunken Guests perchance deserv'd to fall,
But th•se so precious Vessels not at all.

Well I will een go to bed, I am affraid I shall not live long▪




The ARGUMENT.Ignoramus being about to send for Torcol, is deterred from it by Cupes Horn, being in a corporal Fear of the Sowgelder.




I Think I was born under the signe of the Cancer, every thing do go so crosse and backward.



What are you come back again? I will see if I can put him into his former Frights.



I will have a Mittimus for that Sorceresse, and another for that Villain Torman. Torcol but primum parlabo, I will first parly with the knave.



Trin Tran he sounds his Horn.



What do I hear? Is he horning it here again? upon my Life it is the Sowgelder, that Riotous knave doth put me into a bodily fear.



Trin  Tran 



At Lucanus ait cornu tibi cura sinistri; have a care of the left Horn saith Lucan Ignoramus runs away.



Ha, ha, he, he made such hast, he never so much as lookt back upon me, He who runs, runs, but he who flyes hath wings; I cannot chuse but laugh at it, my Wife Polla hath told all her Neighbours, that this Ignoramus is for certaine possessed with a Divel; she believes it, and they believe it, from hence (if need be) an excellent occasion will be given of procuring more mis∣chief to him; and because it hath not fallen out so well with Rosabella, I will do my best endeavour to be assistant to Antonio by one way or other, I shall pick up some moneys again, I am con∣fident, but I will now repair unto my Dragonesse.



The Fourth SCENE of the First ACT.
The ARGUMENT:Antonio at the last finds his Rosabella, they both contrive that, (having now a Mole painted on his right cheek,) he should coun∣terfeit Antonine, and Rosabella should personate Katharine another daughter of Mr. Manlyes which was betrothed to An∣tonine; and for the better effecting of it, they are to speak English.




ANd I my dear Love do make the same promise unto you that nothing but death shall part us.



I hope it will fall out happily; because we have met one another so unexpectedly; but tell me I pray you, How came you by that Mole on the right side of your Cheek?



You know that at London I have a brother, and that he and I, were Twins.



His name is Antonine.



I heretofore have told you of it.



And so like you, that your parents could not know the one from the other.



Right, were it not for a little Mole on the right Cheek of Antonine that did distinguish us.







The painter therefore, by Tricoes Council, hath painted this Mole on my Cheek, that the better I may pretend my self to be my brother Anthonine, and to be newly come from London from my mother Dorothy.



To what Intent is it?



That by this means we may be the more readily recei∣ved into my Fathers House.



You peradventure may be entertained, but what, in the mean time shall become of me?



You shall be entertained as well as my self; Anthonine hath lately Married Katharine, the other Daughter of Alderman▪ Manly, you are now to be Her, and my Wife Katharine.



And you to be my Husband Anthonine.







But did your Father never see that Katharine?



Never, and since my Brother was left at London with my Mother, neither he, nor I did ever see one another.



How came that to passe?



As we came hither, we were taken by war; as already you know; but what it is I would have you to doe, would you know?







You can speak English also.



Very well; For at Fess I learned it of an English woman that was my servant, and that I might be the more perfect in it both for my love to you, and to the Nation, have been much ac∣customed to speak it with a familiar friend of mine an English∣man.



And I because I was born in England do always traffick and keep Company with the English Merchants.



What is it that you desire more of me?



When we meet with my Father we will both of us speak English, and pretend not to know who he is.







I have here Letters, as if they were sent from my Mother Dorothy, Trico excellently well hath counterfeited her hand; I would have given you some further Instructions, but see my Fa∣ther is coming forth. Be you ready to comply in your dis∣course with me, and to assist me in what you can▪







In the mean time be silent.




The ARGUMENT.They meet with Theodorus, and ask him of him, who, at last by their speech, the mole, and other signes and tokens is perswaded that they are Anthonine and Katharine; Theodorus tells them that Antonio was that morning imbarked for London to bring them both unto Burdeaux to him. They give Letters to Theodorus as sent from their Mother Dorothea.





I must go unto my Notary. These Law•suits are full of trouble, endlesse, and easlesse; but who is this? my Son Antonio; he looks like him; but it cannot be he, it is impossible he should return so soon;  Good God  it is he. Antonio! Holla Antonio; He makes no answer; it is not he; but one very like him! It is he undoubtedy. Antonio, Antonio.



What means the old Gentleman?




Hem  He speaks English, and hath a Gentlewoman with him. What are you, young Lady? From when•• come you, I pray? Do you speak English Sir I pray? Do you understand me?



We both understand your language, Sir, but cannot speak it. Do you speak English, Sir, I pray?



I understand it onely▪ Antoni•, why do you not answer me? Antonio I say.



Who would you speak withall, Sir?



I would speak with you Disobedient as you are? why do you answer me in English?







You are very uncivil Sir to strangers; An old man too, Fie.



Am I indeed deceived? peradventure it is not Antonio but a∣nother; he hath another habit, and speaks English too, to neither of which he is accustomed unto, and I am confident cannot well doe i•, It is some other m•n certainly▪ but his Face i• just the same,
  
and without any more doubt, it is he.



Good Old Father can you direct me the way to the Palace.



Are not you Antonio?



I am not Antonio, though my name be very neer it.



Why do you faulter with me, do you deny your self to be Antonio.



Pray God he be well in his Witts.



Sure he is not well.



Do you think I am out of my Wits? no; Although you go about to make me so.



You call me Antonio, and talk as if you knew me.



Either you are Antonio, or I am out of my wits.



Prethee let's be gone?



What shall I say, I saw him shipped, and the ship to steer on her course towards London, I am confounded with a∣mazement, and know not what to think.



It is well, he begins now to suspect himself.



I will try him further.



Fare you well Sir.



Pray stay a little! what may I call your name?



You are very inquisitive Sir, but my name is Antonine.



Antonine  what Countryman?



I was born in London, but my parents were of Burdeaux.















Dorothy; but I pray you Sir, why ask you these parti∣culars.



Hath your Mother any other Children?



One more here in Burdeaux my Twin brother; doe you know one Theodore here a Merchant in this City?



Do you know him, if you see him?



No indeed Sir, though he be my Father I have not seen him these Fifteen years.



But I shall know whither you be Antonine or not, by a little Mole on your right Cheek, I pray let me see.



He is a curious Examiner.



I behold it, now I know you to be my son, my Anthonine, come my Son into my Embraces.







I am your Father Theodorus, before I beheld this Mole upon your cheek, I took you for my Son Antonio who is very like unto you.







We are now safe.







By your pertinent questions Sir I do now believe that you are my Father, pardon I beseech you my former incivilities.



My Antonine; you are very welcome to me, why came not your Mother Dorothy with you? How doth she?



She is well Sir, and remembers her best love unto you by me, and by this Letter.



I will peruse it presently.



You shall there understand the occasion that detaynes her.



But what Gentlewoman is that I pray you.



My Wife Sir, one of Alderman Manlyes Daughters.











What, Katharine! my most dear Daughter in Law.



My dear good Father.



How happily and how wished for, is Katharine come with you? Trust me I cannot but weep for joy.



I pray Sir how doth my Brother?



I sent him this day to London to bring you from thence to Burdeaux.



I am sorry I shall not see my self in him so soon as I hoped.




The ARGUMENT.Trico the plotter of this deceit, coming as it were out of the Coun∣trey, doth salute him as if he were Antonio. Theodore tells him it is Antonine, and the Gentlewoman with him is Katharine, Trico will not believe it; but affirmeth it is Antonio, and the Gentlewoman with him one of his Sweet-hearts, and not Katha∣rine. He conceives the•e is some deceit in it, but at last seems to give some credit to it.

Trico, Theodore, Antonio, Rosabella.


I Have under-hand here listned, and observed all these pas∣sages, I will now appear before my Master, as I came just now sweating from his Countrey house I have so toyld this day, so bestir'd my self, I am all in a sweat, Fie, Fie, how hot am I?



Why came not my Tenant with you, accordingly as I commanded him?



The heavy Lubber is sick; he hath got (one I know not who it is) to give Phisick to him, he will be here to morrow.







O Master Antonio God save you, you have made a quick return.



Ha, ha, he, who do you think it is?



Who should it be but your Son Antonio.



It is his Twin-brother Anthonine one that is very like him indeed.



Master, do not mock me? it is Antonio himself I know it.



Hold your peace you fool you.



What Gentlewoman is that?







His sweet-heart, rather then his wife, why do you mock me master? look upon him, and see if he doth not smile himself at the mistake.



What bold companion's that?



O Lord! What language is it which he speaks?







He pretends it to be English, tis but some Gibberish I be∣lieve; but I pray you master tell me plainly, is this your Son An∣thonine?







Do you speak Truth?



What  do you think I lye!



Not lye; but tell an untruth Master.







You laugh now, but take heed you repent it not hereaf∣ter, I onely admonish you master, I do but admonish you; you know I have been at your Countrey House all this day, lay not hereafter the fault on me.



I will not, do not doubt it.



I pray remember it.



Come Sirrah; you and I must jest a little together.



Pox on this English which he speaks, I like it not.



Ha ha, he; why are you not merry with him?



Good Sir let him alone, he is not worth your anger.



Master, would you have me to tell a lye too?







Let him be gone then.



Hath my Son Antonio a Mole in his Cheek?



No but I have heard that my young Master Anthonine hath.







In troth Master, I begin now to be of your opinion; were it not for that Mole, how like is he to my young Master Antonio?



Do you go presently to Peto the Notary, and tell him that to morrow I will not fail to come unto him.



I go; but I pray master Anthonine, will you be pleased to excuse my rudenesse?



Well, be it so.



Daughter-in-Law, I believe you are weary with your long journey.







Prethee go in  I will talk here a little with Anthonine concerning the affairs in England.



At your pleasure Sir.



Do you hear there? Go before, and shew my Daugh∣ter where she may refresh and warm her self, I will now read my Wives Letters O most welcome letter!



O most sweet Deceit! now will I addresse my self to my Companion Cupes, and give him instructions what is yet to be done; and to prevent all discoveries we will here both of us keep a diligent watch. But woe is me, I see Pyropus the Broaker, he is coming this way with all the speed he can.



What shall we do now; here comes the Broaker, whose Cloaths I have upon my back, unlesse Trico helps me at this d•ad lift I am utterly undone.




The ARGUMENT.When all things were quiet, Pyropus the Broaker cometh to com∣plain of the Brasse Ring that was pawned to him for the Cloaths. Antonio denies himself to be Antonio, and Pyropus seeing his Cloaths upon his back will not be confuted, insomuch that the whole plot was almost discovered; for Theodorus began to be in doubt himself.




I Have shewed the Ring which Antonio gave me for a pawn to the Gold-Smith who saith it is but a Brasse Ring poor∣ly Guilded over, and the stone in it no better then coloured glass. How handsomly that cunning Knave his servant gull'd me? when I said Verily how it sparkles? he presently could speak my words after me, Verily how it sparkles? For a little gain, I then said Ve∣rily, but now I swear plainly we deceive and are deceived our selves; I am affraid I shall loose my Cloaths and all.



I tremble all over me.



This letter indeed is lovingly, and heartily written.



Father I am weary; let us go in, I pray.



Can you speak French, Anthonine?



A word or two Sir, this Broaker doth so trouble me, that truely I do quite forget my self.



Here is Antonio himself, how opportunely do I meet him?



Let us go in.



Sir, doth it become a man of your fashion and quality to serve me so?



Another in the same Errour ha-ha-he.



To laugh, is but a little better then to deride.



I am not able to forbear laughter, and that for many causes pardon me I am merry to day, and I have great reason so to be.







Who do you think you speak to?



To the young man Antonio.



I knew you were in an Error, ha, ha, he.



All is well yet.



Sir I say that this young Gentleman Antonio pawned un∣to me a brasse Ring for Cloaths which he had of me.



Sir, this fellow is some Cheater sure?



I am of your mind  I tell thee honest man my Son Antonio is not now in Burdeaux▪ he is gone this day to London.



The more I look upon this fellow, the worse I like him, if you mark him well, Sir he hath a Knaves look.



I know not what to think of him.



Sir, will you give me leave to beat the knave?



Be not too violent?



He alters now his language, and is all in his English, I know what he goes about.



How often shall I tell you that this is not Antonio?



Who is it then?







In the morning, he was Anthonio, now he is Anthonine; peradventure before night, he will be Anthoninuline; and so from the diminutives of his Name, there will be a Diminution of my Vestments.



Ha, ha, he, Tell me, Had that Antonio any Mole in his Cheek?



Not as I observed.



But this hath, Look you here.



What? am I deceived then? I am confident I am not, He hath the cloaths I am sure of it, on his back, which he borrowed of me; ther's no addition of any Mole to them.



Sir, He sees, I am a stranger, and thereupon intendeth to abuse me.



What should he doe with your cloaths?



He said he would personate some body in them.



Come hither Sirrah, you Broaker?



You would fain cozen me of my cloaths in English, but I will make you to restore them to me in French.



He is obstinate concerning his cloaths, I know not well what to think of it.



I am undone; my Father begins to suspect something  Sir, It may be Anthonio borrowed some cloaths of him.



There is something else in it, whatsoever it is.




The ARGUMENT:To confirm that this young man is Antonine, Cupes comes in the disguise of a Sea-man, and demandeth mony for his transportation from London unto Burdeaux; he threatens Pyropus, and makes him fly, and worms the old man of twenty Crowns. Theo∣dore goes into his house with his Son. Trico and Cupes devise, and bestir themselves how to fright Ignoramus, whom all therea∣bouts, by reason of Polla's words, do take to be possessed with the Divel, and do lay their heads together how to conjure the Divel out of him.

Trico, Cupes, Antonio, Theodorus, Pyropus.


NOw speak English Cupes,  Now bestir thy self, it is high time; now, or never.



I know what I have to doe,   let me alone, I am an English-Mariner, who this day brought Anthonine hither from
  London; if I do not confute this Broaker, never trust Cupes more?



Doe it then, and the better to observe you, I will here conceal my self.



Will you have me bring the Serjeants hither to tear my cloaths off your back?



I know not what to think of this.



O Master Antonine   God save you Sir, I come for mony Sir, for your passage.







How doth Mistresse Katharine?



She is well within here.







The Masters mate Sir that brought me over.



He is Welcome; did you bring my son from London?



He understands you not Sir, he askes if you brought us from London hither.



Marry did I Sir?



Here is an odd fellow sayes no▪



Doth he in truth?



And sayes that I am not Antonine.







And that I wear his Cloaths.



Better and better; but doth he indeed? The Rogue means to cheat me of my hire, shall I beat the slave?



Forbear a little Hark honest Friend; Here is the Mariner that brought my Son over, what say you now?



I see well enough what your Design is.



This Fellow will not believe you.



Is he an Infidel, Let me come to the Pagan.



He threatens me too what a strange thing is this?



By the faith of a Saylor Sir, there be a hundred Mari∣ners can testifie I brought this Gentleman, and Mistresse Ka∣tharine over in the good Ship, called the Speed-well.



He saith there are a hundred Mariners now at the Key to testifie the truth of what he speaks.



I see you all conspire to abuse me.



Hang him Swabber! doth he grumble? If you love me,
  
let me give him a Salt-Eel, whiles I am in heart Money Sir for the Passage.



I pray Sir give him his money, I have not enough to pay him.



What doth he demand?



How much would you have?



Six pounds you know, and richly worth it, though I say it, you had as good bisket and salt-beef.



Do you hear within  Richard, bring hither twenty Crowns.



What do you tell me of twenty Crowns; I had as leif you had said nothing  Give me my Cloaths again.



I know he speaks ill of me, I must needs hang him.



Why do you delay me? I cannot stay.



A little longer 







Doth it go so  well, I will Arrest you all.
Exit Pyropus.



Do you mumble still? 'Twas time for you to go isaith  your son Sir, was never sick all the way, marry his Man and his Maid were fain to be set on shore.



I will provide him other servants  Here is your money Friend.



I marry Sir, I understand this well; Here is a brave wind for us, if it will hold, This week I am for London again; will you have any thing to your Mother Master Anthonine?



Command him to remember my love unto your Mother.



Remember my Father's Love, and my Duty.



I will  adieu.



Come, let us now go in my Son.



My Cupes you have saved me.



Be gone then, lest we be taken here.
Exeunt Theo. Ant.



O my most dear Decoy, you have now throughly satis∣fied my Father Theodorus.



Yes Trico, and got some good dry silver to boot; good English, very good English; we now will have another Supper, but Polla shall not cook it.



But what if Ignoramus should come?



Ignoramus I know will come, and trouble us, but I have
  
found a way to make yet more sport with him, then heretofore have done.



Prethee what is it?



Why, what by his own words, and what by Polla's, it is rumoured here, round about, that he is possessed with a Divel.



And we must conjure the Divel out of him.



Right, and so I have told Polla before hand.



What are you friends with her again?




Great Friends, and she hath promised to assist me in it, but what shall we doe with Torcol, if he should interrupt us.



Let me alone for that; But who shall conjure the Divel out of Ignoramus?



Who should doe it but myself and he who in good time cometh here according to my wish, my Brother Cola, an excel∣lent Boon-Companion, he is come now to have me with him to the Tavern to sip only a Gallon or two of Wine together; I will have him to be my Coadjutor above all men in the World.




The ARGUMENT.Trico and Cupes do treat with Cola a Monk, and the Pot-compa∣nion of Cupes for the conjuring the Divel out of Ignoramus, and for the bringing of him afterwards into a Monastery. Cupes and Cola go to prepare themselves to put the Design into Execu∣tion.




HA, ha, he, Here is my dear Companion Cupes.



I am so Cola?



Just now I have won at Dice all the Books, and (look here) the Hood of one of my Brethren. He swears now like a Tinker, and •urseth me to the Divel; yet for all that Cupes, I would have 〈◊〉 sell them outright & speedily to supply our selves with monies for a good Supper, I am weary of eating of Porridge.



O my dear Confessor!



O my more dear Confessor!



My pure spiritual Father 



My Mundan Carnal Brother 



Now for a Cup of brisk wine.



One Cup, nay let's have Nine.



Oh my dear ghostly Father.



'Twill make your tongue to stammer.



But my Brow smooth and cheerly.



O my delicious Brother, come let us laugh, and Em∣brace. Hang sorrow!



I must now crave your assistance.







We must conjure the Divel out of Ignoramus, the English∣man.



What! is he possessed with a Divel?



I a manner, if you will doe it, I will tell you the whole story of it.



I will do it most willingly, for although he hath not a Goblin in his belly, I shall raise unto my self a high same thereby, as others have done before me, what will they say? our Famous brother Cola, our holy brother Cola doth drive out divels ha, ha, he.



Look, There is a Hood, there is a Coat for thee, How opportunely it comes?



Let it be sold.



No, not as yet; for your Brother Cupes also will drive out Divels, with this hood I will attire my self in the Exercism when I am to be an assistant to you.



It will do very well: Ha, ha, he, very well, I will put on with it a most dreadful countenance.



After the Divel is cast out of him, procure him to be brought to your Monastery where the other Fryers may detayn him also with their Exercisms.



It shall be done, after that my dear brother we will wash our own Tongues.



Not with holy Water, but with blessed Wine.



Ha, ha, he, we will surely Sup▪ at the sign of the spinning. Cat, O quil y • de bon vin la, O what Gallant Wine is there! hei, hei, and there we will sell these trinke•s.



What! the old Postillers are good for nothing compared to us, Fryar Menot and Fryar Maliard are but Dunces compared unto us, ridiculous Dunces.



Make hast I pray, and attire your self.



Brother Cola, do you now go to Saint Severins, and con∣duct hither the Solemnity for the Exorcism; as soon as ever I have made my self ready, I will meet you in yonder street.



I go, and be you sure you say nothing to any man till I return, but be a faithful Achates.




The ARGUMENT:Ignoramus runneth after Dullman to take him, and bitterly threat∣ens him being taken. Trico goes to acquaint Antonio with these passages, Dullman affirmeth to Ignoramus that he delivered the same Rosabella••to him which Torcol gave him, Ignoramus doth relate unto him in what danger he was amongst the Sow-Gelders.




SToppa Dullman, Stoppa Felonem? stop the Thief Dullman, stop the Felon Dullman, stop him stop him.
Exit▪ Dullman



I will make hast unto Antonio, and thoroughly informe him of every thing, and then as closely as I can I will convey my self to Cupes.Exit



Stoppa Dullman, stoppa? stop that Rogue Dullman, stop him▪ Ah Vagabond Felon; Habeo •e per aures jam, I have you now Sirrah by the Eares, •udge not.



I pray Good Master!



Ah Fugative, putabas quod non possent gignere te iterum, you thought I could not get you again you Rogue you, but I would have found you out si•er•• super faciem terr•▪ If you were upon the Face of the Earth Sirrah; and therefore why did you r•in for it?



I ran from you Sir because you were in ta• peltant a cho∣lera in such a pelting chafe Sir, for Rosabella that you would not hear me.



Bonus annus d••e A good year on thee? Gentlemen where do you think I found him▪ upon my Faith he was got into the common place jaciendum glob•s vulgo vocati a bowling Alley, where he played at unlawful Games against the Statute, and there I know it was that sirrah lus••t• viam meas coronas you plaid away my Crowns you knave you.



Videbam super tantum, I onely looked on.



Oh you are a pure Supervisor, you have been my Clerk now these twenty years, did you ever see me play at Bowls?







Non, Non ego warrantizabo; no, no, I will warrant you; what are you turn'd a Gamster, gigne tibi aliam deskam, non scribes plus ad deskam meam; get thee another Desk, for thou shalt not write on my Desk any more.



Master Si tu p•nis me viam a te, sum disfactus ut Ostera, if you put me away from you, I am undone as an Oyster.



Wherefore then sirrah did you not bring Rosabella to me?



I brought unto you that Rosabella which Torcol delive∣red to me.



Funis de to? vis me contrarotulare adhuc. A rope on you what will you still controle me, had he a crooked Neck?



I by my Faith had he, and they did so weep at her de∣parture, that they made me weep also.



Es magnus vitulus, vocatus a great Calf.



And they gave me Wine and Sack also!



Wine and Sack!   There it is  I have now found it out, you are a very Cocks-comb; will you undoe your Master pro una pecia de saccharo for a piece of Sack, Dullman?



He gave me also a piece of Gold.



Where is it? Give it me?



Master, it is mine now.



Es cognoscens latr•, you are a cunning Thief; Sirrah where is my Counterpane?



He said, that he would presently bring it after me.



He said so? Are you such a Lob-cock? you are a true Dullman.







Hanga, Hanga, putabam quod Musaeus erat major asinus quam tu, sed tu es major asinus quam Vniversitans: Hang you, Hang you, I thought Musaeus had bin a greater Asse then you, but now I find you are a greater Asse then an Universitant!



Spero non ita, I hope not so Master.



There is not a greater plague in the world then to have bad servants; I have sent Pecu• to Torcol for Rosabella, and he is not come neither, I believe that he is run away also.



Master, pardon but this fault, & pugnabo tanquam Dia∣bolus pro te, si venerint Geldrii, And I will fight like a Divel for you if the Sowgelders come again.



Ph  you fight  I will fight my self now, let them come and they dare; sum bene appunctus, I hope I am well ap∣pointed for them, see if I am not.



But master, Non est riota portare tres dagarios? Is it not a riot master to carry three Daggers?



Not se defendendo Dullman; If I kill them, let them take heed of me another time; for whatsoever I doe se defendendo, I doe it by order of Law.



Master, I have copied this; see here it is.



Give it me, and I will copy you out another.




The ARGUMENT.Ignoramus having sent Pecus to Torcol for the true Rosabella, Torcol suspecting him to be a Messenger imployed by Trico doth cast him into prison. Torcol comes afterwards to Ignoramus and Dullman, who perceive themselves to be cheated. Ignoramus•reatneth Torcol for his Crowns, and for the false Imprison∣ment of his servant Pecus, and they go both of them to Theodo∣rus to find out the Impostors.


I Have served Trico's Sycop 〈◊〉 very handsomely, who came in by a back way just now to circumvent me  who are you? Pecus the servant of Ignoramus what would you have my Master hath sent me to you for the true Rosabella Ha, ha, he, into prison therefore I have cast this Pe•us the cunning knave of Trico. What? doth Trico think to cheat a Portugall?


Take this, you Asse you, he gives Dullman a •ox in the Ear) you alwaies write false Latine, if you cannot write true La∣tine as I do, cannot you Abbreviate the words by the middle, cannot you learn scribere cum dash• you blockhead you? cannot you write with a dash, as others do, and so you shall make, no error in the Latine, nor error in the Law.



It is a good Rule.



O seignior Ignoramo comesta vestra merced.



Come esta Villano in grano, how fares the Villain in Grain, the notorious common pandar; nay I will complement with you too, if you have a mind to complement.



Ha, ha, he, my merry and most conceited Kinsman, how •ure• your Lady Rosabella, Ha, ha, he.



Num me etiam moccas, What and do you mock me too? at habebo aures tuas si pileus tuus sit de lana▪ I will have your ears for it you Villain you, if your cap be made of wooll.



Have you yet fill'd your self with the love, and with the •njoyment of your fair Rosabella, Ha, ha, he.



Do you laugh at me? the Divel break your crooked neck; Putas hoc esse rem ridentem? do you think this is a laughing matter?



How long shall we jest one with one another, come Ha, ha, he▪



Are you laughing again? Laugh on: But if I doe not make you howl at the Bar like an Owl 



You are merry with me, and I am glad of it, Ha, ha, he; But tell me I pray you, are you in earnest, or in jest?



Do you think it is a Jeast to send me an old Hag for Ro∣sabella.



I understand you not, but wonder what you mean.







Your servant Dullman brought me the Indenture, and six hundred Crowns, he gave me also the private token, I therefore delivered Rosabella to him.



Say you so? Veni tu huc, Bonus pro nihil? You good for nothing come hither do you hear what he sayes?







Did I deliver any ill favoured Woman to you?



He that I delivered the money to, he delivered her un∣to me.



Did I deliver her to you?



I know not, but it was such another Torcol.



Hold your peace you Beast you; and do you hold your peace Torcol? Audi chargeam, Listen to your charge; and answer to that only which I shall demand of you, was this he?







Peace, Sirrah peace, Hah? Is this he who? 



It was not I by Heaven.



What a Divel? cannot you hold your peace? answer me when I speak to you.







Will you still interrupt me, Si te capio in manum, If I take you in hand Sirrah I shall but is this the man that gave you the counterfeit Woman?



That Torcol who gave the Woman unto me was upon better observation, not such a Torcol.



Now doe you speak; did you deliver Rosabella to him?



He who I gave her too was not such a Dullman.



To whom therefore did you deliver her, I will know the truth.



To some other who in your name did demand her.



Now do you answer, what manner of man was he who had my Verses?



He was a lean, a pitiful lean spare fellow, and he had a a little black •eard.







Yes a black Beard.







And he had another kind of a crooked Neck.



How did he name himself?







Have you such a servant, and of that Name? why an∣swer you not? have you such a servant?



No, no, I have not, It is the deceitful Trico that hath put these tricks upon me.



You shall therefore forfeit the Thousand Crowns; give um me, give um me, give um I say, why laugh you not now? why do you not answer now? what not one word? have you a mind to be pressed to death.



Grief ties my Tongue.



You may have for it thou A•quare impedit, give me my Crowns? give um me for I will have them.



O Seignior mio multo honorifico, bazo las manus, I kiss your hands my much honoured signior.



What do you think to pay me with a bazo las manus pay me in good and lawful money, pay me I say?



What sh•ll become of me this is the second time I have been shipwracked Woe is me, Woe is me!



Did not I tell you before, that I would make you hoop like an Owl, I will make you hoop and scritch too.



Mercy my Noble Cavalier.



None at all my notable Villain, my notable Rascal.



Upon my Faith I am not able to pay you.



Will you have me make a distress upon your goods, I will recover my money by Law si tunica tua est super dorsum tuum, If you have a coat upon your back.



I am affraid to be brought into the Courts of Judica∣ture, Seignior: I will tell you what is your wiser course; because a knave hath deceived us two honest men, we two honest men will go and soundly cudgel that knave.



Go your self, if you will, he hath not deceived me but you; I will tell you debet surgere per tempus qui decipit me. He ought to rise betimes that deceiveth Ignoramus.



But it doth most of all afflict me that he hath cheated me, being a Portugal. Oh Admiral Villayn. Seignior illustrissimo doe beseech you to pardon me.



No pardon Torcol, you have forfeited your obligation, causa patet.



Did you send a servant to me, I pray you, whose name is Pecus.



Yes where is he?



Pardon me, I have sent him to prison because I conceived him to be Tricoes Sycophant.



Hay day, what he in the Jayle too? Actio pro falso im∣prisonamento, nisi firko tu•m curvum collum pro hoc, if I Firk not your crooked Neck for't 



If you please let us both go to Antoni• who loveth Rosa∣bella most intirely, we will try first if we can get any thing from them by fayre means, if not we will follow them close, at law, at law Seignior.



At law, do not you talk so much of the law, I will have you both in law, you shall have law enough il'e warrant you.



But first of all I will release Pecus; do you hear with∣in there Here take this Ring, and command that Pecus be brought to my house.



I will have your self in this place ere it be long; Dullman do you go with him and see him at large, but first c•pe advisa∣mentum, Dullman take my advisement with you.




The ARGUMENT.Rosabella sitting at Theodorus door, doth see her Vncle and Igno∣ramus, who both of them do challenge her for Rosabella but she in the English Tongue doth affirm herself to be Katharine, they con∣tradict her and begin to grow very hot upon it, until Antonio com∣ing in doth acquaint Theodorus that they are the two persons possessed with the Divell, of whom there is such a Rumour over all the City.

Theodorus, Rosabella, Ignoramus. Torcoll, Antonio, Dullman.


DAughter after you have a little refresh'd yourself, it will not be unpleasant to you to sit here in the open Ayre, and do so I pray you.



I thank you Sir.
Ignoramus whispers to Dullman.



Do as I bid you, and think on nothing else.




Here is the house Seignior, I will knock at the door Tuk, Tock.



Who knocks at the Door?



Here is Ignoramus, and my Uncle, I am undone for eve•.



What would you have?



I know not, what would you have?







Ask him there if you will.



It is the English Lawyer, Signior, my most excellent Signi∣or, Signior de titulo, Signior de 



Are you not made moyst with Wine?



Mad-moyst; mad? bear witnesse? an Action of Defa∣mation.



What a blattering do you keep?







Pray hold your peace.



They say this English man is possessed with a Divel, I do now believe it my self.



Seignior I understand that this day Antonio hath brought my Cousin Rosabella into your house.



It is no such thing.



Oh that I now were Dead!



Nay and if you make any concealment, I will.



Nay gently and clemently I pray 



Clemently? what have I to do with the Clementines.



Is not your Son Antonio within Signior?



No he is gone to London, but his brother Anthonine, his Twin-brother is this day come to me with his wife Katharine.



I now smell out the deceit, I pray Sir make us so happy as to see that Lady Katharine.



I am undone, I am undone.



You are a couple of merry men; why would you see her?



Cause her to come at her and your peril.



Do you know these men daughter Katharine?



Who I? Indeed Sir I know them not.



Por mi sancti  This is my Cousin Rosabella.



Benedicite This is my Cove•t Baron, my own Rosabella.



What Impostures are these?



Being now come from London Sir, How should I know them?



She speaks English now, I know a little of it, having bin sometimes heretofore at London in the way of merchandise. Are not you my Kinswoman Rosabella?



Do I look like one of your kindred?



Nay I can speak English too; what my own Countrey-woman little pigs ny, my little Doves egge, thou knowest me I am sure.



This is a mystery; I would fain understand the meaning of it, Anthonine.



Why, do you not know your Uncle Torcol, Rosabella?



The man in the Moon as well.



I will give thee a good fair Joyncture isaith.



I pray Sir, be wise if you can.



Wise? O me, I am wise for you▪ and foolish for you, dear Rosabella: pity? pity? some pity to a bursting spirit; be not so fair and cruel.



Anthonine come forth I would fain know the reason of this disturbance.



I see yet I am blind; I freeze, and yet I burn in love; I live not, but I die; I live to love, to love to live, and live not but in loving; nay, I can sing and speak songs and sonnets with the best of them.



Sir, This is the possessed man you heard of.



Whatsoever it is, ther's something in it; All this cannot be for nothing.



Let me not live, if he hath not stollen my Rosabella from me.







What Deceit can be in this? There is certainly some∣thing in it extraordinary.



Shine on me bright Sun; The Sun is no sun, Rosabella, you are the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars; And sweeter far then is a Civet-cat.



I would speak a few words in private with you by my self.



Bound I am in Frank, A pledge, a morgage to thee Rosabella, and yet I am in free soccage, ye goodly tressed Nymphs, and simpering Syrens; O the crimson and the white▪ you Roses, Lillies and double Violets, spring of inameld flowers, and diaper'd meadows, green shady groves, and chirping birds, the warbling streams, and whistling winds, and dainty Rosabella; Dixi   Ha sweet Rose, One habeas Corpus.



Hold off Coxcomb, or I shall set you further off.



What are you there too? sum appunctus pro te jam, I am now well appointed for you. Hic me volvit geldare hodie; Too day you would have gelded me.



What will become of me?



If the Conjurers stay any longer we shall be all un∣done.




The ARGUMENT.Cupes and Cola having put on the Monks hoods, Polla declares un∣to them, that Torcol and Ignoramus are possessed with two Di∣vels, Theodorus believes it, and departeth with Antonio and Rosabella to his own house. Trico shunneth Pyropus. They lay hands on Ignoramus, as if they were Exorcists. Torcol runs away.

Theodore, Antonio, Torcol, Ignoramus, Trico, Cupes, Cola, Polla, Rosabella.


BRother Cupes How well that Hood becomes thee▪ Ha, ha, he.



Make hast, if you love me.



After the Exorcisme is over; we will have a brave Sup∣per.



Pox on you both, Are you talking of a Supper, when mischief and Vengeance are on foot, and threaten suddenly to o∣vertake us?







In the mean time I will bear a watchful eye, and observe what Pyropus is doing.



I tell you the Truth indeed, Seignior.



Although it is hardly credible, yet I will consider of it.



Come hither Holy men, Here is that poor wretch I told you of.



What are you come again. Trust me I will have you coram nobis.



Holy Friars; This is the man possessed with the Divel; This other man is his Companion.



What is the business with these Friars?



Torcol; If there be a Sorceresse upon the face of the Earth this is one; sum in quandario, I am in a great Quandary whether I shall stay or not.



Nay stay what ever become on't.



What is the businesse I pray, what are you about to doe good Friar?



A work of Charity which some good Christians have de∣sired us.



This man is possessed with a Divel. Take heed of him.



I will be gone I professe unto you; I did before suspect as much.



La you now, Sir, I told you so.



I profest unto you this Torcol had almost deluded me.



What strange project is this? What do these Friare here?







Or we will, If you disturb us in the Exorcisme.



We will begin first with Holy water.



In the Divels Name, why do you so often sprinkle your water in my face?



Woe is me, He invokes the Divel.



This is the true Touch-stone, The Divel cannot endure Holy water.



Holy Friars proceed, And do what belongs unto you; he is wonderfully vexed with the Divel.



How long have you bin so vexed?



What is that to you; I have all this day been terribly tormented.







In what form appear'd the Divel, when he first vexed you?



Sometimes of a man with a crooked neck, as this Torcoline; sometimes in the form of my servant Dullman, and sometimes like a Sorceresse as this woman Pella, sometimes in the Form of a Sow∣gelder, as that man; And sometimes in yonder Angelick shape of Rosa rosae, he hath appeared in diverse Formes 



There are many Divels, I see, do vex him.







Doe they never fly from you?



Yes, Dullman this day fled from me, but he is now with me again.



Keep of! 'Tis the very same I saw at London.



Away  Be gone.



And doth no spirit vex you Torcol?



Yes you doe all of you torment me; why do you make a sport of us with a mischief to you? why doe you sprinkle Holy waters so often on me?



This man cannot endure Holy water no more then the o∣ther, they are both of them like affected.



They are so They look much upon that young Gentle∣woman.



Alas, alas, For God's sake let's be gone.



Let all the Hobgoblins in hell come to me if they dare.



By his very look you may see that this man is most strongly possessed.



I am afraid of them, good Sir let's be gone.



Holy Friars, you doe well, but I pray, go further from my House? for by my good will I would neither have Divels nor any possessed with them to be near unto me; I pray give me one sprinkle of your Holy water.







And me Sir I pray you.



Make hast now, Away from them?



What are you gone Rosabella? Come back, come back I pray you.



My dear Rosabella Return to me; Do you not hear me Rosabella?







Why Rosabella I say.



What a noyse they make?



These Spirits be Incubi, and neer of kin to Astmodeus; I would have all women to beware of them.



They look for their Succubae.




Exeunt Anto. Theo. Rosab.



Rosabella I say, Are you gone? Now a pox go with you.



What wild Heats have bred these Distempers? They are all mad I think.



Take fast hold of this man and bind him.



It is my safest way to be gone, lest they use me as they doe him, I perceive they are bent upon mischief.
Exit Torc.



See one of them hath made an Escape, follow him, follow him.



What is he is gone?



Would I were een gone too; for I believe these two Friars are but a couple of knaves.




The ARGUMENT.They tye Ignoramus to a Chair, and with their Exortismes they drive away all the barbarous Lawyers words be speaks as the Names of so many Divels. Cola taketh care to have him con∣veyed to the Monastery. Cupes goeth to the Tavern with his wife Polla, into whose favour again he is now received.


Ignoramus, Cupes, Cola, Polla, &c.


YOu that stand by with palms and holy herbs, tye him fast unto a Chair.



Why do you attach me so violently and bind me with Cords and Ropes?







O Dullman, Dullman; you said to day, you would fight like a Divel for me, Where are you Dullman now?



I do exorcize thee Dullman; Be gone thou cursed Dull∣man.



He hath been gone once to day already; but if he comes now 



He invokes Dullman; certainly his Name is Dullman.



With a plague t'ye; my Name is Ignoramus.



Be gone Ignoramus  praesto.



Be you gone like two Knaves as you are, what a foul Ri∣ota, what a Rowta do you make here?



Two Divels, Riota, and Rowta.



Come forth, Thou mo•t wicked Spirit Ignoramus; I do
  
conjure thee Ignoramus, Thou decliner of Justice, Thou seducer of Men, Thou sower of Discord, thou disturber of the Peace: It is thou, whom I do exorcise. What is the Name of thy Master?



I am the Master my self.



Thou art then Beelzebub himself; Be gone thou Belzebub, I do conjure thee to come forth, and be gone.



So I will you may be sure assoon as possibly I can from your knaves Fingers.



I conjure thee to declare unto me, For what Cause came this unto thee?



For Rosabella, For her it is, and by her, that I am so tor∣mented.



Be gone Rosabella, Be gone!



Oh the Divel! She is gone already.



I conjure thee to tell me: Didst thou ever give up thy soul unto her?



What's that to thee: I have given both Soul, and Body, and all my Goods unto her▪



Oh most wicked wretch!



And besides her Joynture, If she had married me, she had Francum Bancum too.



Be gone Francum Bancum; Separate thy self from her Francum Bancum.



But now she shall not have it, never fear it; had she but set her affections on me, she should have enjoyed many more pri∣viledges, Infang-thief, Outfang thief. Tac, Toc, Tol, and Tem.
How many there are of them? Be gone all of you Infang-thief, Outfang-thief. Tac, Toc, Tol, and Tem. I conjure you, all you evil spirits, whether you be in his round black-cap by day, or in his white cap by night, whether you be in his double tongue or under his Tongue, whether you be in his beard, or in his Head?



Oh you Asses you; what do you think the Divel holdeth i• Capite. No he holds in Frocks, and socks and in bal• Crowns, such as yours are, you hooded Monsters, you brothers of the Divel.



Now he invokes his Brothers the Divels.



Come forth you evil spirits, whether you be in his Dou∣blet, or his Breeches, or his Coat, or his Cloak, or in his Drawers, or in his Pen, or his Wax, or in his Seal, or in his Ink-horn.



He was in the Horn too day indeed.



I conjure thee thou most wicked spirit to come out of the Horn.



Pox take you and all the Hornes in the world, but the Horn only that sounds to dinner.



Come forth all of you, you wicked spirits▪ and be totally explanted whether you be in his Indentures, or his Parchments, or in his Papers ingrossed, or Papers not ingrossed, in words of sense, or words without sense.



Whether in Grayfriars, or in Blackfriars, or in Crutch∣edfriars.



I conjure you all; Be gone, and fly you evil spirits, Gray-friars, Black-friars, and Crutched-friars. Fly and be gone, whether you be in his long Slops, or round Slops, or in his greater Guts, or the lesse Guts, or in his •odpiece.



There is the Divel Ile warrant you. I see him there.



I see him there in you; nisi facio te sursum tenere manum ad Barram, If I make you not hold up your hand at the Bar for it. O you Felons; who hath his hand now in my pocket?   you are Backharend and Handabend.




Be gone Backharend, and Handabend.



If they go, it is Felony directly.



Whether you are in his purse, or his pocket, or his Fo•, whether in Gold or in silver, whether well got, or evil got.



I, that's the Divel you desire, I do know it, Estis robatores, you are very Robbers all of you.



I adjure you most wicked spirits, whether you are in the thighes, •r between the thighes, come out all together out of all the members of this Creature.



Hoc est •ene, si vult ire sic, Nay, this is well, If it will go so.



And come all into the Toe of his left foot.



There they be, I see them there; I will beat them, and keep them down that they never rise again.



O you She Divel, O my Corns, my Corns, what do you
  
doe? The great Capias of the great Divel take you all, and every one of you both great and small.



Now he is mad, Brother, give me some exorcised salt, and hall owed fire, that I may exorcise and fumigate him.



The fire consume you all. Si dagarias capio rumpam cal∣veo coronas vestras; If I take my Daggers once, I will break both your bald crowns in an instant.



Dagarias, I conjure you to come forth Dagarias.



I would they could se defendendo.



Let us try now, If he be obedient; Repeat now what I whisper to you in your ear. Buz, buz, buz.



I adjure you to answer to what I demand of you; Mum, mum, mum.











Why do you keep such a mumming, and mopping, and such a moing like two Jack an Apes about me.



Do you not perceive the Divels are gone from you.



I perceive that here are three Divels still at the least.







Yes three; I believe I am this day tormented with three Divels in good earnest; If I am, you Polla the Sorceresse, are the first Divel, and you two are the two other Divels that do assist her.



Brother, I perceive that very much remaineth yet to be done unto him; If you think well of it, let him be conve•ed to our Btethren the Friars in the Monastery.



It shall be done. Some of you take him hence and carry him thither.



In the Divels Name whither do you carry me, you foul porridge-bellyed Friars. Harroll. Harroll. I know the great Custome of Normandy. Harroll, The Divel take you all.



Assoon as ever I have left him at the Monastery, I will immediately return to you, In the mean time do you take care that our Supper be in a readiness.
Exit Cola.



It shall be done.



Ha, ha, he. Excellent sport brother 



It is so, Sister; Let us now to the Tavern, That is my Monastery.



For this conceit Brother Cupes I will go henceforth with you where you please to command me.



You know my Polla that I do love you; prethee let us love one another. I have given you some money to day already; If you will be quiet and loving, I will always be giving to you; and Nothing shall bewanting.



For the time to come I will love you; and go whitherso∣ever you will have me.




The ARGUMENT.Pyropus comes with Sergeants to arrest Antonio and Trico, Trico is taken by them, whom Antonio doth not acknowledge; he is therefore to be hurried away to Jayl. Not long after Antonio himself is arrested, And Trico to return like for like will take no notice of him. Antonio by his Sword doth redeem himself from the hands of the Sergeants.

Antonio, Trico, Pyropus, Sergeants.


OH Trico, but just now I saw Ignoramus carryed away to Saint Severi•s Monastery. What makes you so Melancholy.



There is another Tempest hanging over our heads master.



I am sorry for it, what may it be.



I observed Pyropus to go unto the Judge, who hath assign∣ed him some Hounds to Hunt us.







The Sheriffs Hounds, who doth Hunt after you to take you and to throw you into prison; and then all things will be known to your Father.



Let us contrive some way to preserve our selves.



You see (friends) what you have to do these are they who de∣tain
  
my Cloaths from me; you may spare the young Gentleman for the present, but be sure you take his servant into your custod•▪



I am undone. What would you have with me.



Either go to prison, or restore my Goods unto me; you are now under custody.



There is my master himself, demand them of him; I am but a servant.



What shall I do? I must dissemble.



Will yov return my Cloaths back unto me, or will you see your servant dragged to the Jayle for them?



Let him go whither he will for me; what have I to doe with him? are you not ashamed to speak with so little respect to a Gentleman of my fashion and a stranger.



Forbear your English at this present, I pray you master, and give back the Cloth unto the Broaker.



What are you? I know you not, Trico, Excuse me I must now counterfeit as if I knew thee not?



What will you pretend not to know me.



Hold your peace I pray, and play the Counterfeit a little.



Hold your peace, and play the counterfeit, you have got what you will of me▪ and now you will not know me.



Do you not know him?



I know him, no not I; and give me leave I pray not to know you neither.



Do not you fool me? know you not Trico's master▪



What Tricks? what Trico?



I would I never had been Trico? will you suffer them to hurry me to Jayle?



What have I to do with you, hold your peace I say, and play the counterfe•t.



Do you not hear how he commandeth me to hold my play and play the counterfeit.



What a lying knave is this, did I say so?



If I should drag him to prison, I should not deal uncivily with him.



What is that to me; do what you will with him; I have no relation to him, I neither do, nor will know him.



Masters for the most part doe so deale with their servants,
  
after they have got what they will of them, they lay them by, and make use of them no more, what? Are you ingrateful master? must your counterfeit Rings be given to a plain dealing, and a down right honest man verily?



What verily again? I will no more be so deluded with verilies, I am now another man.



Well! I will go about my businesse, Fare you well. It grieves me thus to leave him, but what shall I do?
Exit.



What is he gone? O most unworthy man? but, friend I have all those Cloaths in my own custody which you delivered to me, and if you please I will return them to you, the rest (as you your self see) are upon my masters own back.



Sergeant! Do some of you go with him,
Exeunt.
In the mean time I will tarry here until you return. How many men are there, that resemble this mans master; they are good for no∣thing but to make a fine show, and to set a face upon a businesse; they are like the Ring he gave me, it carries with it a fair promi∣sing show, and lustre, but try it at the Touch-stone the brittleness of the mettal will presently betray it self.
Enter Trico.



Look you Sir, here are the Cloaths which were in my cu∣stody; Am I not an honest man now verily?



Yes verily and thereupon I give you your liberty; but tell me I pray, is he who hath the Mole in his face the same Gen∣tleman that came this morning with you to my shop?



What doe you think of him? do you take him to be the same man?



I doe indeed, but if I light upon him again, I shall go neer to lay him fast enough, but see where he comes, as if he meant to out-brave me.



It grieves me that I left Trico in such Distresse.











Your English will not serve your turne now, you shall even go where you deserve to be.



Trico, I pray you work some trick now that I go not to prison.



Who I! I understand you not.



No?  Use your invention; find out one Artifice or ano¦ther
  
to preserve me from the infamy of the Jayle; now stand me instead Trico?



What now I am Trico again; it is not long ago since you did not know me, and now I will not know you.



Contrive some way I pray you.



Take him away Serjeants.



Een where you will; I know him not (you counterfeit as if I did not know you) do you remember it?



What? Do you not know me Trico, then?



St, hold your peace, and play the counterfeit?



Acknowledge me to be thy master, and own me but this once Trico.



Hold your peace I say and play the counterfeit.



Do you hear Friends this man doth know me well e∣nough he is my servant.



Not I, I know him not, suffer me not to know you. Doe you remember it Sir.



He can speak now in some other language come, let us go.



Trico, what would you have them to dragge me hence?



Where they please Nay in the word ungratefull all vices are comprehended I'le be packing too.



Sergeants have a care of your prisoner, see him in safe custody?



If I go to prison, it is my utter undoing.







I'le rather dye away Knaves, Villains, I will kill you all, he makes a flourish with his drawn sword.



O me Why Sergeants, Varlets; whither do you run with a mischiefe to you? return, and do your duties if I complain not to the Sheriff 
They run away.



I have redeemed my self. But what shall become of me now? Truth the Daughter of time will bring this, and all my late extra∣vagancies to the light; my Father (whom I am ashamed to have cajoled with so many Circumventions) will at the last be informed of them; & yet there are many, who I know in love have commit∣ted many grosser mistakes, but suppose it should come to my fathers Ear, he will be very angry at the first, and fret, and fume; but a Fathers anger cannot continue long: but come what will come;
  Rosabella is now my own, and shall be so, she being safe, all things are safe with me, my Life and Fortunes are Woven into hers. Howsoever I will repayre unto a Friend of mine on these new expedients to take new Counsels.




The ARGUMENT.Dorothea the VVife of Theodore and Mother of Antonio is come from London unto Burdeaux, and leaveth her son Anthonine with his wife Katharine indisposed and very weary of their jour∣ney at a House hard by the Sea side; she cometh to the House of her Husband Theodore, and takes along with her, an English Boy, and an English Girle.

Dorothea, Vince, Nell, Richard.


HAil to my dear Country, and to my native City of Bur∣deaux; now after fifteen melancholy Winters expired in London, I do hope to see my Husband Theodore & son Antonio; For ever since they first were made Prisoners by War, no times were pleasant to me, but this day will make amends for all; I stay too long; I must procure a Coach to bring hither my son Anthonine, and my Daughter in law Katharine, I left them in an Inne near to the place we landed. The Sea hath made the young woman so sick and faint, Her legs can hardly bear her; I must send for them both.



Good Madame, speak our language, here's Nell, and I and a great many more understand not a word what you say: what shall we doe in this Countrey?



Why Vince understandest thou nothing yet?



Scarce a word, yet I was in France once before.



Nor you neither little Nell?



No truly, I would I were at home in London again, They speak so finely forsooth here.



Yes, you understand a few words, I taught you something what's La teste?







Well said Nell, what's La main?







What is le bras? tell me Nell.







Nell, Tis a Horse tool.



What is it Vince?



A Horse tool, say.







Say then; what's le bras?



A Horse tool forsooth!











I, I, Indeed forsooth, Vince told me so▪



Vince is an unhappy boy  well you shall both learn.



I, but it will be such a while first.







They say that women teach this language best; And it will be six years first ere I shall get such a sweet Mistresse as I would have.



I will be thy, Mistresse my self.



I but old women never teach half so well, but pray Ma∣dame let me alone with my Mothers tongue; I love my natural speech, I am a Gentleman.



This is the onely tongue that Gentlemen affect.



I know a tongue worth two of it.







Marry a Neats tongue with Venison sauce.



Thou art a very wag Vince  well, Ile go find out thy Master Theodorus house▪ they say it is near the Palace. And that is here, Ile knock, and ask: Tic, Toc. Is this the House of Master Theodorus?











Yes  what would you have with him?



I desire to speak with him.



Come in  If you please?



Where are these little ones?







This is your Master Theodorus house; Come in with me.








The ARGUMENT.Vince and Nell make sport with one another, but seeing Ignoramus whom they take for a Mad man they run away.


Vince▪ and Nell stay▪






I cannot, O Lord, you are such another Trully I think.



O Lord, you are such another Trull I think.



I tell you, I must wait upon my Lady.



I tell you, you must wait on me.




She makes a Curtsey to him.



How now Maid! what's that your Curtsey? down   down down descend   lower yet  lower yet  sweep me the ground with your breech now, and swim away?







Nell, Nell, Didst thou ever see the Man in the Moon?



No faith, prethee let me see him?




He chops her under the Chin.



Beshrew your heart bloud, you had almost made me bite my tongue in two.



What need ears and tongues in this Country, we are both deaf, and dumb here.



It's a strange Countrey, All the little Barns can speake French here; and yet we cannot.



So do the piggs to.







Ovy, Ovy, Ovy, Do they not so?



Here's one thing I shall never endure.







They say, we maids must drink nothing but water.



That's true Nell, but 'tis no matter; youl'e make water, though you drink nothing but wine.



Fie Vince, how you talk?



As though you do not do it? what a simpering is here?



Vince, Vince, they wear fine Cloaths here.



I, but terrible soul shirts here; but, Nell, you must be very bold,



Why are their Women so?



Yes all with their blind Bayards.



you are alwayes flouting.



You must learn to mock too, you must frump your own Father here upon occasion.



I have a pretty wit for a Frump, though I say it, but good Vince, if you love me, take heed of one thing.







of eating Grapes, for fear you take a Surfet.



I love them not, quoth the Fox, I would I could come at them.



Faith you'l be sick then?



I, sick? what heart of Oak? body of Brasse? I am not such a puler as Mistresse Katharine to be Sea-sick, and have a Coach sent for me, well fare old Bell-metal.



Harke!   I think I am called; nay, Fie master Vince, you spoyle my Ruffe; Faith I'le give you no more sweet-meats, when I go to my Ladies Closet.



Peace, Nell, I'le hand you in, by the Arm after the French fashion, O my dear Damosella!







Go apace, yonder comes a mad man.
Exeunt.




The ARGUMENT.Ignoramus relateth to his servants Dullman and Pecus, in what manner they handled him in the Monastery, and how he escaped out of the hands of the Monks.




DIabolus volet viam cum omnibus his frateribus, & frater∣culis etiam, si haberem focum puto focarem hoc monasteri um in mente qua nunc sum, sed est felonia, puto non focarem; At ite mecum vos magni nebulones ab hoc monasterio ad Westmonaste∣rium si audetis pro ambis auribus, si capio vos ibi 
The Divel fly away with all these Friars, and Friarers also, if I had any fire, I think in the mind in which I now am, I should fire this Monastery; but it is Felony, I think I should not fire it now again: but go along with me you Lubberly knaves from this Minster to Westminster, if you da•e for both your Ears; if I take you there 



Quid jam? Num est in fumo adhuc? Magister ego deliberavi Pecus, vide.
What? still in a fume? Master I have freed Pecus, see here he is?



Spero trounsalis Torcol pro hoc.
I hope you will •rounce Torcol for this.



Trounsabis? Ego fui trounsatus h•di•, ut puto nunquam homo fuit in mundo trounsatus; pro hoc solo, nunquam indurato faciem Fratris, neque cleri•• dum vivo.
Trounce him! why I have been so trounced to day, as I think never man was trounced in the World. For this one thing alone, I will never indure the face of a Friar, or of a Clark as long as I live.



Vbi erant Daggariae tum▪ se defendendo? Where were
  
your Daggers then Master in your own defence?



Dagarias me•• ceperunt, & asportarum contra pacem Regis coronam & dignitutem ejus, tantu•i reliquerunt tres scaberdas & spoliarunt meam ruffam, & obligationem, Hic▪
Why? they seized upon my Daggers, and carryed them away against the Kings peace, and his Crown, and Dignity, they have only left me the three Scabberds, and see here they have spoild my Ruffe and my obligation also.



Profecto est cancellata. Oh grievous, it is cancelled indeed Sir.



Volebant etiam facere me mille res, voluit unus me plorare, & in despectu nasi faciebat me plorare, & alius mummabat nescio quid, Ex ego repetebam mummans nescio quid, & quicquid dice∣bam, erat Diabolus cum illis.
They also would make me doe a thousand things; One of them would make me to weep and cry, and in spight of m• own nose he made me cry; Another would have me to mutter, and mumble I know not what my self; and I did repeat after them and mumbled I know not what my selfe, and every word I spake was a Divel with them.



Quomodo dicis per illud nunc? in bona veritate hic erat Dies terribilissimus.
How say you by that now? in good earnest Master, this was a most terrible Day.



Dies? Festum omnium sanctorum praeteriit, puto hodie esse festum omnium Diabolorum.
A day say you  The Feast of All Saints is passed. I think this day was the Feast of All Devils.



Tu convenies cum illis uno die, Sir, you may chance to meet with them one day or another.



I will have them all in a Premunire.



Doe; And beg the Friary of the King.



But that some English men (amongst whom I had made an agreement) came at that instant by chance into the Monastery, who all of them knew me, and certified that I was not possessed with a Divel; per meam fidem puto murder assent me, Upon my faith I think they would have murdered me.



Quomodo dicis per i•lud nunc? How say you by that now?



Ita super eorum verba sinebant me ire ad largum: And so
  
upon their words they gave me leave to go at large.



Hic est Casus meus. Haec est villamissima villa.
It is directly my Case. This is a most vile villanous City master.



Burdeaux, Burdeaux, In nomine Diaboli ego abibo cras, & si gigno Burdeaux semel super dorsum meum, si iterum return• ad Burdeaux dabo illis veniam geldare me. Ibo nunc ad Torcol nebulonem, & nisi ille mibi det coronas meas & bonam satisfactionem capiam illum in manum alio modo.
Burdeaux, Burdeaux, In the Divels Name, I will be gone too morrow, and if I get Burdeaux once upon my back, if ever I re∣turn again to Burdeaux, I will give them leave to geld me. I will now go to the knave Torcol, and unlesse he gives me my crowns and good satisfaction I shall take him in hand another way.



Habes illum super clunem nunc pro falso Imprisonamento.
You have him now upon the buttock for false Imprisonment.



Come, come, let us go all three of us; now sommes trois, we three are three.



Fear not Master; we will advance with one spirit of Re∣venge. But first Hist steal softly off? I see one of them already.




The ARGUMENT.Trico hearing Dorothea speaking with Theodorus, conceives him∣self undone beyond all hope of Recovery; and that the whole carri∣age of the Plot, & all the Deceits there would now undoubtedly be discovered: Dorothea relates to Theodorus that the true An∣thonine and the true Katharine were lodged for the present in an Inne hard by the Haven. Theodorus calleth forth the coun∣terfeit Katharine. Trico hides himself.




JUst now almost, I encountred with my Master Anthonio who gave me such soft and fair language that I could not chuse but forgive him. But what rare sight is this? my Master Theodore  
imbracing of a woman, Ha, ha, he, an old man in love, upon my faith I am glad on't.



I can hardly at the last give any intermission to my kisses, and imbraces, I am transported with so great a joy.



The joy is no lesse mine, then it is yours my Theodore.



My Theodore, my deer sweet-love Ha, ha, he.



At your comming my Dorothy, I doe revive, and grow young again.



And at your coming Mistresse Dorothy I do perish.



To make your joy yet greater, and more absolute, send your Coach I pray you to the Havens side, to bring hither your Daughter in law Katharine, and your son Anthonine.



Anthonine is just now gone into the City, but Katharine is within.



I left them both now at an Inne by the Havens side, and came first of all my self unto you.



Now Trico go and hang thy self?



I will call her forth that you shall see her.







I would she had broke her Neck in her journey or drowned her self with mischief to her.



Let me not live if she be not so sea-sick that she can hard∣ly put one foot before another.



Ho la within there? bid Katharine come hither?



These be your Intrigues Trico? Are you that cunning, that subtle, crafty Trico? what will you do now? What if you go this way? it will not do. What, if that way? it will be to no purpose neither. There is not the least hope left.



Ho la! Bid Katharine come hither quickly.



Wo is me, What is to come? is to come, and it cannot be avoyded.



Bid Trico come hither also, if he be within.



What? Trico too? Trico is not within to my knowledge, I will here hide my self, and be as neer them, as I can.




The ARGUMENT.Rosabella comes forth, and professeth her selfe to be Katharine; but Dorothea denying it, she at the last confesseth the whole truth, Theodorus threatneth her.




WHat's your pleasure Sir?



Look you, Dorothy, this is Katharine.







Do you ask, and see her stand before you?



You are deceived this is not Katharine.



Wo is me, wretch as I am, what shall become of me? whither shall I turn my self?



What do you say? whither shall you turn your self, Are not you my Daughter in law.



Good Lord! who are you trow?



Look well upon her I pray you.



Why would you have me look upon her; I know her not, neither did I ever see her.



Oh that I were dead now! happy is she that dyeth be∣fore she desireth and invoketh death.



Believe me it is not Katharine.



Who are you? why do you not speak?



If she will not be my Mother in law, alas, Sir, can I help it.



Thou art a good one I'le warrant thee.



Who are you? it is impossible for you now to part undis∣covered; why do you not answer me?



Good Sir, I know not what to answer.



Do you still hold your peace? do you think me good for nothing else but to be abused and affronted by you? impudent prostitute!



Whatsoever I am Sir, I am not dishonest, the respect I bear unto you makes me forbear to answer these false and foule Tearms.



I pray do not dissemble, and I will speak for you.



Shall my house be polluted with your filthinesse; shall I be made the subject of infamy and disgrace for your inconti∣nence; you shall not go unpunished.



O me, I was born in an unfortunate hour.



Confesse then I pray you, doe?



When no excuse can be found any longer, you presently have recourse unto Tears, but those counterfeit Tears shall doe you no good. Why draw I not my sword, and expiate this Vil∣lany? will you not confesse? will you not tell me who you are, you strumpet you.



Pardon me Sir, I pray you, and I will confesse every thing; I am the unhappy, but not the unchast Rosabella.



O! now you are my own Country woman. Now you appear in your own colours.



Who brought you hither? speak the truth?







I am sorry he is such a One.



'Tis so, is it not? he return'd from Sea, and counterfeit∣ed himself to be Anthonine, and painted a mole on his cheek, the better to carry on the deceit.







O Times, and manners, when Sons thus boldly dare delude their own Fathers, but it was you, you inchantresse, that did inchant him to it; it was by your Allurements he did do it; you vile strumpet.



I am no strumpet pardon me I pray you Sir, I am the Wife of Antonio.



You his VVife? what, you his VVife? take heed what you say, you inticing baggage least I cut your tongue out of your Head.



VVhat is already done cannot be undone; I must be∣seech you therefore for your goodnesse, and your gentlenesse to bear it with wisdome and not with passion inveigh against that which cannot be changed, or helped.



But I will help it in spite of Destiny; and make at once a divorce both of our Marriage and your life.



Happy is the death which extinguisheth the miseries of life.



O my Dorothy, we had almost lost our son Antonio.



I see there is no perfect joy in this life.



Doe you believe this bag•age is not to be made ex∣emplary.



She is so, but for my sake, I pray use Clemency.



What Clemency can be shewed unto her who hath cor∣rupted our son, for whom I had prepared a rich wife and of No∣ble Parentage.



Patience is a remedy for every grief.



Pardon me my Dorothy, if at this present I entertain you not with that respect, and tendernesse of love which is due unto you; my mind is very much troubled. I know you are weary with your long journey, I pray go in, and refresh your self, and command Bannacar the Moor to come unto me.



I will do as as you desire me, but I pray be not too pas∣sionate, nor leap into a sanguine rage.
Exit.



Woe is me, I have lived one day longer then I should but I will remove farre from me the Cause of Griefe; she shall not live a day longer.



I perceive what he intends to do with me, but I willing∣ly prepare my selfe.




The ARGUMENT.Trico lies still, and close upon the lurch. Theodorus commands Bannacar to kill Rosabella which he denyeth to put in execution, and the rather, because he knows Rosabella to be the Daughter of his Master Alphonsus who dying at Fesse gave him his liberty. Trico departeth to relate this unto Antonio; Rosabella over∣come with Grief, ahd Fear doth faint away.

Trico, •onnacar, Theodorus, Rosabella.


COme forth Trico from thy place of subterfuge, like a shade from the gates of darknesse, and obscrue what thy master Theodorus doth above ground.



Would you speak with me master?



With no man sooner my Bannacar, for I have alwaies known thee a faithful servant to me.



And I have alwaies found you a bountiful Master.



You have been sensible of my bounty heretofore, and now you shall every day observe it to be more, and more enlar∣ged, if you performe that which I shall command you to do for me.



Master command me to be killed, I will neither startle at it, nor fly from it.



Command you (Bannacar) to be kill'd God forbid; but I would have you to kill another.



would you have me master to kill any one 



Yes, to kill her who hath defiled my house, and com∣mitted a wickednesse which cannot be taken away, unlesse she be taken away with it; doe you therefore with your hand colour'd with the blacknesse of Night, remove this disgrace from us, and put her to deserved death.



I will flye to Antonio, and relate this unto him, to preserve, if possible, both her and my self from this great danger.
Exit Trico.



Why doe you draw back Bannacar? why doe you not answer me?



Shall I being made a Christian by your goodnesse, so transgresse against it, as put any one to death. Master, I have learned better things, of you therefore I must beseech you to desist from so evil an Act, you will overcome better by Council then by Passion.



What are you affraid of, I will secure you from all dan∣gers. Do it therefore my Bannacar; inflict upon her what death you please, you may throw her headlong into the Sea, or you may immu•e her between two Walls, where she may perish with Hunger.



Sir, if I needs must dye, I pray let me dye but once, for they who dye of a lingring death dye often.



I care not what death you dye of, but dye you shall.



Loe here I stand an innocent sacrifice, and I dye wil∣lingly, for without Antonio I can find nothing in this world that may induce me to live. And indeed so great a griefe already doth invade me, I know I shall not live long.



If you hope to live, you do but delude your self. Bannacar why fulfil you not my Command?



Bannacar, I knew you at Fesse; you were heretofore a servant of my Fathers who dying made you a Free man; there∣fore Bannacar be not too barbarous in the murder of me.



Wo is me, this is Rosabella.



I am as you see, the miserable Rosabella.



This is the Daughter of my excellent master Alp•onsus whose Bond-slave I was at Fesse; I pray master desist from this so cruel an enterprise.



What, you knave, are you grown so refractory? Either do you kill her, or I will kill you?



Kill me if you please; for I will not kill her: shall I kill her who was heretofore my Mistresse, and so kind and loving to me: shall I kill her whose Noble Father, of a bondman, made me free?



Tell not me these Fables; I will dragge her unto death my self, never stare upon me, I will do it.



You shal not need, feel my heart already to cleave a sunder
  
with the excesse of Griefe. Farewell Antonio?  Farewel for ever my dear Antonio.she falls down down in a swoune.



This your Counterfeiting shall do you no good.



Wo is me she is dead.



She counterfeits, you knave, she counterfeits; and you counterfeit as well as she, but I shall make her 




The ARGUMENT.Antonio comes and believing that his Father had killed Rosabella, he endeavours to kill himself. Rosabella recovereth from her Swoune. Antonio demands her for his Wife. His Father en∣quires after her Parentage. She makes answer she is the Daugh∣ter of Alphonsus, a Noble man of Portugal who dying at Fesse did bequeath her to her Vncle Roderigo Torcol, who suffring ship∣wrack, and by the force of the wind being driven upon these coasts did live here; Bannacar being demanded concerning her, saith, she is not the daughter of Alphonsus (though alwayes so accoun∣ted) but of a London Merchant whose name was Manly and her Mothers name Dorothy; Moreover that being brought up at Detford she was stollen from thence by Urtade, her Nurses Name was Vrsula, and her own name Isabella, by which tokens together with her picture in Amber, Theodorus perceiveth that this is the daughter of Alderman Manly, who so many years ago was betrothed to his Son Antonio, he therefore gives full consent to the Marriage of Antonio, and Isabella, who was the counter∣feit Rosabella.

Antonio, Theodorus, Bannacar, Rosabella.


I Am undone, I have come to late, she is dead already; see where she lyes; Oh that I could breath my soul into thee; O thee and me unhappy for whose sake thou innocently
  
hast indured this. Why was not I demanded unto death; she, alas, deserved nothing, what fault had she done.



What doth he mean to do with himself?



Art thou gone from me my dearest love, my life? Thou art gone but I will follow thee.



VVill he act some cruelty on himself; Beshrew me I suspect him; why Son? Son Antonio what are you about to do?



Am I a Son, or you a Father that have committed so foul an Act? no matter! you shall not hinder him from dying, whom you would not suffer to live.



Are you in your right wits?



I am not in my wits, nor can I be; I desire it not, how can I be otherwise then mad whom you have made so by your own madnesse.



Certainly you are mad.



I am so; and I should be mad, if I were not mad: VVould you not have me to be mad? would you have me now to be mad? Rosabella the delight of my Eys, my Joy and my Safety is killed. Rosabella who while she lived excelled all women; Certainly, you turned away your Eyes from her when you did it; for had you beheld her beauty and sweet innocence, I know you had never done it. This only favour I desire of you that since you would not give us leave being alive to enjoy one ano∣ther, you would now suffer us being dead to sleep together, and to be buryed in one grave.



Son; Before you dye, learn what it is to live.



How can I do that, when you have taken away my life.



I pray come hither:



Approach not too neer, least my youthful sury act that over again which you in your old age already have committed.



VVhat do you attempt? are you resolved to dye?



As sure as she is dead.



But live? and I will graunt you any thing.



You will give your graunt now, when there is nothing to be graunted.



•f you will believe me, we have not so much as touched her, let us see if we can call her back again to life.



Recal her? are you mad. She cannot return, therefore
  
to you I come   I come my Rosabella.



O my Son, Forbear I pray you; Look on my gray hairs, and rather kill me; I am old, and going down the hill, you are in the flower of your Age.







Do you hear her? she is come again to her selfe, I am heartily glad of it.



Where are you Antonio, Antonio?



O my dear Life; Do you breath again; you have pre∣served my life.



Doe you think Antonio I would have killed her?



I dreamed a very melancholy dream; I thought I was dead, And that there was one would have killed me.







Do not Fear? you are now safe from danger.



How happy now am I, because I see you alive, I begin again my self to live.



Let me not live, I am glad to see her restored to life.



I am alive now, but by your benefit.



Sir, I beseech you; you see the Destinies are willing to it, let me have but your good will to make her my wife.



Be quiet a little! peradventure I will.



Peradventure Sir!  This gives no satisfaction.



The fury of the Son hath overcome the fury of the Fa∣ther: we are both violently passionate: my own Son all over  But tell me what •owry are you to have with her?



A great Dowry Father! Birth, and Beauty.



But Son, nothing is bought in the Market with Birth or Beauty; I see she is beautiful enough; but how shall we know she is of Noble Birth? she seems to be a stranger, and is utterly unknown to me.



Her manners speak it in my silence; but she can best her self relate it, if you will give her leave to speak.



I will neither interrupt nor contradict her; speak there∣fore but speak truly?



If I speak not the Truth, let Bannacar disprove me who was my Fathers servant.



Were you her Fathers servant Bannacar? I think all∣ready you have said it.



I have so. I was a servant to her Father at Fesse, before I came unto you: for her Father being dead I travelled into Portugall to procure some way of livelyhood; but finding none, I wandred up and down in France, and came hither at last to Burdeaux where you made me at once both your Servant and a Christian.



'Tis well; If she speaks any thing that is untrue, Do you reprove her?



My Father was a great Souldier, and a gallant Com∣mander in War; his Name Alphonso, a Noble Man of Portugall.











From Portugall he travelled to exercise his Arms at Fesse, and dying there, he committed me to the Care and Trust of his brother Rodrigo Torcol; for so it fell out that he was then at Fesse in the Condition of a Merchant, and returning with me from thence into Portugall, he was driven hither by violent winds, and his ship being made unserviceable, he ever after dwelt in this City.



Is all this true Bannacar?



True, as far as she knows.



Do you know any thing more then she?



I do believe I do, and if you will give me leave I can throughly inf•rm you with it.



You have your own Liberty.



She was not the true Daughter of Alphonsus.



Just now, you said I was. I must now reprove you, Bannacar.



What do you lye, you slave you?



Pray Son, Hold your peace but a little while.



I speak the Truth, and will speak more if you will hear me out.







Before I was Alphonsus servant, I served a Portugall Merchant, who lived in Mauritania; his Name was Vrtado; he oftentimes sailed with his merchandise to London, but finding there but bad Markets, he privately would steal all the English Children he could handsomely meet with, and sell them in
  Mauritania on his return. As our ship therefore did ride on the River of Thames not farre from Detford, the Nurse of Rosabella (carrying her in her Arms) walked along the banks side, Vrtado by chance was there in a boat, and expressing himself in English to the Nurse in as fair and as flattering words as possibly he could, he so far prevailed that he inticed the Nurse, with her pretty burden in her Arms, to come into his ship, which the easie and foolish Woman did accordingly; she was no sooner in the ship but immediately he Hoysed sayles, and brought her into Mauritania with other English Children, where for a round sum of Money he sold this young Lady, and me with her, at Fesse to Alphonsus, who having no Children of his own did adopt her being about Four Years of Age for his own daughter, and laid a great charge on me, being then his servant, not to reveal it unto any, I therefore did conceale it, and this is the first time I have seen her since the death of my master Alphonsus.



But what is become of her who you said was her Nurse?



She dyed in the way, and was thrown over board.



Do you know what was her name?







Vrsula, and Detford? how great is my Hope? but did the Nurse never declare unto you whose her little nurs•ing was, or to whom she did belong?



Yes, and with much compunction of spirit, she said oftentimes she was the daughter of an Alderman of London one Mr. Mainly; or Mr. Manly, such a name it was.



Mr. Manly I believe.



Yes it was so, and that the Name of this young Lady was Isabella.



Good God! what Isabella too?



For it was Alphonsus her supposed Father that did after∣wards give her the name of Rosabella.



Detford Vrsula Manly and Isabella how admirably do these tokens agree? I can hardly containe my self from embracing of her. But tell me Bannacar what do you remember more?



Nothing but that the Nurse being dead I took from her a little medail, which I have still in my purse, I keep it for the rare artifice of it.



Shew it me Bannacar?



Sir, here it is.



Come hither my Antonio; you know that Alderman the first wife of my Dorothea had two Daughters by her, Katharine who is now the wife of Anthonine and Isabella, whom many years ago we betrothed unto you when you were little ones. For even then when you could hardly speak plain she would call you Hus-and band, you called her Wife. When I was married to Dorothea we gave to both of you Medails in which your pictures were en∣graven; And this is that which I then gave to Isabella. See  here is the Effigies of a Boy and a Girle, this representeth you, and that Isabella. Behold your hands joyned as in wedlock, and your two faces touching one another. See the two birds, that are the symbols of marriage, and the Inscription of these two Letters, A, and I, that is Antonio, and Isabella.



I have at home another most like it, with these two let∣ters, I and A.



That is Isabella the wife of Antony. It is the very same which was then given to you. I am now fully satisfied within my selfe that this is the same Isabella that heretofore was betrothed to you.



O wonderfull! I am surprized with as much amazement as joy.



O my dear daughter in-law Isabella, give me leave, most unworthy of you, to imbrace you.



Now fortune flatters, and smiles upon me; and by and by it may be froward and frown again.



Think not so; you have fortune now at your own com∣mand.



You who were before my Rosabella, shall be now my deer Isabella. Twice I have found you, and twice I live anew, and ano∣ther life.



Imbrace you one another, and ile imbrace you both   my dear son and daughter. Pardon I pray you, my daughter, what but now I so rashly attempted.



Father, if you have done any thing amiss, I have forgot it; but the good which you now doe I shall alwaies be carefull to remember.



Excellently spoken! my Antonio, How happy a man are you?



I do confesse it, and Father I must beseech you to for∣give those many Untruths which this day I have spoken before you. For to be wise, and be in love, is granted scarce to God above.



You are wise, and she is wise, I do pardon you, and do de∣sire you both pardon me. Tis I only am the fool. O my servant Ban∣nacar, how much are you more wise then I am: but if I do you not much Good for it, rank me not amongst the number of men.



And I Bannacar will endeavour to doe thee Good also.



But I most of all.



I am glad I have been the Instrument of so much Joy unto you.



Father, I must beseech you that you will be pleased to pardon Trico also.



I pray Sir doe! for if he had not bin, I had bin made this day Ignoramus Concubine·



Both you and he hath deserved, that I should doe both this and that, and all things else which you do desire of me.




The ARGUMENT.Thanks are given to Bannacar, and Trico; Katharine, and Antho∣nine are come to the House of their Father Theodorus, to whom he bringeth Rosabella.

Trico, Theodorus, Rosabella, Bannacar, Vince.


HEre from my lurking-h•le, I have und•rstood all, I will now s•ow my face with confidence; Master, I find that all things fall out happily unto you. Do you not praise me now? am I not now a good Trico?



A good Trico thou art And happy man be thy dole.



Lord, how I hate a lyar with my heart; your Trico told neither unto you, nor unto Torcol any thing but what was the truth this day.



That was true too; what pains you took at my Country House.



So it was Master, with a mental Reservation; my Body was here indeed, but my mind was at your Country-house.



Ha, ha, he; How learned are you grown?



I Sir; I had it out of Cupes Book; when I am married, there shall be a Comedy acted: The Name of it shall be Aequi∣vocus.



But Loiola only must Scene a Tragedy. Away with him:



Father, That no discontent may cloud our Marriage; confer I pray six hundred Crowns on Torcol the supposed Uncle of Isabella for the charges of her maintenance, he may pay them back again to Ignoramus who bought her this day of him for so much money.



Willingly, my Son, and much more too. Here Trico take this gold Chain, and give it to Torcol, and bring Ignoramus hither to me with him. Let that be an Earnest, that I will give them full Content to their own desires; and d'ee hear   invite all the Jovial blades and the most apparent of our Neighbours to supper too morrow night; we will there repeat, and laugh at thy Con∣ceits. No man shall depart with a sad heart.



Now you are my brave Master in earnest, Now I per∣ceive you will get you a Name.



Trico, give me thy hand; In good troth I love thee.



Master; and if I love you not twice as much   well  you know not what I think on now; you may go where you will, but if I love you not in my hearts heart Master.



My Trico, and my Bannacar, I will be good unto you.



Master; Bannacar the Moor, and Trico, are your two ser∣vants that are worth their weight in Gold.



You have spoke the Truth; but go now where I com∣manded you.



On the reputation of this Chain I go now to Torcol, and afterwards I will addresse my self to Ignoramus. I will bring them both to you with all the speed I can.
Exit Trico. Enter Vincit.



Sir, my Lady would desire you to come in, to Master Anthonine and Mistresse Katharine, they are new come, in the Coach at the other Gate.



My pretty Boy Donze la main.



La main, thats a hand; Nell can tell you Sir what's Le bras too.



Come my Isabella let us go to Dorothea, that she may participate of this great joy with us.
Exeunt.




The ARGUMENT.Antonio gives satisfaction to Pyropus the Broaker for his Cloaths.




I See him again; I will speake to him howsoever; al∣though I must confesse I stand in some fear of him: Heus, Heus, you, you Sir.



Is your Name Heus Sir. Here is one calleth Heus, or Hugh.







I pray Sir, restore my Garments to me.



O Pyropus!   Come in, you shall have them pre∣sently.



What Sir, now you are our own Countryman again; Now you are Antonio?



I am so, Come in I pray.



He is more tame, and gentle then he was; I do suspect him so much the more, he before did beat me in English, perad∣venture he desireth to take me into his hands again and to beat me now in French.



Nay Friend come along with me! why draw you back so?



He looks very fearfully, and speaks just like one that is going to steal Deer.



Tell me what are you afraid of.



Of some hard dealing from you; upon my troth Sir, I had rather part with halfe the Goods you have of mine, then indure to be beaten again by you.



Upon my Reputation I will deal fairly with you.



What Sir? not on the Reputation of this Ring.



No on my own Reputation now; necessity doth some∣times put us upon unhandsome shifts, but do you excuse me I am now become another man.



Shall I believe your Flatteries again.



Be confident in me.



What a sly Buzzard is this? a man can scarce get a shoot at him with a stalking-Horse, he hath bin scared sure.



I see no Mole now.



There is none. Be not afraid; Here take this Cloak in the first place, see, I throw it to you.



Shall Heus have your Cloak Sir? I would he would go to Dice with me for it. I have high and low men here. O for my little French Pages now, I shall sting them ifaith.



Nay go in? you shall •up with me; The rest of your Cloaths and Monies to boo• shall honestly be given to you.



I do believe you Sir, I will a••nd upon you.






What sport shall I have now; If it were not too late I would go to Loggets with the Marriners; well I'le go watch the Comers by, and snatch Hats with the Pages; or else I'le go throw Stones at some or other; O I love that sport alife: but first I'le go pin this Foxes tail at some bodies back: Oh Fine, and pat. Here comes Company.




The ARGUMENT.Ignoramus and Torcol understand from Trico all the whole story concerning Isabella, and Antonio; but Torcol knew before that Rosabella was born in England; and because he shall receive her money, and Ignoramus the six hundred Crowns, they both of them forbear to lay any claim to Rosabella, being along ago the espouse of Antonio. Vince makes sport with Ignoramus, and pinneth to his back a Foxes tail.

Torcol, Trico, Ignoramus, Dullman, Vince, Musaeus.


IT is as I say, ifaith.



Well, well; Then much good d'it them.



Because we shall have our Monies again I am glad that Rosabella Anotonio's Love is found to be Isabella; I knew be∣fore that she was born in England and stollen away by Vrtade; and that my Brother Alphonsus did adopt her for his Daughter, but I carefully did conceal it both from her and others in the hope of Gain.



If Rosabella before were the Spouse of Antonio and by consequence in Covert Barn, I am glad I did not marry her, Ne fuisset maritagium amissum per defaltam, lest the marriage should be null by default.



Per defaltam you say right Patron.



I am contented therefore, my Client, If your Master en ce cas de dissesein will pay back unto me my six hundred Crowns.



On the reputation of this Chain, he will Content you.



A pox on't, 'Twill not stick; Lend me a great Pin some body; O here's one.



In the mean time, whiles Ignoramus is telling forth the Mony, Trico give me the Chain.



Give it you, nay give it me I say: Give it me, or else I will make Distresse.



Here take it Seignior, take it.



But first let us be friends and shake hands; Give me your hand, Seignior Torcol.



Because thou hast carried thy self so handsomely all a∣long in this businesse, Trico here it is.



Patron Ignoramus now give me your hand, and here take this Chain in earnest.



Oh  well said Client, I'le put it about my neck; now Trico I give you my hand; and I give it to you Torcol.



O Seignior baso las manas.



I will touch this chain, to see if it be good Gold or not; Oh tis good good; I will now show my self full of Courtesie till my Crowns be paid back unto me, afterwards I will doe, as I think good my self. Oh my good Client take both my hands, imbraso te.



Oh my Patron how much am I inamoured on you?



I am full of Courtesie now, and as full of Craft; For all this if I catch them at Westminster, I will tickle them. Who is there behind them now? Hah!



Oh Sir, I perceive you are my own Countreyman; I have a Latin to make, For Gods sake help me. What's Latin for an Alehouse-keeper?







I thank you Sir; and what's Latin for a Tester?



Sixpence, Anglicè a Tester.



Why this is sixpence for a Tester, what have I got got by it? and what's for a Shoemaker Sir?



In dicto Comitatu Shoemaker.



And what Sir, is a black Velvet Cap upon the hinder part of a red speckled Hogs-head?



Byr Lady that's hard; It is pileus de nigro velvet super occiput capitis porci, coloris red speckle.



I can make as good Latin as this in bas and in bus in o∣rum and arum: As thus; your worshipporum is a noddicockorum in a velvet Capparum.



I'le tell your Master sirrah, of you ifaith. I'le bring you to a Noun, your Hose shall go down.



Nay good Sir, make me one Latin more; what's a
  
Fox-tail pinned at a Fools back: a fool is hic stultus I know.



Is it even so indeed? a rod, a rod, what's your Ma∣sters Name sirrah?



As in praesenti; Sir, you know him well enough.



What? Qui, quae, quod, here ifaith? I'le tell your Ma∣ster. What's that they look, and laugh at, Dullman? what's behind me there?



It is a Fox-tail indeed Master; Tenes in Foxtayl jam; vis me virgare hunc puerum, will you have me jerk this boy.



Do, if you can?



Come, come, and if you dare, I have stones here ifaith.



Will you, what! will you throw stones?



I that I will.







It was well hit; now I'le away.
Exit Vince.



Let us go, and receive the Crowns.



I can hardly go, he hath so lamed me.



My Master desires your company to sup with him.



Say you so? Alloons.



Dullman; To make the period more grateful give me your hand also.



Pox on you, you were Mendoza▪



Wine, and Sack, Dullman.



Well I forgive you for the Sack.



What? Do you come but now Musaeus, you are your own Man, you have no Master to serve, Have you! Well; alloons, alloons.


They all go into the House of Theodorus.





The Victualler, Cupes, Cola, Wenches, and Pola.



I Have procured you Wenches, but at no easie rate I dare assure you.



Well   there's the Money I promi•ed you, Let Supper be served in suddenly and handsomely; In the mean time let these Beauties delight us with some merry and stirring Song.



What you command shall be suddenly sent in.




Now my sweet Friends, what fine new Songs have you?



Let us hear 〈◊〉, Dea• Loves, Be not too modest; I will absolve you every one of you.



It was told me just now that my husband was here with a Company of Whores. If I can find him, Ile make him the most miserable Creature living.



I am utterly undone if she discovers me. Confessor, I pray give me leave to hid• my self a little while under your Gown till she be gone.



Doe, and if she asks me for you, I will say I saw you not.



Oh, Have I found you! you are those bold delicate whores that do so corrupt my husband. Be gone, you filthy stinking Ware; Be gone.
Exeunt Wenches.



I will take this Book into my hand, as if I were full of Contemplation.



I see his Companion, he is not far off himself I am con∣fident; Cola! why Brother Cola, why Cola I say, What are you grown deaf with a pox to you? Lay by your book, and look on me, and answer me.



Be gone I pray, and interrupt me not, I am now in a deep meditation upon my Lent-Sermons.



Come hither I pray; I must needs speak with you.



In troth I am not at leisure, I pray excuse me; One of my best Meditations had almost quite slipped out of my memory.



You shall not stay a jot.



Disturbe me not now, I beseech you.



But tell me then, where is my good husband?



He is not here you see, but wheresoever he is, he is reli∣giously covered with a Friars Hood.



What is he still in a Friars habit exorcising the wives of other men?   could I but catch him at it   but 'tis no matter, I will een let him alone, and pay him home with the same coyn. Brother, if you love me, let us go in together.



I am now extreamely busie; but what should I do within?



Why you shall exorcise me in the same manner as he doth exorcise other women; I desire to be even with him; It will be a sweet Revenge.



O harbour not so evil a thought?



An evil thought! you told me heretofore▪ It was a Case of Conscience.



Fy! what Case of Conscience? Hold your tongue.



Have you not often told me, that if the Husband lay with another Woman, it was lawful for his wife to lie with another Man; you give the very same law to Titius as you did unto Sem∣pronius.







Why do you dissemble so? the last time you lay with me; you know I speak the Truth.



Hold your peace for shame, I never lay with you; Oh, oh, oh.
Cupes pincheth him by the Legs.








I know not what a Divel it is. A Flea I think stings me under my Gown.



There is another Flea that stingeth me under my Coats; prethee let's go in.



Let us go in; Nay stay you impu∣dence;
Cupes starteth from under the Friars Gown.

I now come out as from the Trojan Horse, Jam capta es Troja & Trojae vastator Achilles, Now thou art taken and fair Troy brought under; and thou Achilles that brave Troy didst plunder.



O strange! How came you hither?



O Polla, O Cola, What do the Fleas sting you? O two most shamelesse Creatures!



Believe me Husband, All that I said was in Jest.



Yes on my credit, 'twas all in Jest.



Do you so jest with a pox to you? Ah Polla, I did here conceal my self on purpose to take you.



Nay▪ being conscious of your own guilt, you here did hide your self; Cupes I know it very well▪



Be it so! let us shake hands then Polla? we are quit.




Cum sitis similes, pares{que} vita,
Vxor pessima, pessimus maritus,
Miror tam malè convenire vobis


Since both resemble, and are like in life,
A quicked Husband, and as bad a wife,
'Tis strange, betwixt you should be so much strife.



Since like in face, as in your lives you be,
A wicked wife, a husband bad as she,
I wonder much you do no more agree.




But now my Cupes, for the time to come we shfll agree better.



Sai'st thou so? let us seal it with a Kisse.



For the time to come, Live together in Love and Union.



Yes, brother Cola, and without your Benedictions, and Cases of Conscience; In all other considerations I shall deport my self unto you as a Friend.



My dear Polla go before, I will follow you immedi∣ately.



Come! Let us now go to our Wenches.



Husband, Ile go home, unlesse you have any businesse for me.
Exit Polla.



Come Cola, Let us go; Although you are a very Knave, yet I know you love me.



At the very heart of me.




