





PRincess! a Title boading miserie;
Curst in the Sex, more curst in the Degree!
Our every Look makes an Affair of State,
And every Sigh provokes a grave Debate.
No popular Insurrections with such Care
Inspected, as our rising Passions are.
Love, like our breath, the Will's vain power defies;
Sooner the heart, then its emotions, dies.
Yet we Dissembling, with a faithless Frown,
Meanly severe, our secret Care disown:
Though still the Darling, which our Looks detest,
(Onely retir'd) lies panting in our breast.
Unhappy Women  equally a prey,
If sway'd, or if our Inclinations sway!

  2Either with Nature, we, down th' easie stream,
By Flow'rie banks, to sure Destruction swim:
Or 'gainst Wind and Tide Honour doth us draw
To barren Rocks, there on lean Hopes to gnaw.
These anxious thoughts, ah! whither shall I trace?
I now too near the tender Secret press.
I love the Stranger this too well I know,
Because I Jealous of Gunilda grow.
But here she haunts me still 









Your tongue, howe're unwilling to reveal,
Yet some new Care your eyes more kindly tell.
That heart (that firm and very Rock before)
Shakes by some gust from a Remoter shore.



From France you cannot apprehend the storm,
There an Usurper does the Throne deform.
From Germany no Emp'rour can appear,
Since Otho fell, my younger Sister's share;

Otho, who now of late is call'd the Great.
The others I descend not to repeat.
No such new care did my free thoughts enflame;
Onely the last night's Ball diverted them.



The Stranger there 
I could with a particular eye have seen,
Were but his bloud as noble as his meen.
Sweetness did not the Majesty betray,
Nor Majesty his Sweetness fright away:
That wheresoe're he would a Heart invade,
His Looks at once seem by kind Nature made
Able to force, or ready to perswade.
Together there such state and mildness met,
He seem'd at once agreeable and great.



How with his praise my Jealous heart she wounds?
Aside.

And now how harsh the ill-tim'd musick founds?

  3Methinks I something in his face did see,



Something that speaks him of no Low degree.



He Monarch-like did in the Crowd prevail,
And on himself drew the Regards of all.
Another Edgar some began to cry;
Others, that he might ev'n with Edgar vie:
Till Edgar's presence clear'd the growing Doubt;
Whose beams, like a strong Torrent, breaking out,
Instantly bore the young Usurper down,
And in all minds confirm'd his shaken Throne.
But see he comes  






The Ladies (since the Turnament was past)
On some cross winds your late arrival cast:



Else, who your softer Gallantries have seen,
Had witness of your Manly vertues been.


Our English there by rougher shocks maintain
That honour, they in mild encounters gain.



They small success must to their arms presage,
Who 'gainst the English in the Lists engage.
And they, however, whom the Brave might spare,
Must fall a certain conquest to the Fair.
What Knights did fortune to that glory raise,
As from so fair a mouth to merit praise?



After Nine days in furious Justs had past,
Each Courage grew more prodigall: the Last,
The sport so hot, shockt our relenting sight,
Which scarce could bear the Terrible delight.
Each Nation then their pride abated found,
Their boldest Knights were strow'd upon the ground.
There Spaniards low were with new stiffness laid;
And there the Germans lusty Limms were spread.
There Osmin lay, his eye-balls roll'd in death;
And there Almanzor grinning for new breath:
Too late repenting, they from Africk came
So far, in quest of an uncertain Fame.

  4Their mighty Victour was for Edgar known,
By his address through his disguise that shone.



That was not Edgar; he, by Edgar dar'd,
With Spear reverst his low respects preferr'd:
Unknown he came, unknown he left the Field,
And did the prize, to those he vanquish'd, yield.



When boasting Ethelwold was headlong thrown,
Your favours straight the Stranger's arms did crown:
You did his Spear so eminently grace,



Your Ring for meaner trophies left no place.



That stranger Knight invok'd Editha's name;
And ow'd his Conquest, where he own'd his Flame.



His secrets by some Magick Line you sound.



The Magick is all in this Circle bound.
Shews a ring.









You must to prison 



 What's the hainous Crime?



Ask Ethelwold, and learn the rest of him.



Vertue renounce, and Gallantry abjure,
Since they are not in English Courts secure.
They carry him off.







If here brave Strangers thus are entertain'd,
All men must fly th' in hospitable Land;
Avoid our shore, and in the Storms at Sea,
'Mongst Sands and Rocks find more humanitie.



This hour be rac'd from out King Edgar's Reign,
Else it might all the other bright days stain.
Some Minister in this abus'd his Trust,
For 'tis below a King to be unjust.



These Fav'rites on that Royall power incroach,
No Subject, without Sacriledge, can touch;
And still believe their Thunder idlely spends,
But when it some illustrious Ruin sends.



In this the hand of Ethelwold is seen,
He acts the King, now that his Daughter's Queen.



And let her reign, unenvy'd as unprais'd,
To that high rank, in spite of Honour, rais'd.
That title on Gunilda if bestow'd,
With Joy I to the dignity had bow'd.



Betroth'd to Kenneth, I for Scotland sail'd,
'Gainst our intent when adverse winds prevail'd,
And I by storms was forc'd upon your shore;
Where Edgar's Love disorder'd me yet more.
His Love, for so I constru'd that Address,
Which did but his Civilities express.
But Heaven disprov'd that faithless change in me,
And, angry, smil'd at my Unconstancy.



Yet Kenneth did, no fault, that errour think,
Or else his Love did at the Frailty wink.
And he unchang'd, your wavering purpose knew.
And something to his Constancy is due.



I ignorant still, and constant had remain'd,
Had never I the sight of England gain'd.
But here  



 Who here? (since Edgar claims no place)
Who here, that can your vow'd affections press?
Or Kenneth's first, and justest Title shake?



Those vows, and ties, how easily Edgar brake?
And here, since Edgar from that Conquest fled,
Are others not unworthy to succeed,
Who may consummate, what he but begun.



The Queen I must her hated presence shun.










Stars, ever in this kind position rest;
And Fortune, be thy giddy turnings ceast:
Now fix thy Wheel, and set it by to rust.
Once, it appears, thou art to Merit Just.

  6Was Fortune blind, when she bestow'd this grace?
Never was Crown so fitted with a face.
Looks in a glass.

From every Look I glance a conquering dart,
At every Step I trample on a Heart.
An Air of greatness in each feature reigns,
And Royall bloud distends my Nobler veins.
My Soul is great, and now, each thought grown big,
Begins to labour with some State intrigue.
 Editha shall submit that haughty brow,
 Shall understand she is my Subject now.
Such Insolencies Let it not be said,
A Diadem e're adorn'd this Royall head;
Let not this body issue bear, that may



In after-times the English Scepter sway;
Never of me let Infant King be born,
If I forget her ill-dissembled scorn.
Father, (for I still the Relation own,



Though, in effect, we with Crown'd heads have none,)
Father 






 I have not Leisure now to hear,
My mind is stung with a more pressing Care.





Your Cares seem mixt with an unkind allay,
And symptoms of a sickning Love betray.



Should you be seen, nought can my fate repell:
I know that face, and know the King too well.



You, knowing these, in doubt my vertue call.



Rather my life, on which the storm must fall;
'Gainst which you Edgar's certain Fury whet:
You caus'd my Crime, and now would punish it.
Oh that you lay in some dark village chain'd,
And there, remote, of Marriage-bonds complain'd.
But always Fate, Man's downfall when decreed,
Puts out his eyes, and blinds us e're we bleed.



Your mind appearing in this Doubtfull dress,
The worst (if known) could terrifie me less.



My death (will that suffice you?) is the worst.
Be Women, and their witchcraft, Beauty, curst.
Beauty, thou pois'nous Flower! thou painted skin!
Frailty without, and Impotence within!
Vain wandring Meteor, which, so soon as known,
Art lost! thou glow'st, seducest, and art gone.
Light, which dost more then thickest darkness blind!
Angel in shew, but in effect a Fiend!
From Paradise, where Golden Freedom shines,
Thou send'st to dig and drudge in endless mines.



You fret, suspect, complain, accuse, inveigh,
Whilst ignorant, in guilty paths I stray.
Some grief the quiet of your breast controuls,
In it, there some uneasie secret rouls;
From thence alone this strange distraction springs.



Then out it flies my Love shall lend it wings 
Take it but yet, it is so near my Life,
Both go together 



 Safely to your Wife,
For so the Priest hath call'd me 



 Then I'll trie
Your Love, or, having made confession, die.
The King by fame did of your Beauty hear,
And Alfred's name chim'd sweetly in his ear.
Each day did your Perfections more unfold,
And every day were greater wonders told.
With this Renown he was so far possest,
Unseen, you were admitted to his breast.
But lest a Love from some mistake might grow,
He sends express the certainty to know.
I was his Favourite to that degree,
That he repos'd this Confidence in me.
With Loyall thoughts, and Just intentions fraught,
I came  I saw, and Loyalty forgot.
Thus treacherous made, I back return to Court,
Swifter (and surely falser) then Report.
Said I, The prospect is at distance fair,
But undeceives, who-ever views it near.
Some handsome features are in Alfred seen,
But these disgrac'd by an uncomely meen.

  8The Brow serene, and a bright rolling Eye;
But then the Nose stands fair for Raillery.
And though her Lip with invitation swells,
Th' approach one sally of her Breath repells.
But yet the Women of her Shape, and Face,
May well enough for Countrey Beauties pass.
Thus I with Fame in nothing did accord,
My Tongue blaspheming what my Heart ador'd:
And by this Artifice did so work, and move
The King, that he consented to my Love:
Which I pretended was by Interest led,
That so I might the heir of Cornwall wed.



At once to wrong me, yet to Love pretend!
I judg'd the same a Lover, and a Friend.
Perhaps in truth, these blemishes you find,
And rambling Fame, that talk'd so loud, was blind.
The best is, if this Face a Tempest raise,
One sally of my Breath will all appease.
That, if you rest from other Crimes secure,
You safely may the shock of this endure.



Still fatally to my destruction bent!
Vain Woman, go, pursue your dire intent.



The King may yet some small suspicions bear,
One sight of me those dangerous doubts will clear.



Your beauty who denies, denies the Sun.
To your large Glass have I not seen you run,
There all intent intemperately gaze,
Fill your stretch'd eyes with the reflected rays,
And in that luxury consume the day,
Till drunk with the sweet draught you reel'd away?



I might my beauty prize in some degree,
When I your love and low respects did see.
That Conquest seem'd a Miracle for me.
Nor might I think that England can afford
Then Ethelwold a more illustrious Lord.



O tongue too subtle for a Lover's heart!
Let us divide, and both submit in part.
Be you content, your self unseen, to see,
And I indulge your curiosity.

  9Cover those Beams, and let that natural Light,
Obscur'd by Art, less fiercely strike the Sight.
My Crime may lurk beneath your Twilight-ray;
Laid open, you discovering all your Day.
Your Face disguis'd, I may securely pass.



With what foul Blots would you Heav'ns gifts disgrace?
Heav'ns, that in earnest angry oft retort
What we affect, or counterfeit in sport.



Vexatious still Dispute not, but obey.



To my Obedience my Disputes make way.
Let me your Grief and worst Misfortunes share:
But Fraud and Wrong, I dare not tamper there.



Howe're you to your Face allow no part,
Your many words declare you false at Heart.
Scarce are we joyn'd, the Marriage-knot scarce ty'd,
How many Jarrs and Jealousies divide?
Blaze on, dire Comet may thy Influence be
To Crowns and Empires fatall, as to me.



Whither do your rash words and passion fly?
To calm your mind, my utmost power I'll try.
If I receive advantage from my Dress,
'Tis that I you might with advantage please.
If, wanting this, your Love be not impair'd,
These Ornaments I readily discard.
Pulls off her Patches.




Those Trifles did your Beauty but rebate.
If this be all you'll doe, how desperate is my state!
Pull out those Eyes and then my work is done.
To what extremes will my resentment run!
Pulls her away. Exeunt.





Queen returns with Women.


Shew not my Nuptialls now to England more
Then Syria, Greece, or Rome e're saw before?
More Kings their Homage to my Edgar pay,
Then Planets to the Monarch of the Day.
He sits on high, illustrious and large:
They blow, and tugg and launch along his Barge.









The Hands that lately shining Scepters bore,
Learning new tasks, are blister'd with the Oar.
A Homage ever shall be paid by me
To him that rules and that defends the Sea.




His part of Earth to every Prince is due;
Whilst on the Waters none is King but You.




In narrow bounds are our Dominions pent.
The strongest Winds fall dead, their last breath spent,
E're they attain your Empire's vast extent.




The spacious Heaven and Nature's care scarce stretch.
So far, as your immense Dominions reach.




Nothing is seen that your large Power confines,
Except in Globes imaginary Lines.




What Nation dares your Dictates disobey?
He shakes the Earth, who can the Ocean sway.




Your Sea, (without you) to assert your Power,
Invades and conquers the rebellious Shore;
Stretches its swelling Arms, and grasps each Land,
And combats all that own not your Command.




Your Sails must lowr when Winds and Storms are high,
And on the Water all but Heav'n defie.



What art thou? from whence? what far-distant Coast
Sends thee, proud Spoils and vanquisht Kings to boast?



Those Eyes do all our Pomp and Glory brave,
And in the midst of Triumph make me Slave.
Now all the Homage which was lately paid,
By me resign'd, at your fair Feet is laid.
From what height is my Pride untimely thrown!
Snow, which some lofty Mountain's head doth crown,
When the South-wind's warm breath once issues forth,
Thus shrinks, dissolves, and sinks into the Earth.

  11Why was this Face, or why not sooner seen?
Yet after all thou shalt be  thou art Queen 
Speak, Nymph asswage my pain 



 So new a thing
It is for me to see or hear a King,
My Eye's too weak to look on Majesty;
And Tongue unskill'd to fashion a Reply.



Proceed, sweet Harm'nie Let your Tongue Love sing,
And your tun'd Heart consent in every string.
Let every Sense to Love's soft Charms incline.



Might I presume, or any thing define,
Your words seem aim'd at one in equal Sphere,
And ill descend into a Subject's ear.
Unfit for Love, we dread your Majestie,
And low to that, at distance, prostrate lie.



All Majesty and Distance I disown:
If Subject born, you are my Sovereign grown.
You, all Divine, with radiant Beauty crown'd,
In me the very thought of Power confound.
Pardon, bright Form, if I approach too near,
A sudden, raw, unpractis'd Worshipper.



If Beauty were a thing to be ador'd,

England would be, like barbarous Egypt, stor'd.
In every Grange you might an Idol see,
And nothing rare or singular in me.



There's something in you, sure, divinely rare.
Am I a Slave to every Maid that's fair?
Me you accuse, your self whilst you impair.
No common Planets in your Birth were joyn'd,
No influence for common Fates assign'd.
I feel the power resistless infinite 
Then Majesty more strong, and more then Beauty sweet.
My burning Veins prove your full Presence there,
And my astonisht Soul declares you every-where.



'Tis Glory, Sir, 'tis Glory that inflames
Your mighty Soul, which still of Glory dreams;
Whose Image wanders bright before your eyes,
And you to that more nobly sacrifice.
Those Hymns are not to Humane kind addrest,
Nor Edgar's Soul to earthly Frames debas't.



'Tis my good Angell that I hear and see;
My Eyes and Ears confess a Deitie.
Yet my Devotions were not pure; the Man,
Aside.

The Earthly part did my Soul's zeal profane:
My Heart conceiv'd a criminal Desire;
Ethelwold takes her away.


And guilty Thoughts allay'd the holy Fire.
I doubted, wish'd, presag'd, expected thence,
Something more dear, and relishing to Sense.
Forgive me how? the heav'nly Vision's gone.
Turns about.

Glory, thou call'st, but whither shall I run?
I'm lost in Darkness and Distraction.









Go, Brother-homagers, your work is done,
Whilst restless I rowl Sisyphus's Stone.
From Toil are free my Hands and outward part;
But ah the Pangs and Labour of my Heart!
The daily Homage to Gunilda paid!
I through Disdains, sharp Snow and Winter wade.
Yet more I strive, and eagerly persist,
The farther off I tumble from her Breast.

Denmark's fair Daughter, onely vow'd to thee
Are all my Cares, my Pride, my Libertie.
O happy Edgar! in this Court of thine
The choicest Flowers of farthest Nations shine.
If any Spark in noble breasts does burn,
Here Gallantry they either shew or learn.
The Brave and Fair thy Count do joyntly prove
The Theatre of Honour, and of Love.











THE Sentence which for my late Bonds was sign'd,
Did me in fair Editha's presence find.
Her nearer Beams did on my Senses beat,
Whilst sick and panting with excessive Heat,
A thousand amorous Thoughts roll'd in my head,
And Cares by Love-disordered Fancy bred.
And there I gave my Liberty for lost,
Fearless of harm from any other Coast.



Thought he, You tame to an Affront would stand,
Whom Love had chaf'd and heated to his hand.



But scarce had I in Prison set my Foot,
When a new Sentence came to fetch me out:
From Ethelwold it came, 
Tells me, in Field I for th' Affront must pay,
And he resent it this more generous way.



To's Power that sullen Complement was due;
And this Respect to's Honour, and to you.



With Power turn'd giddy, insolent he grows;
But scarce (I fear) enough of Honour knows.
Howe're, an edge on my Revenge to set,
He will it thus with Provocations whet.
Arm'd at all points we must the Combat try:
In all I with the Challenger comply.



The Turnament gave rise to your Dispute,
And he your Cause with proper Arms would suit.
Exeunt severally.









How slow is Time to a Love-tortur'd mind?
The lazie Hour flaggs heavily behind,

  14Not yet arriv'd. How pressing are these Fires?
I am devour'd by my too keen Desires.
Is this to be a King? Whom Men obey,
Shall over him a brutish Passion sway?
We who controll the greatest Tyrant Law,
With a stern Nod too-busie Justice awe,
Whilst we our vast Prerogatives extoll,
This name of Weakness, Woman, humbles all.
What Power hath he, who Slave is to a Frown?
Or is he Sovereign whom a Smile can crown?
I'm still my self, nor is it yet too late,
Nor yet the path too headlong for retreat.
We, too-unsafe, with these soft Dangers play 
I go yet something in me bids me stay 
I'll stay and, Vertue, I thine aid implore 
No foolish Heart, I'll hazard thee no more.
Who wast her Conquest when untouch'd and sound,
Shalt not be trusted, now I know thy Wound.
Is going off, meets








'Tis well I take him whilst his Passion boils:
No Lover's eyes can e're descry my Toils.
Aside.

Th' unwary Youth shall leap into the Net,
And on new Game discharge his wanton Heat.
The Arms shall cover him, but not defend.
One well-plac'd Blow shall all my Troubles end.
The work is easie 



How Ethelwold hold one thing e're you go,
Which to my Curiosity I owe.
The Woman whom I at my Landing found
With you, her Eyes in melting Sorrow drown'd,
Who is she? 



 One design'd to serve the Queen;
But Bashfulness forbids her to be seen.
She sought a Hiding-place when us you met,
And I stept in, to hinder her retreat.



Prevail with her at Court some time to stay,
And soon that Modesty will wear away.
Is she related to you? 




My Carriage else would look too rudely free.
But I too long am held from her Defence.
Pardon, dread Sir, with a just Heat dispense
On her behalf I hear the Horses neigh,
And clanck of Arms upbraiding my delay.



What Arms? what barbarous Danger threatens her?
What Enemies can so much Beauty fear?



When Beauty darts the strongest influence,
On Honour's side most weak is the defence.



Her Honour question'd? 



 Nothing can be true,
Bolts from a mouth that also injures you.



How me?  



 'Tis he who in Disguise, so late,
To Fortune, at the Justs, was most in debt.
He says, t' encounter you was his design,
Which your request oblig'd him to decline.



Madness on him doth, with his Pride, increase:
The man wants Brain to bear his good Success.
From him she could deserve no Injurie:
Aspersing her, th' Affront was aim'd at me;
In her he touches my most tender part.
Aside.

She claims my Arms, who challenges my Heart.
Where is the place? 



 With silent Feet we range
Single, unseen, to steal a cold Revenge.
But in broad day, with Trumpets sound, the rage
Of Armies must for injur'd Kings engage.



I Armies 'gainst a publick Foe would bring:
This quarrel is with Edgar, not the King.



I gave the Challenge, now the Cause is mine.



Your Arguments must to my will resign;
My Arm this Quarrel every way demands,
Nor can I trust the Cause in other hands.
On horse the fight the Casque my Face will hide,
So better he will my Revenge abide.

  16And if my better fortune makes him bow,
He may believe the Combate was with you.
The Arms? the Horse?  



 Without that door they wait.
Beyond the Elms was our appointment set.
But 'tis not fit 



Leave me and stir not hence.











Small Crimes we start at when we first begin,
But stop at nothing when our hands are in.
The blackest Treason now to me's no more,
Then was the least Disloyal thought before.
Love, that blind Guide, first led me from the way:
I farther going, farther go astray.
These Paths we enter with a tender Foot,
By every Thorn and every Scruple cut;
Thus our first Steps: we after boldly tread,
Grown hard, and brawny, and all sense is dead.
Thus from small Errours in the birth and seed,
Are Prodigies and horrid Monsters bred.
Having once past the Lines of Fit and Just,
All farther Law and Reason's writ in Dust:
All farther are but Cyphers to the Summe.
I've a new world of Wickedness to come.
Free in my Choice and will, I first begun:
But now, by dire Necessity dragg'd on,
So far advanc'd, the Danger's to be slack:
On Precipices there's no looking back.
Offers to go. Meets






This way he past 'mongst the dark Shades that Face



Yields a fair Light, his Royall Steps to trace.
You at the first encounter reach'd his Heart,
And for your Breast there wanted not a Dart.

  17His Wounds he doth not unrevenged mourn;
For every Shaft, was made a just Return.


Lately, my Lord, before our Marriage-vow,
Soft were your Looks, and gentle was your Brow,
And melting Words did all with Sweetness flow:
Now, Storms and Troubles in your Eyes I reade,
And in your Face no peacefull Colours spread:
And from your Tongue mysterious Language breaks,
Which nought to me, or but your Anger, speaks.



We to a fair Appearance rashly wed,
And never see the loathsome Serpent hid.
What you call Mysterie, I might reveal:
Those Mysteries you understand too well.






You wept the King was mov'd at your Distress:
So bright a Nymph, how could a King doe less?
Hence 'tis presum'd that your Design prevails:
An Inference that's, like your Beautie, false.



Let not my Vertue share in the Disgrace,
However out of Favour is my Face.
But if my Heart could, like my Face, be seen,
Your Brow to me might still remain serene.



The King intended you his Royal Bride,
Till Ethelwold your Beautie's Charms bely'd.
Perswaded this you hugg the glittering Dream,
And now set up to play your After-game.

Editha never did such things suggest,
Nor into her Caball the new Designer list?



The King's intent I scruple not to own,
From Ethelwold, not from Editha known.
But for the rest, your Highness what inclines
To judge of me as fit for Court-designs?



Oh, none so proper, so compleatly fit,
Where Malice makes the Instrument, not Wit.
How close soe're they hatch within your Breast,
I'll find them out, or shall destroy the Nest.











When your rais'd Visour did your Face betray,
And I perceiv'd 'twas at your Feet I lay,
That chance my flying spirits did recall,
And then I seem'd to triumph in my Fall.
And with warm heart I thank'd the Heavenly powers,
Since yet no Arms e're vanquish'd me but yours.
But what most deep my troubled heart have pierc't,
Are those false Rumours Ethelwold disperst:
They wound me still 



 I cannot but confide,
And trust your words, having your Valour try'd.
Lying, a low and recreant Mind declares,
For every man will speak the Truth who dares.
Nor doth the Armour, try'd, appear of proof.



That, that alone is evidence enough
'Gainst him, in stead of having Safety thence:
'Twas your Address defended your Defence.
He comes  



My Guards too to his party drawn 



Yet in your Cause you shall not die alone.
The Life you gave shall be as freely spent.



Rule your brave Heat, till sure of their intent.







Are these our Guards? or your confederate Crew?



Intend you Force, or would vain Fraud pursue?


Death in no form so terrible appears,
Kneeling presents his Sword.

As doth that Face which your Displeasure bears.
How can I see, and how sustain that Brow,
At me which never levell'd Frown till now?
I am condemn'd; I know what Doubts infest;
I see the black inextricable Mist,

  19Which round my labouring Innocence is spred:
And yet the worst, your Ear is from me fled.



My Ear is not to your Defence refus'd,
Yet must not be by a vain Cant abus'd.
With less Regret I others Treason hear,



Then but, in you, the least Suspicion bear.
In all important Pleasures, you had part,
Sharing at once my Kingdom and my Heart.
How many Nobles did his Piques displace,
Who, now retir'd, live murmuring in Disgrace?

Wilmott his place, nor Cavendish had lost,
If I in ought could Ethelwold have crost.
As Earth Heav'ns Favours, these ours entertain;
Send back unwholsome Vapours for our Rain.
Thus men to whom Prosperity is stale,
Despise that Heav'n whence they deriv'd it all.
Puft up, and grown by long Indulgence proud,
That makes them Atheists, which should make them good.
Friendship is amongst Equals onely fixt,
And Kindnesses reciprocally mixt.
Whilst still on us the Counterfeit impose,
The Regall State no reall Friendship knows.
All Friendship here is in vile Flattery lost.
A Friend's a Jewel that no Crown can boast.
But tax not my proceedings as unkind,



If you, till I know farther, be confin'd.



'Tis the Queen's Father you to prison send.







And more then all Relation, 'tis my Friend.



This ominous on our Nuptiall-day must be.



'Tis ominous, but to our Enemie.
But think not that with Rigour I proceed:
For if your Heart is troubled, mine doth bleed.






Again in Tears? whence springs this fatall Grief?
Can I? can all my Kingdoms give relief?



This sight alone would all my Joys controul.
How every Drop falls bitter on my Soul!


Can Ethelwold have merited your Hate,
And I not have my portion in his fate?



Recall him had the bloud of Kings been spilt,
Those Tears would purge and expiate the Guilt.
Behold the Wretch through your Compassion free'd.
Ethelwold is brought back.


Yet more then he, ('lass!) I your pity need.
My Soul enthrall'd and Senses all restrain'd 
My Tongue sticks fast my very Words are chain'd 
A Fire within devours me: yet must I
To you alone, to you who kill me, fly, 
And onely there expect my Remedie 



If I may answer Language thus obscure,
I cannot own the faculty to cure
Those Pains and that Distemper you endure.



Love is my Pain, my sole Distemper Love:
But answer this, and all my Griefs remove.



My humble state cannot this Honour bear,
Nor understand what now I seem to hear.
Howe're, your Trouble since within you find,
Vertue's the onely Physick for the Mind.



Whate're Distemper does the Mind infest,
First from the Body is deriv'd the Pest.
And for the Cure no other method's known;
The Cure begins where the Disease begun.



You in a heat too rashly that prefer,
Which cooler thoughts would instantly abhor.
And, for a seeming Ill, your vain Relief
A reall turns, and more outrageous Grief.



We two shall meet, yet not from Vertue stray;
Though to my Joys dark and unknown's the way.
Something Divine, some Inspiration fills,
And my fir'd Breast a sacred Fury swells.
By Love, or some more gentle Muse, possest,
I prophesie my self, in your Embraces, blest.



This would sound sweet, where a Belief might rise:
My Heart is deaf t' Impossibilities.
You by firm Bands from these Desires are ty'd,



And me no weaker Obstacles divide.
Such Difficulties, ne're to be surpast,
And rigid Bars, by Fate betwixt us cast;

  21Law, Justice, Honour, all oppose this Love:
And there's no Faith that may such Rocks remove.



I know the Rampires that obstruct my Will;
Yet with more rage does the wild Torrent swell.
Ye Powers, what have you done? in this true Blessing crost,
On me are all your splendid Trifles lost.
King of the Isles, and of whole Albion crown'd,
And Master far of the vast Seas around,
Thus great I reign, if in her Favour blest:
But that deny'd, no Sweets of Power I taste;
Wretched, forlorn, in Woods condemn'd to pine,
Exil'd, where no kind Ray of Heav'n can shine.



I cannot make your days more clear or bright,
Nor to the Sun, a Glo-worm, promise Light.
No humane Excellence that strange power can claim,
Nor you for me these great Idea's frame.



What is all Power, if it to Love must bow?
Or what, indeed, is all of Heav'n we know,
But Love? All Happiness in Love alone
Is plac'd; 'tis there the Blessed fix their Throne.



Furies! must I a tame Spectatour stand?
Did he for this from Prison me remand?
Aside.

Am I from a less painfull Rack releast,
Thus to be tortur'd? Howsoe're disgrac't,



Howe're obnoxious judg'd, yet Truth is bold.
The Breath that marry'd you is yet scarce cold,
And yet your Actions threaten a Divorce.
A Tyrant's Sword the Gordian Knot may force.
Your Royall Grace was taught another Law 



Of which you shall the Rigour undergo 
Take take the Traitour hence must you upbraid 
Walks a turn.

You check my will  
Bring back the Duke How did I urge a Crime,
Which I before, so late, had pardon'd him?
I own the Truth that he declar'd, I own
I have some rash impetuous Transports shown.
They sprang from no approv'd or certain Cause;
For, without Thought, a sudden Passion rose,
Boisterous, and high, no place for Reason left;
All helpless ran 'fore the fierce Storm adrift.

  22But Reason now makes head, at th' helm employ'd;
And my Desires to the vow'd Port will guide.
I moving towards my Queen as on the Sea,
Think the fair Land behind goes back from me 
Whether the Foot goes forward, or beguiles
My sense I'm sure the stubborn Heart recoils.
Exit.







How shall I the obscure nice Track discern?
Or where this high undaunted Conduct learn?
A silent Shame weighs down my face, and I,
As guilty, from who-e're approaches fly.
Exit.







Your Eyes, that make the proudest Victours bow,

To Editha turning from him.


And shake the Lawrells on their haughty Brow,
Behold us, as unworthy of your Charms,
Who could submit to any other Arms.



Oft is a King pufft with undue Success,
When Flatterers, his Courage to caress,
Unforc'd are beaten. 



 Edgar's close Disguise
Left here no room for that unjust Surmise.
But 'tis more Glory by his hands to fall,
Then in a meaner Crowd to conquer all:
And what-e're Praise to Edgar's Arms is due,
Fate brought me to be vanquish't first by you.



The Victour with small Triumph would be grac't,
Except with him more Courage you profest.
But you pursue your Libertie too far:
With me your onely safe Discourse is War.



War I might with less fear and danger move:
But all are here the certain Spoils of Love.
Love sways my Tongue 



 Love is a Crime reveal'd;
When written in the Heart, the Lips must still be seal'd.



But Love, how-e're industriously hid,
Breaks out, in all our Looks and Actions read.



More easily smallest Cyphers some discern,
Then others largest Characters can learn.
But do not rashly to my Rank commit
What never was for our perusall fit:
Lest that unlicens'd to your Ruine turn,
And juster Flames your wretched Labours burn.



Who want your real and unquestion'd Worth,
May glory that Queens travell'd at their Birth.
What wants in Heart, in their proud Veins does flow:
And Bloud they boast, their Vertue ebbing low.
Others in this, as Equalls, may contest;
Whilst you'r alone and matchless in the rest.
If Royall Lineage authorize a Flame,
You cannot then our just Ambition blame.
The man for whom I'm bold to mention Love,
Is from a Crown at most but one Remove.



Who is not King, holds but a Subject's place.
From Crowns the very first Remove is base.



But were he King, and of a Throne possest, 



That, onely, were no Title to my Breast.
Were he so great, and your Supposal true,
He then might claim a Liberty to sue,
And at my Feet his Royaltie depose,
Whilst I shall weigh the Merits of his Cause.
But if you wish a prosperous Embassie,
Let me my Love first on his Picture trie.
Then blazon the renown'd Originall,
Proclaim his Sovereign Titles then 




Obey, and trace the method you command:
For to the Eyes Love his first Shafts must send.





Whilst a rash Flame was in his Breast surmis'd,
I 'gainst his Folly a just Anger pois'd.
I coveted a cause to seem severe,
And too much wish'd what I did vainly fear.

  24Too mean and humble for that brave Offence,
He onely is ambitious for his Prince 
Intreat the Stranger back I will explore
His Breast, and search all the dark Volume o're,
To Women who go off.

To learn the Secret out. He from a King
Might Confidence and free Expressions bring 
Looks so engag'd and Words so nicely turn'd, 
Lewis returns.


Prove he his own (a nearer Passion) mourn'd.
Is your own Heart secure, whilst 'tis alledg'd,



Your Cares are on another score engag'd?
Symptoms appear, as though your self endure
Some Pain. Declare, is your own Heart secure?



Surpriz'd it pants, and trembles to be search't,
Amongst so many blazing Beauties scorch't.



Many may spread a harmless lambent blaze,
And all, without the flashy Meteor plays,
And (till in one contracted) hath no force.
'Tis onely a particular can pierce.
To me reveal that Fair particular.
Sometimes it may be Prudence to declare.
However, Courage often better speeds:
Cold Prudence thinking stands, whilst Courage vaults to deeds.



Climbing too high, from an ignoble Root,
Courage turn'd rank, doth into Rashness shoot.



In happy Climates, by a warmer Sun,
To a new height Plants, without fault, may run.
But to be plain you know your self esteem'd 







Confess and venture to be blam'd.



My Courage starts Love is a Crime reveal'd.



But, undiscover'd, can a Wound be heal'd?



These Favours daunt me more, then when her Brow
Did with the hottest Indignation glow.
Aside.

Much more this sudden Floud doth me confound,
Then by Despair when lately run a-ground.
Fears press my Hopes, and Hopes confront my Fears,
Most in the dark, when most the Light appears.



Considerate and slow, why this Delay?
Love on stretch'd wings impatient speeds his way.



Let me not speak, (a Rudeness you abhorre)
But at my distance silently adore.



Suspect no Pale, or nicer Distance set:
In the mid space two equall Flames will meet.
But I mistake your Breast Love reigns not there.
What is it thus that clogs your Tongue? 







Some Hopes, I thought, from my Indulgence sent,
Might bloom, and strow the way to your Content.
A Princess woes in vain 
Turns from him.




 Too wretched I,
And ill-proportion'd for the mighty Joy
That rounds mine ear! what Dream deludes my sense?



No Colour may excuse your long Suspence.
Gunilda appears and enters.


Yet more t' upbraid your Incredulity,
What was declar'd, her Hand shall ratifie.



Oh happy day! 



 Gunilda, lend your Hand 

Gives him Gunil∣da's hand.


Thus I perform  
Exit.






 How all amaz'd I stand! 



Confus'd and stupid I! 



 And she is gone
E're her Intent, her dark Intent, is known.
And I, in Justice, scruple to receive
What she might want Authority to give.



Few, when once seis'd, will their Possession quit,
And nicely weigh the equitable Right.
Your Eyes a fairer Purchace had design'd.



My Eyes, my every Faculty is blind.
In a dead Sea perplext I float, nor know
I on what Shore m' abandon'd Thoughts to throw.



All here to flatter your Desires agree:
Where can your Hopes design a calmer Sea?
Nor lies the Haven far remote. But you,
I fear, a rash forbidden Course pursue.

  26Go Leave me Kenneth saw us from a-far,



And 'gainst us, as Confederates, brings War.
Till known what Course the Stranger aims to take,
With Kenneth I some Breach must find, or make.








Guilty again condemn'd so late before 
She in my Friend do's a new Love explore.
False false a second time But rashly I
Aside.

Unchain a Thought that out to Rage would flie.
Here I shall Homage pay with less regret,
To her.

Since here are all my centred Wishes met.
My Glory my Gunilda here is found.



Your Triumph drives on an ill-chosen ground.
What Glory, or what Mistress yours is made
By Deeds so mean? 



 What Fact would you upbraid?



Your Royall name no base Submissions blot,
The Pageantry and painted Oar forgot 
I saw you not with red-swoln Fingers row,
And o're vile Labour hang your sweating Brow.
I nothing can reproach 



 I Lewis fear,
And a false Friend in your Reproaches hear.
Blinded by him, my Actions you deface,
And in my room an odious Image place.
Him my Revenge shall instantly pursue.







I chuse, repent, refuse, and chuse agen:
This Pulse beats Love, the next a cold Disdain.
I contradict, before I fully speak;
And e're half bent, my Resolutions break.
Each fair Design I ruine in the bud:
Then, onely what I had condemn'd, think good.

  27No sooner in my Breast a Thought can rise,
But others spring and catch it as it flies.
So hot my Head, what-ever enters there
But whizzes, and straight vanishes to Air.
If ought more tough to an Opinion grows,
Away that Bubble the first Whisper blows.
My Soul is perfect Discord; Chance, not Skill,
My Choice, and but the Shadow of a Will.
Dreams are more real: to that Point I sail;
But veer again with the next breathing Gale,
Whilst a new Calenture my Sense do's mock:
For every Course I steer presents a Rock.








Alfrid leaning asleep with a Lute in hand, her Woman sings.
THE SONG.

AH! lay by your Lute;
Ah, Lucasia! forbear.
Whilst your Tongue I may hear,
Other Musick is mute.
Ah! lay by your Lute.
For the Heav'ns have decreed, that my Heart should submit
To none but the Charms of your Wit.


The Conflict was hot,
When I first met your Eyes;
Yet my Heart would still rise,
Though through and through shot.
The Conflict was hot.
But your Wit's great Artillery when drawn to the field,
Oh then 'twas my glory to yield.

  28To satisfie all,
When an Empire is due
To each Beauty in you,
The World is too small,
To satisfie all.
With the rest you in Triumph shall sit and survey;
But give Wit all the Spoils of the day.




I tremble Shadows I too highly rate.
Alfrid waking starts up.


'Tis but a Dream yet often Dreams have weight.
That night e're first I Ethelwold beheld,
These Images my wondring Fancy fill'd:
And now repeated, may Prophetick seem.



And now repeated are but still a Dream.
If any Reall Trouble crost your way,
You would not with Imaginary stay.
But with what Face was this strange Vision seen?



As I in a green Valley walkt alone,
A brighter Day and Lightning round me shone.
Surpriz'd, and lifting up my troubled Eyes,
Behold an Eagle towring in the Skies.
Of Birds a numerous train, that on him wait,
Clapping their Wings, seem'd to applaud his State,
In his fierce Talons he a Crown did bear,
Traversing oft, and beating in the Air.
At last his motion towards me was bent,
Who trembling stood, expecting the Event:
When two great Ravens, with a hasty flight,
Struck in between, and barr'd my eager sight.
One upwards, th' other towards me did take,
And o're my Head his huge black Wings did shake.



This frighted you, and with the Fright you wake.



These Ravens after both fell at my Feet,
And on my Head the Diadem was set.



Those winged Creatures of your Dream are gone,
And all the Fate, that they portended, flown.
Yet vainly you in transient Scenes of Air
Seek ground whereon to build your Hope, or Fear.
Rather your thoughts on that late Favour place.
Pointing at a Iewell.

That Jewell bears a more Prophetick face,

  29And shews more like the earnest of a Crown.



I have not yet that wild Ambition known;
Nor did I think this Present from the King
Could on me an unfriendly Censure bring.
If shall no more offend a jealous eye.
Puts it in her bosome.









To this bright Face you owe your Liberty.



Thus from her Frailty precious Merit grows,
And She her Honour piously bestows.



If his Release was granted at my Suit,
Blame not the Tree, since you approve the Fruit.
Nor to a Crime imputing the Success,
Make the King's Favour, or my Vertue, less.



Curse on the Favours married Women boast!
Thus they grow rich, but to the Husband's cost.
What seems free Gift, she in the dark must earn;
For what she takes, engag'd to make return.
And wanting Substance otherwise to pay't,
Her Body lies obnoxious for the Debt.



Denying now, Ungratefull you remain:
And that's a Vice must not your Beauty stain.



My Gratitude to nothing can enjoin
Whence you, or strictest Vertue, may repine.
The Bounty that do's flow from God and Kings,
Not from Design, but their high Nature springs.
Nor do they with their Gift convey a Snare;
Or make a Prey, when seeming to prefer.



Your Kings, howe're resembling Gods above,
Ungodded, are like Mortalls in their Love.
My work shall be to break your Traffick there.
You think the Court a Market for the Fair.








How black do my best Actions turn? I sow
Sweet Flowers and Odours, but dire Mandrakes grow.
A strange Infection from my Breath is spread,
And Serpents rise from wheresoe're I tread.
A perverse Influence did our Nuptialls sway,
And a bad Angel govern'd all the day.
Check'd by a Parent's unresolved Frown,
(Which flowing Smiles did overtake and drown)
I thought my self to rigorous Duty ty'd,
Er'e I this Marriage-discipline had try'd.
From the first Ship thus was the Dove sent out,
When onely Death and Deluge rag'd about.
Here Envy me, there Jealousies infest;
There I'm by Love, the greatest Danger, prest.
Too far that Siren do's m' Attention move.
But who is deaf when Kings profess their Love?
The Storm still thickens, yet no Port I find:
Death, at the worst, is to the Wretched kind.
Death from all other Dangers will secure 
She mingles poison.

Death is the least of Ills I can endure:
And Death is ready 



 What is here design'd?
To what extremes flies her distracted Mind?
I will call help 
Exit Wo.




I'll not be so unprovidently chast 
Severe, like Lucrece, when the Crime is past.
Better with timely care the Stain prevent,
Then halt after with tardy Punishment.
Not that (like 'her) I think a Tarquin near:
I rather Force from m' Inclinations fear 
And lest I might be my own Ravisher 
But 'gainst this Madness and irregular Heat
I have a Cure, and ready a Receipt 
Love's Julep, sovereign Antidote of Shame,
Looks on the glass of poison.

Wine of the Soul thou, the Ethereal Flame
Quenching, an Earthly kindlest Hence I soar
Above Drink this I'm mortal then no more 

  31That Tie which causes Ethelwold such Pain,
This will dissolve, and set him Free again.
The Queen no more my Innocence shall tax,
Or Vertue, by her rude Suspicions, vex.
The King no more When on the King I think,
Ah now! 'tis truly Poison that I drink 
This Life if any Charm or Filter bind,
That Charm and Filter in the King I find.
My Soul to him some secret Magick ties:
My Soul, when from him parted, truly dies 
For him alone I prize the Sun and Light:
Closing my Eyes, Death shuts him from my sight.
Often, how often have I heard it told?
(Which made vain heads in their Presages bold.)
And if the Honour were not singular,
All will allow the Circumstances rare.
When he, yet young, (the thirteenth year scarce gain'd)
Did Surety for me at my Baptism stand,
The Bishop did no sooner Alfrid name,
But Edgar's Eyes and Cheeks were shot with flame:
Till falling Drops of Bloud took off the Heat:
Then pale he turn'd, and sigh'd, and Alfrid did repeat.
My Innocence the early Tincture knew,
And secret Love with my Religion grew.
Dear Pledge 
Weeps looking on a Iewel.

On how unsure and slippery ground I rest,
To speedy Flight by Guardian Vertue prest!
Vertue thy sacred Summons I obey:
Edgar behind her.


Thy Voice Divine do's all my Doubts allay.
Thy Musick strikes my Soul; a Power less strong
Draws Savages, and Woods, and Rocks along.

Edgar, farewell it cannot must not be.
Takes to drink: sets down, re-takes it.

I come I come 







 Heav'ns otherwise decree.

As she goes to drink, Ed∣gar snatches the Glass.


O're humane Life what Fate, what Furies reign?
What Plagues, what Seas did that small Glass contain?

  32All Troubles from her by that Potion wash't 
She swounds.

On me the Death and Bitterness had dash't.
No Deluge could have Nature more annoy'd:
The World to me were by her Death destroy'd.
But what untimely Fate has clos'd her Sight?
Unlock those Eyes, two living Globes of Light.
Now am I equal to the Blest above;
She opens her eyes.

Now in their Orbs the rolling Wonders move.
Without which Stars, I, by dire Tempest tost,
In Death and everlasting Night am lost.



Sweet Vision still detain'd in earthly Clime 
I'm blest and seem in Heav'n before my time 
The King himself 
Pardon, great Sir, a sick, disorder'd Mind.



I can account your Sickness onely kind.
My Happiness from this Confusion grows,
As Heav'ns fair Frame from ancient Chaos rose.



You, what by dying Wretches is confest,
Unhumane, to encrease their Torture, wrest.



I am that Wretch, by your sole Breath who live,
And from your Mouth have waited a Reprieve.
Yet you retract what in my favour past.



In me (alas!) a Pow'r's unduely plac't,
A Pow'r of Life, unfortunately shown,
That fails even in disposing of mine own.
Who fail in this are damn'd before their time.



I cannot hear this Sorrow's dismall Chime.
Before that Face the blackest Tempests fly,
The scattered Clouds leave a serener Skie.
Glad Nature smiles where you (her Pride and Care)
Once breathe, her richest Odours fill the Air.
She strows her fragrant Treasures in your way,
And there do's all her Sweets, and all her Pomps display.



Nature to me nor Fortune e're was kind;
For still my Steps more Thorns then Roses find;
And sharpest Grief still ranckles in my Mind.



If any Monster-grief or Harpy gnaw,
Try what an English King and Love can doe.
I Nature's secret Chambers will explore,
The deepest Sea, and the remotest Shore;

  33Make stubborn Rocks to your free Wishes yield,
Till your Desires with shining Spoils are fill'd;
Till Gems and Pearls on heaps around you lie,
With all that's rare, and precious to the Eye,
Sweet to the Tast, or to the Touch is fine:
Your every Sense shall have its Magazine.



To no Intemperance my Desires fly out;
Yet in my Soul ranck Sorrows firmly root;
And there for other Bounties leave no room,
But onely those through Death's cold hands that come.



Betwixt your Thoughts and Death let Ages stand;
And Happiness take from a better hand.



Death, Death I want 



 Thus in Diana's Train
Some Nymph would fly the shadow of a Man,
And bear the fight of Savages alone,
On which her Darts and dextrous Rage was thrown.
You, from the Woods howe're retriv'd, appear
To Man as strange, and wilfully severe;
And from a flaming Heart as wildly fly,
Not yielding your's should know Humanity.
This milder Air should softer Thoughts inspire,
And a new Sense, more kind to my Desire.
Musick howe're may this Aversion break,
And tame her Spirit come, fair Nymph, partake 
The Masque is ready 
Leads her away.










The Danger's past that gave us this Alarm,
The King himself securing her from Harm.



In what obscure and dangerous Paths I tread,
By a blind Guide in endless Errours led!
Like him who Pain by a false Cure escapes,
My Ease is short, but mortall the Relaps.
I must proceed A tame and poorest Slave
The Plague and dire Extremity make brave.

  34If rudely I mistake in place, or time,
Offers a Picture.

With favour judge a forward Dutie's Crime.
I to suspend your Expectation fear'd,
And all Delay as Negligence abhorr'd.



With my Concerns had your just Duty squar'd,
You this unwelcome Diligence had spar'd.
The Picture do's my Thoughts so little press,
That onely the Originall could less.



The Object of your Rigour yet unknown,
This fierce Contempt is but at randome thrown.
But when I name the Prince, and when I say,
'Tis He whose hand do's the French Scepter sway 



Then all your Meen and fine Address was made,
To gain me to a curst Usurper's Bed;
Whom Conscience with a silent Scourge shall tear,
And pale-fac'd Ghosts from my Embraces scare;
Whose Throne by bloudy Scaffolds is upheld,
And by Slaves guarded, who their Master kill'd.



His Throne is fixt, and the Foundation good:
'Tis not less firm if cemented with Bloud.
Right is a Notion may the Simple sting;
But with the Wise, Possession makes the King.



Your Speech a strange and insolent Doctrine bears,
And Maximes yet unknown to English ears.
Rather to the true Prince, (did he survive)
'Midst his Distress, I would my person give;
With him partake his Indigence, and Toil,
Lurking in Holes, or wandring in Exile.
Howe're from Land to Land, from Coast to Coast,
By restless Storms of adverse Fortune tost,
I'd rather with him all Disgraces bear,
Then guilty Pomps with your Usurper share.



I'm made a Convert; and relent to find
Those generous Transports of your noble Mind.
And envy not the Tyrant's haughtie State,
But rather his whom you commiserate,
Howe're forlorn, abandon'd, and undone:
Your Favours the Dethron'd and Banish'd crown.
Since for his Loss you bear that generous sense,
Here at your Feet behold that Injur'd Prince.



You give at once too much to be receiv'd,
Nor can in this be suddenly believ'd.
And yet your Merits so possess my Mind,
That I believe, as by my Heart inclin'd:
And to the King will straight make known your Case.
(His greatest Pride is, Injuries to redress.)
And he shall in your Right his Arms advance.
Fates will that English Arms give Law to France.




Yet all that I, and all that they can gain,
To me must prove, without your Favour, vain.



I own'd your Merits in a private Dress:
Their Lustre will not shine in Purple less.











I, from my Kingdome, as by Shipwreck, hurl'd,
Losing but Earth, find a new Golden world.
What-ever Loss or Troubles on me fall,
Aside.


Editha is a Recompence for all:
One Jewell that alone outweighs a Crown.



Ah, that my Heart were to this Stranger known!
Too much already hath with Kenneth past,
If Words or Vows can make a Woman fast 
But why am I regardless what of old
Our Prophets in their Runick Rymes foretold,
Of what Import the world should find the Knot,
A Danish Maid join'd to a Royall Scot,

Whose Issue throughout the whole Isle shall spread
An Empire fixt under one onely Head?
Perhaps, for this Event a longer time is set 
As the slow Birth of an uncommon Fate.
Stay, Stranger stay suspend your present Care:
To Lew.

I for your Breast a higher Secret bear.
A Princess loves you 



 You too much express,
This, ah! you onely in my Favour guess.



One word might serve where the Affair is nice,
Nor ought you press to tell a Secret twice.



Regards she me? 



 Her Inclinations are
Best known to me, her Griefs I more then share.



Blest Angel, Day-star to my Happiness,
(Since I th' Ambition of my Soul confess)
Some Token give t' indulge a weak Belief:
For still I struggle with black Doubts 




Is wilfully continu'd. All are slow,
And hardly learn what they are loth to know.



If Chymist, at his Furnace, pale, and old,
With wishing eyes pursues his Faiery Gold;
If famisht Marr'ner from the ragged Beach,
A Ship in view, his suppliant Arms do's stretch;
I with more ardour this Discovery trace:
Treasure to me, and ev'n my Life is less.
Display the truth my Heart so hotly seeks.



Her Tongue, her Eyes, her every Action speaks.



I never from the Princess could perceive
Ought, to encourage Hope, or Me to live.



Princess his Thoughts are on Editha bent,
And on a Rock I pour my sad Complaint.
Aside.

You have my Words, but cannot read my Sense,
So blinded by a brighter Influence.
Since Modesty do's plainer Language fear,
Take this this Picture for th' Interpreter.
Gives her Picture.









Friendship and Heav'ns, lo I your Thunder bear,
And shall your Justice from this Outrage clear.



Suspect me false I'm ready to engage;
Not willing, 'gainst a rash ill-grounded Rage.
First hear 



 From that bright Sanctuary break,
Nor, in those Arms, inglorious Safety seek.

  37Are those white Arms and little Lims so strong?
Yield me that Pledge, the Witness of my Wrong 



And shall not I be heard? 

He offers at Lewis. She clings to Kenneth.




 Oh powerfull Breath!
What Magick force, resistless, strong as Death,
Disarms my Fury? My Resentment sleeps,
And o're my Rage a lazie Patience creeps.
My stormy Mind by a sweet Dew appeas'd,
And flagging Veins of burning Bloud are eas'd;
My Will by a soft Violence constrain'd,
She lets him goe.

And I all wholly to Obedience chain'd.
Yield me yield me that fatall Pledge, with which
She made thee, to thine own Destruction, rich.



To what is claim'd you the just Title lose,
Whilst to my Right you Threats and Force oppose.
To your calm Bloud I might the Gift resign;
But if that you will have it your's, 'tis mine 
Since a Friend's name I cannot yet devest,
Knowing your Pulse, I may impute the rest
As wild Distempers of a Love unblest.
I am not false nor shall your Right invade.
Draws out the Picture.




Ungratefull! is my Honour thus betrai'd?
Aside.




Take it and with it this Assurance take,
I importun'd she gave it for your sake.



What sudden Shame and Trouble blots my Face?
With how much Art he labours my Disgrace!



Image of her who fills and rules my Heart:
She cruell is, insensible thou art.
Design'd for me? ah! touch that Note agen:
I hear not this, unless I hear it plain.
Looking on the Picture.

Said you, for me? I cannot hold my Joys.
Yet Unbelief all Weights and Shackles tries.
Her Modesty, and Conscious eyes cast down,
Allow me not my present Bliss to own.



I, though at distance, her fair Steps will trace,
Till I obtain, or perish in the Race.








A tempestuous Sea is represented, Neptune heaving the Billows with his Fork. Edgar with Alfrid entring, the Tritons sound their Shells: a sudden Calm. Neptune lays his Trident at Edgar's Feet. The other Sea-gods, Proteus and Nereus, make likewise Obeisance to him, and Proteus speaks.



'Tis now, what I foretold, that th' English Oak
By Heav'ns of old was destin'd for our Yoak;
And that our Necks no longer should be free,
When from their Thames those Ships launch out to Sea.



The English Power, that cannot be withstood,
Springs rather from their Courage, then their Wood.
And if that Valour once were ebbing found,
The boasted Keels would basely rot a-ground.



From one great Prince how much a Nation gains!
In every Breast his Soul and Courage reigns.
He their glad Veins with generous Fire distends,
And to each Heart the brave Infection sends.
From Edgar 'tis that England's Glory grows.



More then one Edgar Fate to England owes.


These retiring, Tritons dance: They retiring, 3 Sirens arise out of the Sea, and sing.






LOve, the Ambrosia of the Blest!
'Tis Love in Heav'n that makes the Feast.
O Mortalls, Mortalls, come and tast.





Whilst jingling Honour strives for place,
And Vertue sets her ugly Face,
The Moments, the sweet Moments pass.




It cools, alas, how fast it cools!
Fall to, ye men, ye men with Souls,
And Ceremony leave to Fools.





Care tearing your Hearts and tormenting,
Is some Devil in the way,
That creates your Delay?
Or a Bug of some Bigott's inventing?


Three Celestiall Sirens approach, skymming on the surface of the waters. The former Sirens dive hastily, and disappear. These looking after them, say,



Fly, Monsters, fly with your deceitfull Breath,
That warbling strikes, and pleases unto Death.
Each tender ear ev'n yet the Accents wound,
And th' Air yet trembles with the impious Sound.




A Heav'nly Voice, and Beauty, they prophane,
With the unblest, abominable Train,
Which their false boasted Pleasures do's detect;
Sweet to the Sense, but Poison in effect.




Great Edgar from those Charms is safe,
To all, but those of Glory, deaf:
Glory, whose Chariot drives an height
'Bove the rude Jolt of sensuall Delight,
And hurry of low Passions. Victory
On silver Wings, and Triumph with them fly 


These 3 dance, and after, they retiring, the Sea seems troubled. Andromeda appears ty'd to a Rock, a great Sea-monster making towards her. Perseus is seen in the Air, on Pegasus, with his Scimitar, and Gorgon-Shield. When Edgar abruptly starting up, turns from the Masque, and with Face towards the Pit speaks.



Glory had once th' Ascendant, Glorie's Dart
Did from all other Flames my Breast assert;
Which, raging, now torment m' enfeebled Heart.

  40A Dream of Majesty a King no more.
These Shows are now less Shadows, then my Power
They represent. Love's utmost Malice try'd,
Has me dethron'd, degraded, and destroy'd.
If ought survive, if ought of me remain,
'Tis but the sense of an immortall Pain 
Love, I obey and Captive follow thee
To Solitude a fitter Scene for me.











Unhappy Princes, who a just War make,
And onely Arms, when necessary, take!
For me, yet cruell Heav'ns determine worse;
Against my own, to head a forrein Force.
By those that no Allegeance owe, obey'd,
Born to protect the Nation, I invade.
They have the Blows, yet I partake the Pain;
A Subject lost, in every Foe that's slain.
My Mind's distress'd, whilst my bold War succeeds;
My Heart, at every Wound they suffer, bleeds.
The English must my juster Cause decide,
Whilst them I in new paths of Glory guide.
How can the Continent their Shock sustain,
Whose Arms ev'n force an Empire on the Main?
But I shall teach them thus, perhaps, a way,
That France may wish untaught another day,
In France again their fatall Banners spread.
This Heav'n avert 
I love their Vertue, but their Valour dread.
Ambition, blunted by these soft Regrets,
My Love provokes, and to fierce Action whets.
'Tis not my Crown alone that I forgoe,
But with my Crown I lose Editha too.

  41Let Kingdoms my Despair in Ashes mourn:
A meaner Flame the Universe will burn.









Long live King Lewis 




 The Usurper gone,

France, with one Voice, recalls you to your Throne.
Your Absence they lament 



 Is Rodulph dead?




And (to the just Reproach of Heav'n) in Bed.
Yet his black Soul did th' Air and Heav'n deform,
And dying Breath did bluster to a Storm.
As if the Troubles (since he ceas'd to live)
Which to the Earth he could no longer give,
He still would through the Aiery Regions drive.




The Day which did his last black Night precede,
The bloudy Tyrant had your Death decreed;
And, hearing that to th' English Court you fled,
Sent two Embassadours to demand your Head.




But these things may in vacant hours be said.
Our Bark, my Liege, waits ready, to convey
You safe, e're Fame the Secret shall betray.
Kings, caught on forrein Ground, are lawfull Prize:
And for a King what Ransom can suffice?



I my Condition may some time conceal;
But cannot from this Court so rudely steal.
Nor can I fear the Danger you foretell,
Knowing the King, and English Hearts, so well.




Their generous Minds as nobly you report:
But who can find an English-man at Court?
No private Mind can any Courts controll;
All mov'd by Interest, their common Soul.




Hot Places those, where Vertue cannot look;
But withers, dies, and vanishes in Smoak.




The private Love is ended that he bore,
Since you are now the Private man no more.

  42To ruine all, your Cause he might advance;
And, loving you, declar'd his Hate to France.





Your Kingdome he may, without Wrong, invade,
Till Articles and formall Leagues are made.
Friendship with Kings requires a certain Date,
Engross'd, and seal'd on Instruments of State.
Nor this, 'gainst crafty Counsels, a Defence,
Who weaker Words suborn against the Sense.
To sacred Interest their bald Heads they nod:
That they adore, and know no other God.




Possess your Kingdom first, and then send back.
Embassadours, your Complements to make.



Is that the Court? Your Message do's invite
Me thither, and from thence your Maximes fright:
Maximes, within the English Verge not known;
Nor shall in France, whilst I possess the Throne.
Pardon me, King, to Friendship if unjust:
I yield unwilling to a Friend's Distrust.
Aside.

I on my Throne shall mourn with the Disgrace,
If in your Breast I forfeited my place.
Attend me there, till I in such Disguise
Points to a distant place.

Return, as shall deceive observing Eyes.







For my Ambition Fortune could no more:
Yet am I, after all this Fortune, poor.
Ambition is not all I will not move
One Step from hence, till prosperous in my Love.
No Power, no Scepters shall allure me hence.
Love too shall feast, though at my Pride's expence.
Blest Omen see her Image strikes mine Eyes 
Heav'n guides her hither 











 That false Tongue
No more I'll hear 



 Alas! I Triumph sung
Aside.

Too hasty, cheated by an empty Dream.
Yet, free from Guilt, I may the Tempest stemme.






An Innocence presume not to perswade:
These Eyes beheld the Conference which you had,
The strict new League and Interchanges made.



She saw me with Gunilda late embroil'd,
When Kenneth was in the same Errour toil'd.
Aside.

What League? what Conference? 



 New Allies to make
With Strangers, where new Fires you give and take.
Goe 'mongst the Hearts by your feign'd Love engrost;
Goe and Editha in the Number boast.
She offers to goe; he stops her.




Let Heav'n not own, nor Earth sustain me more,
If God, or Mistris, I, save one, adore.
Both which by me too rudely were prophan'd,
If, whilst in presence here of both I stand,
I durst be false 



 She present? Also She
Is some invisible Divinity.



Around she do's such dazzling Lustre shed,
Ev'n, like the Sun, in her own Beams she's hid;
And o're all other Beauties bears such Sway,
They disappear, like the Stars feeble Ray,
Drown'd in the Light and Deluge of the Day.



The Path I mark'd, your wary Language shuns,
And, safely wide, a wild Vagary runs.
You traverse not the Charge against you laid,
But would by cunning Sophistry evade.
Me, your ill-tim'd and dawbing Flatteries paint,
When, for your Self, you a just Colour want.

  44But injur'd Friendship why should I relate?
You must contest with Generous Kenneth that.
All All will in Gunilda be repai'd:
And Denmark now comes bustling to your Aid.
Yet though to th' English you the Dane prefer,
I envy not your Arms successfull War.
For, your good Cause (whoever shall assist)
Will my best Wishes on your Party list.



From a wrong'd Friendship I've no Blemish drawn,
And for Success, that rests on You alone.
Your favourable Wishes give me more,
Then they, my Crown and Kingdome who restore.
Kingdoms by Marks and narrow Bounds confin'd,
You fill the vast Ambition of my Mind.



When with arm'd Threats you should th' Usurper brave,
You vainly like an idle Lover rave.



Is there a Secret I may not impart
To Her who holds in Custody my Heart?
Th' Usurper's dead; now for Relief I wait
At your Hands onely. 




The Happiness of your recover'd Throne.



No Kingdom I, without your Favour, own.



This is a Copy of your private Mind:
You'll scarce the Record in your Kingdom find.
When Royall Cares once fill your larger Breast,
No place remains for any forrein Guest.



My Dignity will not my Guest discharge;
But rather furnish, and the Room enlarge.
Which since your Image do's so nobly grace,
Majesty will a brighter Power confess,
Gunilda comes.


And yield to you the Consecrated place.



She by Appointment comes false man where She
Attends the Love, you practis'd but on Me 
I leave you to Her 






 The same Path I take.
I must the Chain of these Suspicions break.







Gunilda looking on a Letter.



My Brother how?  Depos'd, and Sigar reigns 
His Title own'd by the perfidious Danes 
Fortune and Fate, what have I now to claim?
The wandring Shadow of an empty Name.
Speedy Assistence he from Kenneth craves.
See how (unknowing) he my Folly braves.
See the just Curse on my Inconstancy:
And loe a Victim, injur'd Love, to thee.
Now will the Scots about me fleering run,
And to vile Pipes my sad Disasters tune.
Yet, spite of Fortune, I this Scepter hold:
With this in Hand, I will not be controul'd.
Pulls out a Dagger.

By this, within, an Empire I maintain,
And there, unmov'd, a perfect Princess reign.








Can any Trouble, Princess, touch your Breast,
And mine not sink beneath the Load opprest?
Disclose, fair Princess, your sharp Grief disclose.
I know the Pain, a stranger to the Cause.



Read this, and laugh Do you, before the rest,
Gives him the Letter: he reads.

Of fresh Revenge the rasie Pleasure tast.



'Tis done swift Orders I dispatch, and all
The Kingdom to our Royall Standard call.
In Person I will join them on the Shoar:
Nor will I wait a Wind to waft us o're.
Nor will I rest, till, Sigar's Faction quell'd,
The Throne again is by your Brother fill'd.



I stand astonisht at your forward Heat,
You have not weigh'd half my Misfortune yet.
To your feign'd Love what lighted first the way,
Our Riches, are the ravenous syrant's prey.

  46Despis'd, despoil'd of all, Gunilda see;
Nor with her Portion, save in Misery.



Give me Gunilda, and no Want I fear:
No other Wealth deserves a Monarch's Care.
Leave the gross Fewel for ignoble Fires:
A fairer Prey do's nourish my Desires.



Your Language has that generous sense displai'd,
As but too much my Errours do's upbraid,
And Constancy, so easily shaken, tax.



Heav'n ne'r made that a Vertue of the Sex.
Ah! look not back, when present Joys invite,
And Hymen calls with thousand Torches light.



'Tis Love alone has right those Joys to boast:
But Love would here in Gratitude seem lost.



Deep Gratitude the firm Foundation lies;
Whilst we behold Love's glorious Structure rise.
There will we reign there drink eternal Joys 
And, touching Heav'n, the low dull World despise.



On equall Grounds I your Desires would meet,
But Fortune thrusts me now below your Feet:
Which makes my Love suspected, and that I,
Against my Choice, forc'd by Necessity,
Forsaken, hopeless, broken by Distress,
Into your Arms, as my last Refuge, press.
No; Malice, I thy hissing Snakes defy,
Thus arm'd none e're was wretched that could die.
Dagger in hand.

I in my Heart can no Retrenchment find,
Nor have I lost one Atome of my Mind,
Nor will in ought diminisht to you come.



Frail Riches gone to Courage left the Room.






What Discord? Lovers speak let me decide 
But leave me 'las! I am, within, employ'd
Too much my self 








 How tedious turns the Wheel
Of Time? how slow where men in Torments dwell?
One Day would make Eternity in Hell 
To me this Instant that Long day has been:
Hell I have felt, for something Heav'nly seen.

Ethelwold found some other of the Name:
This, She who rides on the white wings of Fame.
And I may This, the True, my Alfrid claim 
My giddy Thoughts run wild, and rave about;
My Mind is all Distraction: I will shut,
Shut close my Eyes lock the deceitfull Door 
I will not see come near think on her more 



Alfrid in Man's habit, as Edgar goes in hast, from behind a Bush runs against him.

My Mind's unhindg'd, and the whole Fabrick shakes:
This Boy my labour'd Resolution breaks.


Fate sees through my Disguise, and makes me run
Aside.

Into his very Arms, I strive to shun.



I in this Face the matchless Alfrid see.
Heav'ns! are ye not her Brother? Should he be,
Mad, and inconstant, what were that to me?
Are you?  the bashfull Grace the pretty Fear,
All Alfrid, Alfrid to my Soul endear.
Sympathie is't, or some new Charm, do's seise,
Ravish my Breast, and violently please?
Insensibly on me the Poison stole;
'Tis now within, and mingles with my Soul 
Oh Fire! oh Rage! oh certainly Divine,
No humane power could thus could thus disjoin,
And fix, ev'n in the Centre of my Life.
Sense Reason vain and fruitless is your Strife,

  48In vain contesting that this is not She.
'Tis and by Heav'n design'd a Part of Me;
My dearest inmost Part   Thus hurry'd on,
Ah! whither will my raving Fancy run? 
You are her Brother. 



 She no Brother had:
The onely Child was that unhappy Maid.



Then, you have known her 



 Seen her heretofore.



I saw, admir'd, and ne'r examin'd more.
Whom do's she blest with name of Parents make?



The Duke of Cornwall doth that Name partake.



Your Words directly to that Alfrid lead,
Whom I and all my Stars had mine decreed.
Shall His Embraces that bright Form prophane,
Whom Sacrilege and blackest Treasons stain;
Who this Affront to Me and Heav'n durst give,
Yet after have the Impudence to Live?
But, Traitour, I thy Fraud shall counterplot:
I will untie, or surely cut the Knot 
My Title's good: He courted her,  he sped, 
And did her, onely, as my Proxy bed.



The Ceremony went not yet so far:
She, by strict Oath, engag'd him to forbear
The Marriage-Bed, till that three Nights were past:
Of which three Nights, this following is the last.



Heav'n, this great Work is thine, thy Care I see,
Since Alfrid is reserv'd entire for me 
I'll search her out 


Going, meets Ethelwold, stops, and looks angry on him.






 Restore, restore my Wife 
Or take, what I can better want, my Life.



Thy Wife? what jealous Frenzie turns his Brain?
Where is this Wife? where is she? But refrain
From calling Alfrid so; that Claim forbear,
And ne'r presume to make a Title there.

  49Where is my Alfrid?  
Ethelwold seises her.


 This is her Disguise.
What fatall Mist conceal'd her from my Eyes?
What time was lost?  Blind to my Happiness,
I pine, and die, yet what I want possess.
Monster of Impudence, yield yield her me.

Snatches her. Ethelw. draws.





I owe no Faith to naked Majesty.
Without his Guards King's but an empty Word:
The Scepter's his who wields the better Sword.

Edgar makes at him, throws him down, disarms him.



Live, wretched man!  thy Crimes do thee pursue,
And former Guilt still spurs thee on to new.
Live but depart and leave this Pledge with me.



A low, base Soul would call this Clemency.
The Crimes I acted were on Alfrid's score:
And, were it in my power, I'd push at more.
You grant me Life, (a Gift that I despise,)
And rob me of the onely thing I prize.
I'll call her Mine with my last Gasp of breath,
Grasps her.

And with cold Arms still grasp her after Death.



By Fraud you got, and would by Force maintain.
Let not too far thy mad Presumption strain.
Can I see this?  
Takes her from him.




 Let not your Royall Hand
By a rash man's distemper'd Bloud be stain'd.
If Alfrid's Tears may any thing avail,
Ah! let not now their Intercession fail.



Your Words with me such Sway shall always bear,
Those you may trust, and need not wast a Tear.
But plead not, Heav'n did you together knit:
Heav'n ne'r could be a Party to the Cheat.



This sudden Passion with the Day arose;
And now may with the setting Sun repose.
The silent Night, and Sleep's refreshing Dew,
May to your troubled Mind its Calms renew.
You then what's fit more clearly may discern:
And I a Vertuous Wife's Obedience learn.

  50Though you may charge my Marriage with Deceit,
Your's stands a firm irrefragable Lett.



Were She more close preserv'd, then, feign'd by Greece,

Th' Hesperian Gold, or the Phryxean Fleece,
By watching Dragons, fiery Bulls secur'd,
'Mongst Rocks of Brass or Adamant immur'd,
Or 'mongst eternall Ice beyond the Pole;
Did stormy Seas of Fire about her roll;
Yet would I trust to Love's almighty Power,
And Heav'ns high Aid more confident implore.
She (though within my Arms by Fortune put)
Stands inaccessible, and more remote.
Ah, Vertue too severe! too plainly I
The Flaming Sword, the angry Guardian see,
And Paradise for ever shut to me 
Yet surely I a certain Door discern;
The Bars give back, and easie Hindges turn.
Reason exalts a fair conspicuous Head,
And beckens me to where my Wishes lead;
And tells, that yet no perfect Marriage past:
Nor I, by other Ceremony fast 
With you, alone by Proxy, firmly ty'd:
Which Contract good, makes all the following void.



Blind with Desire, we each faint Glimmering watch;
And, for sound Reason, empty Shadows catch.
If for your Agent Ethelwold was meant,
I, as his own, did give him my Consent;
Did give my Hand, did solemn Words repeat,
Designing nothing to equivocate.
Though, by your Plea amus'd, my Reason bow,
My Conscience will no other Husband know.



From all your Doubts I shall your Conscience clear:
Mine is the Law, and the Interpreter.
Nor must I now your Inclinations fear?
Are they unjust?  








 The guilty Couple flies,
Not daring stand th' Encounter of mine Eyes.
They turn away. She makes up to them.

'Tis Vertue makes me bold: the Name of Queen
I coldly wear, whilst Alfrid thrusts between
Me and the Substance. Up to Justice yield
This Sorceress, long and wrongfully withheld



From me, and from her Lord, my Father. I,
In both your Ears, the Law the Law will cry.



I shall not here alledge a Sovereign's Will,
Nor, by your Father's Rules, be justly Ill:
Whose dangerous Pencill would all Monarchs draw,
With Sword in Hand, and at their Feet the Law.



They to your Royall Hand the Sword who join,
By the same right, a Dagger place in mine.
Pulls out a Dagger.

Which her Heart's Bloud shall feel 



 I will not hear
These Threats, far hence the empty Flashes bear.



Is not my Rage, though from your Person ty'd,
Strong, and let loose on all the World beside?
This, as a Queen, I will not be deny'd.



Leave her I almost took into my Bed








 This Wasp shall sting your Minion dead.






Fall on, fall on, Sword, Poison, Thunder, Hell;
The Earth, Air, Seas, with Death and Horrour fill.
Each Curse, each Plague, my rouz'd Revenge shall try.
Furies, Medea, hear assist me: I
Have the same Cause, have the same perfect Will;
I onely onely want the Godlike Skill.

  52And can no Devil inspire my ready Breast? 
My Spirit groans with Magick Rage opprest. 
Start not the Rocks, nor aged Mountains reel? 
Nor yet my Might do's the cleft Center feel?
The Poles, the Stars on heaps, th' affrighted Moon,
On All on All my hot Revenge is thrown.
Oh! I have found where I can pain him most:
He shall no more his Wooden Castles boast,
His Navall Glory, dearest Darling pride.
Ev'n in the Harbours whilst secure they ride,
See, on each Hulk a fiery Storm is hurl'd,
And rising Flames around the Top-mast curl'd,
Dismally bright, illustrate Edgar's World.
He pours out Sighs and casts an helpless Look 
And now his Eyes are melting with the Smoak.
Exit.






Alfrid, Woman with the Light.



PRess me no more, nor Arguments pursue,
Too taking sweet, too flattering to be true.



The Gown agrees, and all Opinions joyn,
You are th' undoubted, onely lawfull, Queen.



Riches and Honour glaring in their sight,
The Doctours squint, and rarely see aright.
A surer Guide Heav'n for my Conduct made.



But thus the Snare to your Advantage laid,
Who would not wink, and wish her self betray'd?



Leave tempting me, the glorious Hour is nigh.







 The Hour our Hell-born Jealousy,
Tormenting Doubts, and vain Desires shall die.



What mean these Words? how dismally they sound?



I to the King am by fast Promise bound,
To meet him here: I shar'd his amorous Grief;
And for his Pains did thus design Relief.



Hear I this Language from your Mouth escape?
Rather the Fruit of lawfull Process reap.
Before the World you might enjoy your Will;
Yet rather seek the false Delight to steal,
Waving a Title authoriz'd by Day.



Let not your Thoughts these black Surmises sway.
Though in the Dark, I shall not lose my Way.
Goe and beseech the Queen immediately:
Beseech her hither: goe without Reply.








Tempted with all the Charms of Royall State,
Something I find, I can more highly rate:
Some Sense I feel, some Grudgings still remain.
And yet Ambition murmurs; but in vain,
Where Vertue, a more noble Pride, do's reign.
My Innocence more solid Glory brings,
Then from the Pomp of guilty Greatness springs.
This gives me Courage: in this Fort secure,
I all the Storms of Jealous Rage endure 
My sending for the Queen, I fear, may be
Misconstru'd, as a rude Affront, in me.









Provok'd by this outrageous Insolence,
I come:  but 'tis to punish your Offence.



Necessity, and the Occasion known,
You will not on my humble Duty frown.

  54To a few Words vouchsafe a patient Ear,
And after let me your Displeasure bear.







 Knowing what Grief your Mind do's sting,
Suspicious of my Conduct with the King 



Say, I suspect your Villany, I see't,
I know it all 



 Behold me at your Feet.
Kneels.




What feign'd Remorse, what Strategem is here?



By all in Heav'n we Sacred call, I swear,
I am to You and to my Honour Just,
And here presume to vanquish your Distrust.
This Night your Grief and painfull Doubts shall clear:
In these dark Paths your Wishes shall not erre,
Permitting my Advice to be your Guide.



Rise and no longer this strange Secret hide.



This day I in a Labyrinth have worn,
Where still I met the King at every turn.
Within, some stubborn Conflict shakes his Breast,
(For this his Words and every Look confest.)
But whither his distracted Motions lead,
You better guess, who have in Courts bin bred.
Yet lest to me he might some Favour aim,
Which you alone by Marriage-right may claim 



What now remains? be short. 



 Within this Hour,
He in the Dark will trace me to that Bowr.
There We together may his Coming wait.
And lest your Silence any Doubt create;
My Voice shall him, as he approaches, guide,
Whilst silently into his Arms you glide.
And having once asswag'd his Amorous Heat,
He will applaud the innocent Deceit:
And your Embraces such Success may find,
As to your Love may him for ever bind.



The Secret's out:  yet will not this atone
For all the Ill by your Inchantments done.
An Injur'd Love can never be repair'd.
For this Night my Revenge shall be deferr'd,
And you shall take the Respite for Reward.

  55The King has all the day in Darkness been;
Else you had not been courted for the Queen.



You cannot yet your Jealousies digest:
Something yet swells, and boils within your Breast.
But I can better your Reproaches bear,
Then from the glorious Paths of Vertue erre.
Despise, abhorre, affront, abuse me still;
I shall not be, for your Requitall, Ill.
Forbear, and let us to the Place be gone,
Lest his Impatience slower Time outrun.










Heav'n taxes Greatness with proportion'd Care:
A King not one Day to himself can spare.
By a new Pain and wild Distractions crost,
This, almost, I insensible have lost.
Yet I this Minute from my Love may snatch.
What rests unfinisht, that requires Dispatch?
Turns to the Secretary.




The Scots in Arms against their King declare,
For yielding to become your Homager.
The Welsh rebell, and this Advantage take,
From their stiff Neck the English Yoak to shake.



Or rather, struggling, it uneasie make.
What else requires our Care?  



 Within, still wait
The French Embassadours, importunate
For your last Answer. 



 That they had before 
If not yet pleas'd, conduct them to the Door.







My warmer Bloud, and Spirits that briskly fly,
Inform me that the happy Hour is nigh;
And from my Breast all publick Cares would fling.
The Man I feel grows stronger then the King.
Yet more one Minute's Truce for publick Good 
I'll shake thee off Rebellious Flesh and Bloud.
That Minute past then Passions take your swing,
Till the King's Work is done I will be King.






I must be short; I all that you demand,
To Embass.

Already, and your Reasons, understand.
The Titular King, your Master's Enemy,
You say, did here to Sanctuary fly.
Too far your Power and blind Revenge would stretch,
If you would those in my Protection reach.
But if that Injur'd Prince (to me unknown)
Were here, my Kingdom should be as his own:
My Crown should lie at stake till his were wone.
I would, and in such manner, send him back,
As on his Throne should the proud Rebell shake.
You next crave Leave (which modestly is done)
To build a little Navy of your own.
Which to perswade, your Reasons are no more,
Then mine for building Castles on your Shoar.
In my Dominions (nor th' Indulgence slight)
I give you Leave to Traffick, not to Fight.
I shall your Trade 'gainst Piracies ensure,
If Forty hundred Sail the Seas can scour.
But I am told, e're this Address was made,
You the Foundation of this Fleet had laid.

  57And then I, in your Complements return,
Must send one Ship shall your Armado burn.
Not that we value all your Navall Power.
Could every Ship, like Fish, spawn Thousands more;
We should chastize and check the monstrous Brood.
Our Trees bewitch'd, and curst were in the Bud,
If English Oak dreads ought that's made of Wood.





Serjeants enter, with Lewis bound in Disguise.



We took him in Disguise, prepar'd to fly 



I'll hear no more This Opportunity
Is welcome, since I in some measure may



The Honour, I too long have ow'd you, pay.
You shall be Admirall; and, for greater State,
Ten hundred Frigats on your Flag shall wait,
To burn, or see their Infant-Navy knockt
To pieces, e're on the Salt waves 'tis rockt.
My self will forthwith your Commission seal.
Exeunt all.





Ethelwold solus, with Dagger in hand.



A timely Chance the Secret did reveal.
With This I'll guard the Treasures you would steal.
Another reaps my Harvest, whilst I starve:
For my Part, onely Husks and Chaff they carve.
I must forbear her Bed by Oath made Poor;
And here in secret she breaks up the Store.
How intricate the Heart of Woman is!
No Eye, no Sun can pierce the dark Abyss.
I yet will share Howe're she may deny
My Love I my Revenge will satisfy.
With This I'll force her till that Heat I cloy;
Holds Dagger.

And through the Body I'll her Soul enjoy.
I will lie close and with one free Home-thrust,
Asswage both her insatiate Pride and Lust.

  58I'th' Dark, and with my Own, I may be bold.
The next shall find his Entertainment cold.
The King's Embraces give her Ecstasies:
In Mine she more effectually dies.
Exit.










Press me no farther I command withdraw.



I'll speak and then your Anger undergoe.



What is't you with this rude Impatience crave?



'Tis Loyall Rudeness, that your Life would save 
This way I heard a Man, 
He gnash'd his Teeth with Discontent,
And rav'd, and mutter'd Treason, as he went.









A Man (I thought it had your Highness been)
Seiz'd, and has barbarously slain the Queen.
Enter Woman.




The Murth'rer too fell with her; I discern'd,
And heard, methought, the Stabs that she return'd.
Broken with Throbs, she these Last words did strain,
Take, bloudy Tyrant take thy Gift again.



Who can expound this bloudy Mystery?
Her Words say, in her Thoughts she murther'd Me.
'Las! not by Malice, but Revenge enflam'd,
At her Assassin, not the King, she aim'd.
Our Bubble-Hopes! most brittle, when most fair!
Which swelling shine, and vanish into Air.









Her Father, (whate're Fury spurr'd him on)
Souldier returns.

Duke Ethelwold, this horrid thing hath done.







 In their mixt Goar he swims,
And with stiff Arms still grasps her congeal'd Lims.



My cruell Stars this fatall Train have laid;
And to the Snare I have the Queen betray'd.



You guilty?  it a blacker Crime would seem,
To suspect You then 'twas to murther Them.
No bloudy Stain on your bright Form impress'd,
Nor on these Hands can any Guilt be trac'd.
Takes her by the hand.




'Las! I the Queen to your Embraces sent:
And see how Fate has wrested mine Intent.



Fate, or the Hand of Providence, appears;
And now the rugged Walk to my Contentment clears.
Heav'n has unravell'd now the dark Decree;
And the high Source of my just Love I see;
By Ethelwold and humane Cunning crost,
Till he in his deep Policy is lost.
'Las! I forgive him who but, for her sake,
All Loyalty and strongest Ties would break?
This is an happy unexpected Leap:



Now, Innocent, I all my Wishes reap.
Now, Alfrid's Mine, my now undoubted Right;
For ever Mine, for ever my Delight.



Now in an Hour to brave Desires so just,
I will not the Success of mine Distrust.
This I give back into your Royall Hands.
Gives up his Commission.




This seems as in Contempt of our Commands:
Or, that great Souls in Dangers most delight,
And, void of those, the easie Honour slight.



Your Highness will more just my Scruples rate,
Inform'd who 'tis you did Commissionate:
The King of France behold him in your Power.



In what thick Darkness wander'd I before?
Are you that Injur'd Prince? 



 Th' Usurper dead,

France has at length my Juster Title weigh'd,
And own'd me King, while I am Vassall here.



That, from the English, you unkindly fear.
Shall We your generous Confidence abuse?
A nobler Course to Greatness here we chuse.



No Greatness e're was equall to your Mind,
Like Heav'n, by nothing but it self confin'd.
Whose Actions such illustrious Aspect bear,
That Monarchs, who would copy them, despair.



For my Reply I shall not Language seek;
My Deeds will more effectually speak.
Whilst here my Court is honour'd with your Stay,
In all with Me You equally shall sway.
And when for France you quit the English Shore,
Half of my Navy shall conduct you o're.
Two thousand Frigats, in the Downs that ride,
Shall all be on that glorious Work employ'd.



Yet, for all this, I rest that desperate Slave,
Whom (I may say) not all your Power can save.
Your Royall Bounty on the Wretch is lost;
By a severer Power your Sentence crost:
A Power, that now, even in your Presence, reigns,
And, whilst you Freedome grant, condemns to Chains.



Some Vision checks the Freedome I approve.



What you this empty Vision call, is Love.



A King of France, and doubtfull of his Claim?
All Hearts must melt before that sovereign Flame.



You will except, when I Editha name.



I freely that Alliance shall embrace:
And where can she her Love more nobly place?
Thus Fortune both my Sisters will advance:
That, German Empress; This, the Queen of France.

And if, like me, she balances Desert,
With a less Crown she might accept your Heart.



Yet, Madam, yet is your Consent deny'd:
My Joys wou'd flow, your Rigour checks the Tide.



The Splendours of a Kingdom fill your Eyes:
Each Object else beneath your Prospect lies.



Were all the Glory of the World in view,
I should be blind to All the rest, but You.
A Kingdom, then Content to me can yield,
When your fair Hand shall the same Scepter wield.
I rather here wou'd lie, fixt at your Feet,
Then in a Throne from You divided sit.



You, whilst eclipst, may think an Object bright,
That will shine dim, when you regain your Light.
When Crown'd, and on your Throne, consult your Mind:
Thence (if you still these Inclinations find)
They may be more authentickly exprest,
In Pomp of solemn Embassie addrest.



The King himself, his own Embassadour,
What can contribute to your Honour more?
He must not wait, with tedious Forms amus'd;
But as a King, and as my Friend, be us'd.



Statesmen abroad, maliciously wise,
Will say, we make of the French King a Prize:
That he, with vile Advantage basely trapt,
By Marriage, onely other Bonds escap'd.



These Difficulties you so nicely move,
Are none; or are, however, none to Love.
Gives him her hand.

Take her one Hour one Priest our Hands may joyn;
And the same Stars shall on our Nuptialls shine.



Your Will, Great Sir, must ever be obey'd,
When you Command, or when you but Perswade.
Would you, on my behalf, exert your Power,
This too might prove My favourable Hour.
For Me, with fair Gunilda interpose.



This Conduct an excessive Passion shows,
And in your Breast do's such a Flame confess,
That the Combustion in your Kingdom's less.



That Trouble's past, and our Repose is due
To the great Genius that still waits on You.
The Rebell Force all met in a large Field,
Which to the Sea do's a near Prospect yield.
There as they train'd, and exercis'd for Fight,
Your Navy came to Anchor in their sight:
Which through the Crowd a conquering Terrour sent,
Whose conscious Minds suspected the Intent;
Hence mutiny, and, the chief Leaders slain,
They left their Arms as Lumber on the Plain.



Then may we calculate the Fate of Wales,

Since their Support and Hope of Scotland fails.



Ah! labour not nor to low Objects bend



His Nobler Thoughts, which publick Care attend.

  62The Pleas of Love allow of no Appeal;
And the more prest, the more my Resolutions swell.



I know the Scruple, where Gunilda sticks;
And must that generous Sullenness unfix.
My Coffers shall with Interest repay,
As charg'd on me, what Fortune took away.
To the Scotch Foot, Ten thousand English Horse
Shall straight be joyn'd, the Rebell Danes to force.
To this I adde, whilst your two Lives remain,
Both Homage-free and absolute shall reign;
And henceforth shall to England onely come
In Friendship's name 



 Oh thou, our better Doom,



As Heav'n serene, resistless strong as Fate!



Not Hercules was ever feign'd so great,
Nor that Redress to humane Wrongs could give;



Heav'n's Steward, Champion, Representative.




Ken. takes her by the hand.


By no Conjunction Heav'n could yet essay,
What, Princes we, by our joynt Nuptialls may,
To make one great and memorable Day.

As they are going off,







By Fame instructed, I am hither led,
To warn you, that you must not Alfrid wed.






Not Alfrid wed? that stabs me at the Ear:
What murth'ring Oracle is this I hear?
So many Storms Heav'n suffer'd me to scape,
Now thunders on me with an After-clap.
Not Alfrid wed? the Mystery unfold:
What Law? what Book? what Spirit this has told?
Has Heav'n for me done Miracles in vain?
I'm in a Pit, and thought the Passage plain.
Dampt are my Hopes, and all my Joys are fled.
Where is that Text, I must not Alfrid wed?



When the Church took her first within the Pale,
You for her Christian Carriage stood as Bail:

  63And so assisting to Regenerate,
Rest in Degree, as Father who Begat,
By Spirituall Relation. 



 Has th' Offence
No higher Source, I with my self dispense.
Must I from Rocks and certain Danger quit,
Now in the Port, and on a Pebble, split?
Is that a Law t' obtrude upon a King?
Whence do's the pinching Obligation spring?
'Tis not a Law in God's or Nature's Book.



On Rome, and on the Holy Canons look.
These must command, where God and Nature's mute;
And that Command no Temporall Prince dispute.
Provoke not from the Holy Chair a Curse.



If Caesar liv'd, could I be threatned worse?
I will that Curse in the mid Ocean meet,
And 'gainst it try the fortune of a Fleet.
Dare you preach here what any Laws define,



That are not shown under God's Hand or Mine?



You bravely act, what others onely think,
Who low beneath th' encroaching Deluge sink,
O'rewhelm'd and dampt by Superstitious Fear;
You'r truly King, and keep the Character.



Kings their Just Rights to know from You shall gain,
And, those Just Rights, a Courage to maintain.



No harsh Disputes must our ripe Joys allay.
Now Love and Triumph challenge all the Day.



