The Curtain being drawn up discovers the Temple of Maho∣met,
in it Tamerlane, Mandricard, Odmar, Abdal∣la,
and Priests who sing the following Hymn.


SIng we, Alha, Lord of Fate,
Father, Ruler of this State,
In whose hand are War and Peace,
Overthrows and Victories
Sing we to thy Pow'r Divine
At whose Nod the Heavens Bow,
To whom Gods Allegiance owe,
Whose just Favour Kings doth Crown,
Monarchs perish at whose Frown,
Sing we at thy Holy Shrine.



Accept our Thanks, accept our Praise
Our solemn Vows, our Eulogies,
The Altars which our Hearts do raise
Accept the humble Sacrifice.



To thee, Alha, Virgins Sing
To thee Tune each Tender String,
Carry'd by an Holy Zeal
Of the Pious Matrons tell
To thy Grace Triumphant Youth
To thee glad Old Age doth Kneel,
Nor do Kings, thy Power Conceal.
But all admire, all Confess
iTs thou Cursest, thou dost Bless

  2To thee owe their Rise, and Growth.



Accept our Thanks, &c.




See the Trophies see the Spoils
The glad Harvest of our Toils
See the Scythian Majesty
Crown'd with Peace and Victory
To his Scepter Turk giv'n;
To him Conquer'd Asi• bows
To him th' Earth her Freedom owes.
Fear we now no blow of Fate,
'Tis Iust Alha rules our State,
And our King's the Care of Heav'n.



Accepted are our thanks our Praise
Our Solemn Vows our Eulogies
'The Altars which our Hearts do raise
Accepted is the Sacrifice.

After the Hymn Tamerlane, Mandricard, Odmar, Ab∣dalla,
with Guards, come forward on the Stage, and the
Scene changes to the Pallace.


After our Sacred Rites to Alha paid
'Tis fit we show our second Thanks in Joy
And Triumphs which to Victory are due.
Let Scythia now Arrai'd in all the Pride
Of Conquer'd Asia dart her Glory to
The utmost Gades, and to the utmost Ind.

Let all her sleeping Monarchs rise and see,
How far her new-got Liberties Extend.
And as of Old her Vertue has alone

Assyrian and Pellaean Arms withstood,
Nor dar'd the flying Parthian to look back
Upon his Enemy, but by retreat
Sought Life, not Conquest. Our Faim'd Ancestors
Then boasted how they could a Foe repel,
Far greater's our Renown in Glorious Arms,
Who know to Conquer too, enlarge our sway,
And Teach the Haughty Ottoman to bow.



Needless, Great Sir, was that far Boasted Gift

  3That Law which to your Tartary entail'd
The Turkish Empire, when their Kingly Line
For want of Heirs should cease, you scorn'd to wait
The slow Event; (or shou'd it be) to take
Ev'n Empire at a Gift; but Gazing on
The Golden Prey, you thought it lookt too great
To be so cheaply Bought, then Seizing it
With Danger, and the famous Lot of War
Made it your Merits due, and Valours right.



That Man who threatn'd all the World with ruin
That fierce, that yet unconquer'd Bajaset,

Whose dreadful Name so oft shook Greece with Terror
And struck her Princes Dumb with fear, That Man
To whom all Asia Bow'd, has Learnt to Kneel,
To Tamerlanes more Mighty Pow'r; Avert
Ye Gods, all Nations Cry, from us the Hand
Of the all-Conquering God-like Tamerlane.





Abdalla, no; the World is pleas'd and silent,
Amaz'd, and wondring at the sudden Change,
The happy change of Monarchs, Bless their Stars
By whose kind influence doubtful Victory
Flew where Desert, and working Virtue call'd.
While to your Arms all Nations wisht Success,
To you who shou'd Revenge the Injur'd Earth
And for a Tyrant give the World a King.



Stain not with flatteries the famous Day
But rather let our Victory appear,
By her own Trophies absolute, and sure.
Let Blaze through all our Streets the Captive Moon
That Superstitious Idol of the Field.
In Solemn Process March our Slaves of War
Each Tartar to his Turkish Prey a Guard,
Your Heads with Lawrel Crown'd, your Hands with Spoils,
Filling with wel-come Joy the shouting Crowd.
For a Just Trophie to our own Ambition
Call here the Captive Monarch to our sight.
I wou'd Survey each Limb of that Great Man,
Try his fierce Temper, see what awful Pride
Held in such fear the Subject Nations.


  4Bajaset and Asteria are brought in Bound.



I've view'd thee in a Thousand, Thousand Shapes,
When not the fear of all thy Murdring Engines,
E're shook my Soul so much, as now the thought
Of this Tongue-Combat give me Patience, Alha!








Infectious be my Breath,
And Blast thee ere thy Taunts can vex my Soul,
For I conceive I shall be talk'd to Death.



Think not, O King, we come in Proud Disdain
To thy fal'n State, or scorn thy Ebbing Fortunes,
Or with Vain Glory to Commend our Deeds
Which of themselves do loudly Praise the Doer.
But as thy Conqueror and Prince to claim
A just Submission to our Power; Live,
But to our Mercy owe the Life we Give.



And dost thou think the Glorious Bajaset

Can stoop so low? speak, Alha, say, my Stars
Is't just that I who held the fate of Kings
In this Right Hand, and scatter'd Death's among
The Tyrants of the World, as fast as words
Cou'd mingle them; at last shou'd hold my Life
On any upstart Power? First shall th' Enfeebled Sun
Stoop down, and Borrow from the Earth his Heat,
The Stars from Northern Fires take their Light,
And Gods of Kings shall Mortal Blessings ask
E're I to thy scorn'd favour own a Debt.



Talk on, fond Slave, and Glut thy self with thinking,
For words and thoughts are all thy Weapons now,
Which yet thy Abject State shall prove but Vain
And make thee a much greater 




The Brave are alwayes so; nor can the Fates
Debase an inborn Virtue, Oh that Frown
That Frown suits wondrous well the baleful Brow
Of an Exalted, Stern, fate-looking Tyrant!
So stretch thy self Ambitious Arrogance,

  5Stretch on the Wheel of Pride thy streightned Nerves
Till thy Cramp'd Limbs yield Musick to my Ears,
Proud, Vain Usurper 





He Built his Throne by Virtue, and I mine
Speak, if thy Pride can give a Vent to Truth
Which is the Nobler Title, fairer Name,
A Crown'd Usurper, or a Captive King?



Gods! that I live to hear that vile Reproach▪
By Alla 'tis too much Now cou'd I fly
Like some Fierce Lyon scap'd the Hunters Hand
(His Strength by Rage Improv'd, Rage by Despair)
Against my Victor ha, Inform me Slaves
Who, or from whence was that bold Son of War
Who durst with me in dreadful Combat Joyn?
That Chief in sable Arms! for yet I see not
His Face in all this Crowd.




Most Dreadful Foe, see me Heav'ns fatal Scourge
Sent from above to Purge the sickly Earth
By Blood from Bloody Tyrants.




Mistake me not; that Conquerour was one
One Nobler far, and fairer to behold
Then any thy throng'd Court do's to my Eyes display.



Spightful and false thy base Reproaches are,
Say Odmar, speak the Valiant Mandricard,

The Mighty nothing of that Strangers Acts.



Not Sir, to Lessen or Eclipse your Fame
Do I to that brave Strangers high Desert
Due Honours pay, not that the Fierce Abdalla,

Wise Odmar, or the Valiant Aldegar

Did less then God-like acts; yet Sir, to speak
His Worth I Envy, not those Numerous Bands
To Conquest by your Royal▪ Conduct led
Equal'd that Heroes Fame, who follow'd by
A Guard of Horse in Mournful Black Arra'id
O're ran our fainting Enemies; none durst
Withstand him but their War-like Emperor,
Whose rashness caus'd his Fate, the brave unknown

  6With force Superior drew him to our Camp,
Threw him into my wide-spread Arms, and Cry'd
Take here a Present from the Man you hate;
Then adds, I ask but this for my Reward
He was a King, be sure you use him so.



Gods! I shall jealous of my Conquest grow!



Nor he, nor Heav'n your Glory cou'd obscure!
Since Mandricard was sharer in the War:
For by him fell the great Ortobulus

The Hopes of Turky, and the Prop of Battel!
Him did he Disinherit with his Sword,
And snatch'd his Birth-right World as his Reward.



Curse on thy Tongue! what Frenzy broke thy silence?


Thy Breath has Blasted me, and for a flash
Of Honour, Damn'd me to Eternal Flames.



My Noble Son 



'Tis false, ye spightful Powrs,

Ortobulus (I'le ne're believe it) slain
By that weak Arm, what Millions back'd the Coward?



Fair Virtue was his Guard, approach me nigh,
Embrace me round; now claim thy just Reward
Ask freely; for the Glory of the Act deserves
VVhat ere thy Swoln Ambition can Demand.
VVhat Will not Conquerors on the Brave bestow?
VVhat sad Disorder moves my Mandricard?

VVhat foolish Passion dares disturb my Son?



Who can withstand the vastness of such Hopes?



Have we not giv'n our Word, and can we Lye?



Far-bee't from me such Blasphemy to think.




Odmar, Abdalla, witness to my Vow,
If ought I can deny to him! I Love
Above the World, which he can ask with Honour,
Sudden Destruction seize my Perjur'd Soul.
Faith is the brightest Jewel of a Crown.



Speak my Souls great Ambassador, my Tongue,
Pronounce thy Message loud; a King Commands:
O speak what thou desirest most to speak,
Pard'n Sir, my too rude Carriage,







Low as the Earth two Monarchs I Implore,
Rather two Gods in saving pity great,
As Heav'n may bless your Throne with Victory,

As Heav'n may raise you higher by your Fall,

I beg this Princess from your Royal hands.



With all the force a Virgins Tears can press
On any Soul, I here implore my Death
Ten thousand Deaths e're yield my Innocence
To be polluted by his loath'd Embraces.



Curse him, Asteria, curse the fatal Source
Of thine, of mine, of the Worlds wretched State,
Upon a Fathers blessing curse the Race
Of Perjur'd Tamerlane, there's poyson in it
And rank Infection, and consuming Plagues.



Is she not Fair, my Lord!
Is she not Innocent as Babes new Born?



Mean Soul, degenerate Boy, I charge thee cease,
Canst thou behold this haughty slave in Chains
Outdare our Pow'r, and scorn our offer'd favours,
Nay Curse thee to thy Face, and hold thee worthless
The gift thou ask'st? deny thee with Contempt?
And thou yet stoop to him, kneel, pray to him?
Wipe off, rash boy, thy growing Glories stain
Or quit the Name of Son 



How all things to my ruin do concur?
Father, and Daughter, Emperor all are joyn'd
To make me wretched, O the killing Flames,
Of a despairing passion, oh my heart!



My Miseries have giv'n me leave to smile
To see thee Traytor find an Hell on Earth.







Oh I am ruin'd, stain'd,
With hands scarce cool from my dear Brothers blood
He catches at the Sister for reward
And Im'e become a partner in the Murder.



Oh the bold Ravisher, that he shou'd dare
To touch her purge then Villain with thy blood
Her fully'd beauties, Dye.





Presumptuous Fool, this Act has forfeited.

  8The Life we gave.



Have I driv'n Troops before me
And am I thus held in by a crowd of Slaves?
Vile, fearful Mice to pluck the bristled Main
Of a bound Lyon, rise, my Passion, rise
Swell every Vein up to an Artery.
Return the famous Lightning of my Eyes,
Work, Oh my Heart, my Soul, in my revenge,
For I am kill'd, choak'd with disdain and fury.



He Raves and we lose time to hear him, hast,
Take, force him from my sight.



Do not think me King,
One that has nothing but a Life to lose;
Death! 'tis the common Scourge of coward minds,
A Goblin hatch'd to fright base vulgar Spirits.
Life I contemn; nor wou'd I stoop so low
Beneath my Majesty to take it up,
Though with my Empire it might be redeem'd,
Since he must grant it whom I scorn and hate.
A Grace from Tamerlane wou'd load with shame
My inward memory far more then all
My risled Crowns, or the base name of Slave.
Now, Tyrant, to thy last destruction hear
What Alha moving in my breast Commands
Me speak, thy Glory, Tartar, is short liv'd,
There are a Royal Race of Ottemans,

(See thy Guards tremble at their very Name)
And so must thou, I see thy Glory sink
And Heav'n in Arms against thy Perjur'd Soul



A way to Death to speedy Torture with him
His boasted courage this last Act shall frye.



Yes, I will make a Tryal of my Heart
I'le bear my wrongs with such a noble Courage
So far Transcending mean Tartarian spirits
That thou shalt burst with envy to my Fate.




Thus doth the Naked Beggar gazing stand
On great Mens wealth and starves, O cursed spight.
That I must perish all my Joyes in sight.






Urge me no more, my Lord, my fate is seal'd,
And Heav'ns fixt will stands uncontroul'd by chance,
Now to return (by Heav'n I never will)
Were as to seek a second Banishment,
Or Death the lesser evil for returning.



Yet Sir the King 



Is most unjust and cruel
Lead by the voice of every fawning Traytor,
And gives all power to him that Flatters most.
My Brother! Yes, by all that's good it was
That fatal Brother, that ambitious Boy,
With the deep plotting Odmar wrought my ruine,
And built their greatness on my ill-tim'd Vertue,
VVhile I 



VVhile you here in inglorious sorrow
Quit your just Title to your Fathers Throne.



A Throne Axalla, can it yet be news
My Father owns no Son but Mandricard?

He shares his Crowns of Lawrel and of Gold,
And all the shining Scepters of each Clime,
VVhere if a friend but chance to name Arsanes,

Or fetch an inward sigh for his misfortunes,
A pointed frown marks the kind Spirit dead,
And choaks with mournful groans his pious wishes.
Oh my Nerina! 



That fever still, my Lord?



It like the Liver of the Earth-born Monster
O'respread nine Furlongs of the burning Lake
Feeds on the fiery Diet of fond hope,
To be renew'd a prey to black despair.



Yet Sir she may be found



She may! O trifler, may!
May be is quite impossible to Love;
She must ye Gods, appoint the happy time,
Like that when softest Hours in Greece I drew

  10Then when the Hospitable Emperor
Saluted us as Princes, treated us
At no less rate though both by Law enslav'd,
An exile I, and she a Pyrates prey.
Long in that state we liv'd in Bliss and Love,
I Adanaxus, she Nerina call'd.
But Oh, my Friend, that Golden Age is past!



Ah, my dear Lord 








Of specious truth your passion can o're sway
And raise belief in your distracted Breast,
The sight of her 



Do not Delude me thus.



No false Delusion, or diverting Fable
Can here reside, take, take the naked truth,

Axalla in her rifled Tent beheld,
Gaz'd on, and knew the fair Nerina's charms.



But did you see her like Nerina? bright
As the first Sun when on the Eastern Shore
He Rises fresh, and Decks the Infant Day.
Did you behold among the Beauteous Crowd
One by all envy'd, and by all admir'd?
A Triple Goddess, Fair, Majestick, Wise?



Shee's all, my Lord, that ev'n your Love can speak her;
And though all bash'd and shrouded o're with Tears
Yet cou'd not ev'n those thickning Clouds of sorrow
Obscure the shining lustre of her Eyes.



Methinks, my Friend, I see those Pearly drops
When taking on my Breast her last farewell,
She cast her Ivory Arms about my Neck,
And cry'd, my Love; Oh shou'd we meet again,
Nor spoke she this with the least sign of Bliss,
For with a Smile she promis'd it a truth.



As great and faithful as the Sybills Voice,
And can you then, my Lord, leave all those Joyes
For want of seeking them? Think, think, Arsanes,

When this hot Fever has dry'd up to Ashes
Your slaming Heart, and Parcht your vital Spirits,
Then you will cry (but oh 'twill be too late)

  11What mass of Golden Treasure have I lost?
Then curse your self for your unkind distrust,
Your little Faith to your Axalla's Counsels,
That ruin'd the unfortunate Arsanes.

But let's behold, the faithful Danches comes

From your Great Fathers Court, his joyful look
Denotes some glad Discovery The News?



Great Prince! what still may please, and make you happy,
I went to Samarcanda; but I pass'd,
Me thought, through Streets block'd up with moving Castles,
So thick, so numberles• the People stood:
While they with Voices undistinguish'd fill'd
The Air, that Eccho'd nothing but the Stranger,
The Stranger is the business of the Court:
The Sweet Discourse of every Ladies Mouth
Is, what the Stranger did; to you they owe
Their Trophies and their Fame.



And is the Court so monstrously infectious,
That scarce an hour gone thou'st learnt to flatter?
Speak, speak thy Errand, what of the fair Nerina?




Great Sir! the Lady which your Friend discover'd
Is Daughter to th' impetuous Bajaset,

The tender sharer of her Fathers Fate.



Ha! Withers not my Hand, start not my Eyes
From their curs'd Orbs?
Am I not all an Ague? So loud a Clap
Of sudden Thunder, and yet live? Ye Gods!
Have I to ruine her my Sword employ'd,
My greatest Strength her Country to destroy?
Was it her Father too whose Fate I sought?
Then on my self, my more than hellish act
I thus Revenge.









For I confess a death so quiet, and
So short, had been a Balm to ease my Heart,
Rather than punishment to expiate
My great offence; to die? perhaps the News
Might satisfie some Relicks of the War,
That their great Enemy is dead What then?

  12What had I done for Bajaset? what for
His ruin'd House, his flaming Pallace? what
In lieu of all his pillag'd Scepters, Crowns?
What for Nerina's wrongs, whose every Tear
Deserves a Life? No, no, Axalla, that
Which can but once be done, let it be long
In doing.



Dear, my Lord, divert those thoughts
And go where Piety and Honour call.
The Royal Slave not brooking his disgrace,
And yielding not himself to Tamerlane,

Is most unfaithfully condemn'd to Die.



To Die? Shall then Nerina's Father Die?
Basely and poorly be a prey to Fate?
And leave his weeping Daughter all alone,
'Midst a rude Multitude of Savage Men?




Arsanes cannot think a thought like that.



No, my Axalla, hast we from this place
With all the swiftness of a Love in fear,
That he shall come too late, and lose the Prize,
The Beauteous Prize, for which all that have Souls
Must needs be Rivals; Guide me, O my Stars,
Shorten my Journey to my Paradise.
By all my hopes Nerina's Father lives;
Then snatching to my self the Glorious Prize,
I'le reap the Fruit of all my Victories.




Bajaset is discover'd on a Scaffold, an Executioner with an
Axe, and others with Hallbirds, Swords, &c.






HOld, stay thy bloody hand, I charge thee strike not.



What bold Invader dares thus countermand me?
Speak, say, what art?



Lay down, O mighty Prince!
A little of thy Thunder, and I'le speak.
O thou to whose high care Heav'n doth intrust
The Rule of Nations, Monarch of the Earth,
So may you Laurels bear from either Pole,
As you to them shall peaceful Olives joyn,
And in your Conquests God-like Mercy shew.



The Accent of that Voice I sure have known;
Nor am I unacquainted with that Face:
All day I could with patience hear thy Story.



Not to recount the Changes of my Life,
Which but for one, one only happy Fate
Does not deserve a Name; yet, Sir, I'le tell you,
There's Glory in that Fate, and to have done
You Loyal Service, is a Noble Bliss.



By all my Lawrels the Triumphant Stranger!
O Prince! for I consider thee no less;
What shall I, what Reward can I repay
To thy great Vertue?



Not a Thirst of Wealth,
Or Sacred Famine of Reward, or yet
A vain Ambition to commend my Deeds,
Made me presume to meet your Royal Eyes.
But since, Great Sir, you do esteem my Acts
Worthy a price, O hear the Prayers I make;

  14By Alha, by the Soul of Mahomet,

By the ne'r-cancell'd Bond of your strict Vow
In Heav'ns bright Eye, I do conjure thee spare
The Royal Captives Life.



Thou cou'd'st not ask
A thing but this, we cou'd not grant.




If with a Princes Life you needs must Seal
The Glory of your Conquest, rip these Veins,
And draw what Blood is left in expiation
For his dear Life Oh hold me not in doubt.



Did I but think I did the Slave a favour,
Spight of my Vow by Heav'n he shou'd not live;
But as 'tis that he fears far worse than Death,
I by one Act will wisely satisfie

This Strangers hopes, and glut my own Revenge,
Yes he shall live; remove the Fatal Pomp,
And lead him to our Palace; but know, Slave,
'Tis to this generous Prince thou owst thy Life.



For me his Pray'rs; ye Stars shed ruine on him,
Beg in my Cause? Precacious Fool, be silent.

Ha.! Villain! why's my Fate so long delay'd,

Is the Axe not sharp enough? or am I held
Here to be gaz'd at for a Mark, a Shew,
A Property to please the Idle Vulgar?
Strike Villain, or I'le spurn thee into Ashes.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, O I could burst with laughter,
To see these Apes, these mistaken Fools,
Who think they have been generous and kind,
While they are dully cruel; Tyrant, blush,
And know, wer't thou my Slave, thus would I glut
My self with vengeance on thee, so farewell,
And some Plague seize thee e're we meet again.




Thus to your Prayers we sacrifice our Justice,
And to your mighty Merits our Revenge.




Thus at your Royal Feet I cast my self,
And may those Pow'rs that rais'd and guard your Throne
Reward you for this greatest highest favour,
For which I vow you everlasting Service.



Hail, O great Soul of War, matchless in Might!



Fair Guardian Angel of the Scythian Throne.



Desire of Nations, Bulwark of this State.



Your Vassal, Princes, knows not to bear
These loads of Praise, unable to repay
Your noble kindness ev'n in Thanks.




You always knit fresh Lawrels to your Brow,
As we to you our Turkish Conquests owe.



'Tis true, I as a Warrior must adore
Thee in thy Vertues, thy Success admire,
Thy Actions love, reward thy Loyalty.
But something nearer calls thee to my Breast,
Stamps thy dear Image on my Soul, and tells me,
There is a mightier reason for my love
Than any I have yet alledged. O Nature,
My Eyes, my Heart, both challenge thee, my Son!



Father, if I may dare to use that Name,

Behold your wretched Son, your Darling once;
Now less than Stranger to you, banish'd, spoil'd
Of all my Honours, Father, Country, Name,
By their vile Arts, who with false Counsels arm'd
Against my Innocence your mildest Nature.
Here could I wish I were for ever fix'd,
Here breath my last, and leave my flying Soul.



Ye Powrs, my Son, the wrong'd Arsanes here!
Heav'n knows with what regret I rob my Throne of
So great a Pillar, my Kingdom of so good
A Prince; Heaven knows how I have mourn'd thy absence,
And curs'd my fond belief to busy Flatterers.
Credit me, Prince, I always thought thee injur'd.



O damn'd, deceitful, spightful Queen of Chance.



Hell, that I as a Basilisk cou'd dart
Poison from my Eyes, and blot his growing Greatness.




O Mandricard! my other Blessing, share
This mass of Joy that fills my heaving Breast.



And can the Stranger prove so near a Friend?
A Brother? Oh that Name! Now by my Arms,
If ever hate were grounded in my Breast,
You Valiant Deeds have dispossess'd it all.
Such Vertue ne'r can find an Enemy:


  16Now all the subtilest Plagues of Hell prevent thee.




O happy day! the whitest of my Life.



All who are present at this Solemn Meeting,
Behold your Prince, your wish'd for Prince Arsanes;

In whose just Cause you have so often mutinid,
And ev'n assail'd our Throne for his revenge▪
Receive, take, share with me his Royal Heart,
And with loud shouts of Joy accompany
Us to our Palace: Thus from their sad Urn
Thy Phoenix Vertues to new Glories burn.





Furies and Death, and all the Family
Of dark Infernal Pow'rs, can you see,
So tamely see me your Chief Instrument
Sworn to your Counsels, so lost, so successless?
For this?
Have I trod in all Paths that Hell-ward led?
Has Envy lost her Snakes, and Fraud forgot
Her Art? Is Malice satisfi'd so soon
To glare, and snarl, and not destroy? for this
Have Guilty Thoughts disturb'd my Nights, and Blood
Started my Soul in Fancies, broke my Sleeps.
Bled the Kings Son committed to my charge,
An Infant to no-purpose; is it nothing
That my Themyre supplies his Place, and Name?
But doth Arsanes still prevent us? Nay,
He's grown much higher by his fall; our Plots
To tread him down to Earth have mounted him
Above the Clouds. This must not on, again
Brain whet thy sweet Invention, while he climbs,
That he may fall, and set the World in Flames.






Give, give my Passion vent, or I shall burst;
Yes, yes, ye Pow'rs 'twas he, 'twas Adanaxus


  17That ruin'd me, my Father, Country, all.
'Tis the same charming Tongue moves Tamerlane,

That caught Nerina's Heart, just so he wept,
And knelt, and pray'd for Mercy at my Feet
For his own Life; as for my Father's, now
▪Tis the same Rival of Andronicus,

The same Triumpher o're the Graecian Slaves,

Turkey destroy'd. I and this faithless Man,
Crown'd with the Pleasures of a Smiling Field,
While we each others Story did relate
So tenderly, and with so much concern,
Promiscuously we gave our Hearts away,
Born on the Wings of interchang'd Discourse.
Then first we sigh'd and smil'd, and smil'd and sigh'd,
And look'd, and wonder'd, and discours'd again,
While the young God stood laughing on the Plain,
And wonder'd at our Sympathy of Souls.
Wou'd you believe it? This same Under-Lover,
This very Adanaxus, from the World,
From all Mankind, was chose to work my ruine.



Has he not sav'd your Captive Fathers Life?



Did he not make him so? O trifling Comfort!
How now, what Air, what Heav'n is this, what Sky,
What Country? whither am I led? alass,
What am I now become? Still, still my Eyes
Behold those various Images of Death,
And Fatal Ruine they in Prutia saw.
All pale, and shiv'ring there my Mother lies,
And there my Royal Brother bleeding groans;
All this and more this dear, this trayt'rous Man,
This smiling false Deceiver has perform'd.

To them Arsanes, Axalla.



See there, my Lord, and think on what your Friend
Advis'd you to.



I see my Heav'n near,
Am ravish'd with the light, wish, and admire,
Court and hope, yet dare not enter in
With such a clog of guilt incumber'd round,

  18I tremble at the Presence of my Judge.



If Conquest were a Crime it was the Gods,
Not yours; nor can she blame your hidden fate;
How full of Fears is Love?



Bless me my Stars,
Oh I'm betray'd, look, Zayda, see that Man,
Oh let us shun that swearing, perjur'd Man,
And never let me trust my Heart again.







What means this rude Assault?



Thus low I fall
To Beauties and to Mercies Shrine, while from
Their Oracle I learn my Life or Death,
Present Despair or Happiness.








Ha! am I grown so strange
So alter'd, neither known, nor understood?
Or rather are you so forgetful grown?
If so, let these recall your Memory,

The Tender Labour of your busie Love.
This witness of your Vows.



What shall I say, or do?
Ungrateful Man! but let me not recall
My Grief with Words, and stab my bleeding Wounds.
The Gods revenge my Injuries 





Your Guilty Penitent his Crime confess.



Some weak Evasion, or deluding Fable;
Oh what excuse, or wile, can you invent,
In recompence of all my Sufferings?



Her every word a bleeding Heart-string cuts,
Her every Tear a Vein; your Sufferings?
Oh cast on me the burden of 'em all;
For I can bear for my. Nerina's quiet
The Pains of Hell, with Heav'nly delight.



Ill shall I trust so known an Enemy.



An Enemy! what Horrors seize my Soul?
Oh clear, clear me of that wretched Name.
Who could have thought the Ridling Fates and meant

  19I shou'd have sin'd in bringing help to him:
Who gave me birth?



'Tis plain you have betray'd,
For empty Duty have betray'd your Love.
What Name could make Nerina to forget
Her Adanaxus thus ? ah cruel Man!



Forget you? had I drunk dull Lethe dry,
Its Waters had on me wrought small effect.

Nerina always was, is present here,
My Mind, my Soul is nothing but Nerina.



When losing her, I sought in dreadful Battle
My long wish'd End.



Excuses are but vain;
For by your Actions I your kindness weigh▪
Captivity, and shameful Bands are all
The mighty Gifts of your protested Vows.
Have I not heard you say? yes, I have heard,
To me the Tribute of the World was due,
How fit I was to be a Queen, how well
A Diadem wou'd with my Beauty Suit.



Oh my Nerina, if I then must stand
Guilty of all the malice of the Stars,
And what great Heav'n decreed, if it be nothing
That by my Pray'rs your Royal Father lives:
Yet sure I've lov'd, and for your love despis'd
All dangers, oppos'd Princes in your Cause;
Witness the Fury of Andronicus;


Nerina may remember too some Months
Imprisonment, harsh Chains, and hardest usage.



How quickly passes a Womans Rage that loves!

Now could I lay on Fortune all his Crimes,
Oh Adanaxus but I have been wrong'd.




Then Heav'n o'retake me with thy swiftest Justice;
While from your Mouth I here beg leave to die.



Oh how I melt to Tenderness and Love!
I cannot now dissemble with my Heart,
Nor curb my Passion with a seeming Fierceness.
Ah, my dear Lord 



Pronounce the Fatal Sentence.



While your Nerina lives you must not die,
Your Life is link'd with hers.



And can I hope
For Absolution?



If you've any Faith,
See, see it Seal'd, while I due Thanks repay
To Heav'n, which has restor'd my dearest Lord;
By this one Gift my Stars have recompenc'd me,
For Mother, Brother, Father, Country, all.



Such words as these mix'd with that Grace of Speech,
Wou'd charm the praying Hermite from his Cell,
And draw the rigid Cynick's Heart to Love.



But see, we are observ'd 






That Raven bodes ill Fate.



Ha! what so close
Billing? believe me Brother, 'tis too much.



Did not you mark his black disorder'd Looks?
Between his gnashing Teeth what silent Curses
He mutter'd forth, and threatned us with Frowns?



Though he were arm'd with Lightning we'd not fear.



Again then we must part 







Part now to meet again with greater Joys,
More Ravishing Delights; mean while we'l live
On hope.



And nourish Nature with the Thoughts
Of Joys to come; now drive thy Chariot, Time,
Incumbent on the Wings of all the Winds;
Nor cease thy flying Pages to maintain,
While I and my Nerina meet again


A Garden belonging to the Palace.
Mandricard alone.



Dull, Coward Heart, weak Flesh, and what is worse,
A Mind ambitious, yet without revenge.
Rise, Mandricard, let not thy Glory sink
In vain Complaints, and feeble Murmurings.

  21By this I shou'd have fill'd the World with Ruine,
And on its Fall my early Glory built:
By all my Fury I cou'd laugh to feel
The ruin'd Palace crush my burthen'd Limbs,
So that Arsanes might partake my Fate.

To him Odmar, Abdalla.



A happy Morning to my Gracious Lord!



Gods, that I live to see this hateful day!
No Serpent wing'd, or Dragon-breathing-flame
Cou'd raise my Soul to this unbounded rage,
As doth Arsanes Presence; O ye Furies
Prepare some sudden deadly Pest to blast him.



He's fir'd, and now to blow him into Flames 
Busie, my Lord, and full of rowling thoughts?



Dost thou not see Revenge hang on my Brow?



Divide the heavy burthen of your Breast,
And witness for me, Hell, there's not a Path
That leads to your Ambition, vast desires,
Your Odmar dares not tread to make you happy,
Though with the fatal hazard of his Life.



Speak but the word, and I'm a true born Son
Of Scythian breed, can strangle, poison, kill,
When e're your Interest shall arm my Fury.



Now these are Men according to my wish,

First swear to keep the Secret 




To blaspheme Mahomet, we swear.




My Tongue to speak the happy Deed my Mind
Long since has acted? were you bred in Blood,
And nurs'd with Milk of Tygers, have you each
Murder'd your Thousands?



All my Life has been
But a continual practice how to kill
Most silent, and most sure,



I from my Youth
Have conversant in Plots and Treasons been,
And artfully have study'd by the fall

  22Of Men above me, how to raise my self
To highest Place, and Power.




As fit as Hell cou d make, for my Design.
How long shall I, like some vile Shrub beneath
A spreading Oak, stand overshadow'd by





Does it hit there? this Steel
Has entred Brass, and cut through Coats of Mail,
And will serve still to lop or branch or so
From that tall Oak.



We'l take it by the Roots.







And drink his Blood.



And eat the Corse.



Like Tartars spoke; the Means?



By force of Arms.



By Stratagem, Fate-working Stratagem.
Then first the Captive Princes, to deceive
Must be our care, that she in spight of all
The tenderness she to Arsanes bears,
Be brought into your Arms a Glorious Prey.



That serves but for one half of my revenge,
That for my Love, but what for my Ambition?



You have no sooner thought, but I have acted;
Lyes are the steps by which black Treason climbs
Confederacy with Turkey, dark Designs
With Bajaset, and contracts with the Princess.
This Head, that Hand can fail in no Attempt.



Where you the Platform lay, I swear to build.



My Noble Lords, now you are Friends indeed,
I envy not Arsanes now with all
His crowd of supple Flatterers, that cringe
And buz about his new-reviving Greatness;
Let them speak Friendship which you act, and now
To our great Charges silent as the night,
And hush'd as our Designs, we go; Farewell.

'Tis sure, these Men with Trayterous Designs
To the destructive part may much avail.
But on what Ground to build my happy Love,

  23And how to gain the Fair Asteria's Heart,
Instruct me, Alha; O Prince, 'tis enough,
Enough thou see'st to gain her mortal hate,
That by thy cursed Hand her Brother fell;
What will she say? but oh what canst thou say
In thy excuse? when by thy Hellish Arts
She hears Arsanes basely, poorly Murder'd?
Yet, Mandricard, cheer up thy drooping Spirits,
She loves the Man that sought her Fathers ruine,
By Heav'n her Brothers Murd'rers less in fault.
'Tis fix'd; and on that hope I build my Bliss.





I wou'd not harbour such a jealous thought
Within my Breast; can Mandricard prove false
To his Ispatia, O unequal Gods!
Prevent this mischief; what disast'rous chance
Has summon'd me to this unhappy place
With Eyes and Ears, to see and hear his falshood,
To which my Soul cou'd never credit give?
But yet I'le smother it, and try if words,
With all the force of Tears, may turn his mind.
Health to my Noble Lord, Great Mandricard,

How fares your Highness?




The better that I hear thee ask me so;
But I am busie now, leave me, Ispatia.








I prithee leave me,
We shall have idle hours enough for Love.



How, my dear Lord? I little did expect
To meet you thus on this Triumphant Day.



Blame then the Fates, not me.




Disturb your Rest, my Lord? If so, behold
Your weak Physitian, do not scorn my help.



Thanks to your care, your Mandricard is whole.



My Care? O trifling word He shou'd have cast
Away that cool Endearment on the Crowd

  24That fawn'd, and welcom'd him at his return.
Are all my longing Wishes come to this?
And is it, is it thus, I must receive you,
Is this the Fruit of all my early Moans,
And Midnight-sighs, when shall I hope for Rest
If I must now despair?




A Wife are most unsufferable, now cou'd I 



Are not my broken Slumbers worth a Look?
Not one kind word for all my long Complaints?
One Smile wou'd be as much as I dare claim,
Though I cou'd wish for Millions.




I prithee to repose my self a while;
'Twill add a fresh, and stronger Life to Love.
Heav'ns! is she senseless?





Think me unwilling to partake his Grief
That I have always done; and when I heard
Of any Princes Fate, half dead with fear,
I listen'd with impatience for the Truth
Of all the Story of my Life or Death,
Lest Mandricard shou'd prove that hapless Prince.
But still those fears did joyfully deceive
My Heart, reviving with the welcome News,
The dear, dear hopes of seeing you again,
So Great, so Glorious!



Oh that my inward Pray'rs
Cou'd move with pity some relenting Pow'r
To raise a Mountain, or a Sea betwixt us;
And snatch me from the Daggers of her Tongue.



Believe me, Prince, you over-load my Soul
With Thoughts of what shou'd move such discontent,
Knowing the innocency of my Breast.



You'r not in fault, Ispatia, give me leave
To think on those who are.



If to be freed
From your Ispatia's company be Rest,
Then I'le not rob you of those pleasing Minutes;
Though I could willingly for Ages gaze

  25O're all that Field of awful Majesty,
And wonder how it ever open lay
To entertain so poor, so mean a Love.
I go, my Lord, and leave you to your Rest;
For which I would all Joy, all Bliss resign,
Your Rest which me delights, for it is mine.




So, is she gone at last, then farewell Wife,
And welcome Love, thou highest Bliss of Life.
While through my Rivals Heart I cut my way,
And with a Mistress my past dangers pay.
And this fond Wretch shall the sweet War begin,


I'le, while they groan in death, enjoy my Queen.





HE's gone, he's fled like Water shrunk away,
The more I strove to hold him fast; Curst Fate!
When every Matron sprightfully with fresh Joys,
And every Virgin full of harmless mirth,
Share the glad Pastimes of this happy day;
Happy to all but me, whom one wou'd think
Its Triumphs most concern'd, since Mandricard

Bears all its mighty weight of crowding Honours,
The haughty Conqueror Tartary adores.
Yet after all his far-blown Victories,
I blush to say this Great, this Glorious Man
Is vanquish'd, vanquish'd even by his Slave,
And wears the Fetters of a Captive Maid.
But sure I have misconstrued all he said;
He did but try me, my Eyes dazeled
When I beheld his Gestures, when I thought
I see him frown, I'le not believe my Thoughts,
Poor Womens Thoughts are wandring Iealousies;

  26We fancy, dream, and real things suppose.
Yet go thou silent trial of my Fate,

Her Characters I've here exactly drawn,
And every Letter subtilly have copy'd,
Which might I think deceive Arsanes self,
Which he might see, and not perceive the Cheat.
But oh why do I thus delay my Wishes!
Within there, Hamzeh, trusty Slave, appear.




Most Honour'd Princess, what's your great Command?



Provide this Letter carefully be sent,
As from Asteria, to your Royal Lord,
Be gone; and wing to Mandricard your way,
Each minute seems an hour, each hour a day.







Make me believe as soon the Stars are faln.



Yet, Sir, with any but a Fathers Eyes
Black discontent is seen to hover o're
His darken'd Brow, his wild unstable Looks
May render him suspitious.




Thou foul Fomenter of suggested Lies,
And politick Deceit, think not you, Slaves,
We'r ignorant from whom this Message comes.



See what your Plotting comes to.





This Tongue was never known to fill your Ears
With painted fraud, and poisonous deceit,
My Counsels hitherto ev'n you have thought
Loyal and wise, and grave as Cicero's,
And have preserv'd your Happiness as much
As his did Romes yet, Sir, your Slave
Confesses all his Projects had been vain,
Had not your Vertue perfected those Actions,
Of which we but the bare Idea shew'd.



What's all this to Arsanes?







  27And do not flatter, nor thy self, nor me,
Thy Words fly wide from all thy former Sense;
Thou nam'dst Arsanes, tedious Slave, proceed.



Now witness for me all ye Pow'rs Divine,
And thou that know'st the Secrets of my Heart,
Punish me strangely, Alha; if I speak
Ought that I fear'd to speak before the Altar,
Or swear it on the Alcoran for truth.



He's at his Pray'rs now, sure his Conscience bites him,
Heav'n, he'l confess, we're ruin'd.





Give me but patience, Gods, to hear him out.



Though loath, I must unfold the burning Secret,
Both for my Conscience, and my Country's sake;
The proud Arsanes, jealous of the Love
You show deservedly to Mandricard,

Bears mighty Projects in his lab'ring Brain,
Envy, Revenge, with all that nat'ral hate
He ows his Brother, stir him up against
The Laws of Man, and Nature; his Ambition
Flies Sir no lower a pitch, than at your Crown.



Ha! I begin to find him, he talks Sense!



Now, Villain, give me Proof, substantial Reason.
For what the poison of thy Gall has vented,
Or else by Heav'n thou dy'st.



Ha! goes it so;
Villain, and Death! Plague of your Stratagems.



Scars will remain after their Wounds are whole;
The highest Palaces stand most to view,
And are most look'd at, when their Lustre fades.

Arsanes cannot brook his late disgrace,
And thou forgiven, blushes with disdain
That he was banish'd; scarce an hour ago
The Valiant Mandricard in Pious Suit
Sought Reconcilement with his raging Brother.



This does not sound like truth, it has no face
Of Probability.




When in a lone
And vacant place we found your Royal Son.
But oh how chang'd from what he fain wou'd seem,

  28Must'ring up such a train of impious words,
And bitter curses; Heav'n, we cou'd scarce believe
It had been he; but strait approaching nigher,
We over-heard him in a murmuring Tone
Say thus; The House of Ottoman shall soon regain
Its Empire by that Arm it newly fell;
Hearing all this, the pious Mandricard

Came near, saluted low the proud Arsanes;

He frown'd, and lifted high his haughty Head,
Then flung away, and left us in amazement.



'Twas done as to his well-known Enemies,
And, Traytor, was it not that Loyal Son,
That brave Arsanes? (whom by Heav'n I'm proud
That he should call me Father) was't not he,
Who spight of all the base indignities,
Under whose load he sunk to banishment,
Came with new Strength so wonderfully fierce?
So unexpected was all kind of Succour,
Not one among our gazing Troops,
Scarce I my self, but thought him Mahomet.




Too well, dread Prince, he fought, if all were known,
He has already half eclips'd your Fame,
Witness all Tartary, which bowing low,
Kisses the very Ground on which he treads.
Do not you hear Arsanes mighty Name
Eccho'd through every Street, long live Arsanes,

A Thousand Voices ev'n in your Court reply,
While Tamerlane must stand neglected by,
And wait upon the Triumphs of his Son.



By Hell thou art the very Soul of lying.



Nay more I fear, it is no false report,
The specious Acts he wrought in your defence,
Cut but his way into your Peoples Hearts,
And a wide Path to his Ambition made.
This I may safely swear, my Lord, he's false.



The same swear I.



You both are Villains,
False, treacherous, perjur'd, damn'd Villains,
Whose spotted Souls regard not Innocence,
Nor Conscience trembles, when you dare accuse it.

  29And now to let you know how little Faith
Your seeming Counsels fix upon my Soul,
Call here the Prince Arsanes spight of yours
And Mandricards more hateful Policies,
I'le Crown his Vertue with Rewards so large,
Shall raise your envy high, as is his Fate.


Come to my Arms my best, my Loyal Son,
Let me embrace thee all, my long-wish'd Joys
At last are come; rise my better self:
See there the Authors of thy former woes,
See them, that wou'd renew thy Miseries;
Villain, is this a Face shews discontent,
What wild unstable looks are here, what frown,
What gesture that may render him suspected?



I always thought those Men my Enemies;
Yet I confess, Great Sir, I have deserv'd
All that their envy or your juster wrath
Have made me suffer: For whom e're he be
So just a Prince thinks false, or but suspects,
By Heav'n he's false; nay then 'tis a Crime,
A Crime unpardonable in innocence
To say she's wrong'd.



He has a Tongue as smooth

As yours, pray Heav'n it may but prove as fatal.



You false, believe me; nor thy Conqueror
Your injur'd Vertue claims a Recompence
So large, with guilty thoughts I blushing hear,
That now to share that Empire you have sav'd,
With that your Arms have won, will be a light,
An empty Offering to your vast deserts;
Men stile us Scythians barbarous and wild,
But I appeal to the Immortal Pow'rs,
If ever Rome in all her Pomp cou'd show
An Act like what Arsanes has perform'd.
An Act so good, Athens wou'd blush to hear,
As wanting fit example to compare.
An Act to brave the Heroes from their Orbs,

  30The famous Senate of unconquer'd Minds,
Start back, and think their Glory faintly won,
So much Arsanes has surpass'd their Deeds.
An Act 



Of which I thought the insolence
Might rather raise your Anger, than your Love,
To see an Exil'd Slave, who durst return
Uncall'd to share the Trophies of your Fame.
Yet let me plead but this in my defence,
My Duty to so just a Father, and
So good a Prince, work'd high my ravish'd Soul,
Nor could my Blood be chill'd with outward fear,
Or inward grief, but boyling in my Veins,
As one shou'd say 'twas part of Tamerlanes,

Stir'd me to go where Fame and Duty call'd.



Ruin'd as handsomely as Hell cou'd wish us.



Now in the Face of thy worst Enemies
Receive the highest Honours we can give;
Let loose thy vast Ambition, let it fly
At Riches, Honour, Love, or once at all.
Your Word shall guide our Heart, your Wishes bind
Our Will; your Pray'rs command what e're they crave,
Ask, and believe it granted e're you speak.



Now cou'd I cut thy Throat instead of his.




Lawrels, and Crowns are Tamerlanes alone,
And the Rich Entrails of the Golden Earth
Serve but to fill the Lustre of his Name.
It is, Great Sir, a light Request I make,
And yet in my esteem worth Worlds, so great
A Prize the fair Asteria seems to me,
That were I seated on the Scythian Throne,
With swarms of Tributary Kings about me,
And subject Princes waiting my Commands,
By all my wishes I shou'd scarce enjoy
One moments rest, without the beauteous Bride.



Ye Gods, that ever such antipathy
Shou'd be united; Oh cou'd I but taste
The sleepy Waters of dull Lethe's Lake,
That I might now forget those hateful words.
I tell thee, Prince, thy fond Request is vain,

  31Which nor consists with Duty, nor with Honour.
She is thy Enemy, Arsanes, cease
To think of her.



Take Heart, Abdalla, see,
The Prince is Planet-struck, and Tamerlane





Duty bids me not
Dispute your dread Commands, yet I must blame
The coldness of my Stars, and too hard Fate.



It is not fancy sure disturbs my mind,
And leads my wav'ring thoughts to jealousie;
Yet I cou'd shun thee now, Arsanes, here
Thy dark Request sticks deep: Farewell, and when
You make your next, if not as a Son,
Ask what is fitting for a Friend.





As Hell and we cou'd wish.



Now is our time,
To shed out all our Poison on his Soul,
Which Heav'n nor Arsanes may controul.




Now from a fairest Heav'n of surest hope
Am I thus faln? O sudden turn of Fortune!
Quite ruin'd e're I scarce perceiv'd a Change.
Thus stands some mighty Tower, the Bulwark of
A Nation, shooting up her lofty Head
Above the Clouds, gaz'd and wonder'd at,
But in a moment see to Ashes turn'd
Its tot'ring pride on some base Traytors Guilt,
And scarce the marks of all its Glory left.
Thus But oh the Star that guilds my days.
She comes; and now my fading sorrows pass,
Like showry Clouds before the Glorious Sun.





My dearest Lord, so may you find all Joys
My Heart can wish you, as you shall unfold
The Mystick Secret of that sad Complaint
Just now you sent to Heav'n.



Most impious were I

  32Could I while I possess those numerous Worlds
Of fullest pleasures hanging o're your Brow,
Those endless Comforts basking in your Eyes,
And all the Charms which wait upon your Smile,
Ungratefully and foolishly complain.
Pard'n me ye Pow'rs, if I have offended,
For to Arsanes you are wond'rous kind,
Most bountiful, who in the fair Nerina

All I can ask, all I can wish, have giv'n.



Yes, Adanaxus, we are free to love,
And I without a crime can give a Heart,
With Honour, Duty, and a Fathers Will.



What is't I hear? what sudden happiness
Raps my glad Soul?



'Tis true, as strange.




O Harmony! but how the wond'rous Change
Was wrought, dulls all my busie thoughts to guess.



Then first I knelt, and wept, and kiss'd his Feet,
And told how I had been his Darling from
My very Infancy, and what Delights
My Childish Sports afforded him how dear
He priz'd my Mother, made him sensible
Of his past Joys with her, and then conjur'd him
By her blest Ashes, and Eternal Name,
To have compassion on me.




Wou'd charm the rav'ning Wolf with hunger pinch'd,
With a strange softness to forego his Prey,
And make him tender as the panting Lamb.



But yet the joyful Grant he had not seal'd,
When once again I did embrace his Knees,
And call'd to his remembrance how he liv'd
By your kind intercession, though he scorns
The Life you gave; yet frankly he confess'd
It was a Noble pity in a Mind
So great as yours.



Oh the Angelick Sound!
Cou'd yet the moving Argument be vain?



It was, my Lord, till turning to a Theme

  33Of more concern, I told him I lov'd,
How I was lov'd, with what a generous Flame
You answered my Affections, how by you
I was protected from the violence
Of rash Andronicus; and then he smil'd
And said 'twas nobly done, and as a Lover.



And yet cou'd he deny? Oh what remain'd,
What cou'd you farther urge?




Your constant Vertue, and unviolate Faith,
How weighing not your wrongs then thick upon you,
Banish'd by your great Fathers jealous rage,
Your Loyal Vertue still unshook, unconquer'd,
Brought Kingdoms to his Throne, and Lawrels to his Head.
This he was strangely taken with, and lost
Much of his fury; wondred, and grew kind,
And swore he cou'd not be a Foe to Vertue
Of so sublime a Nature, then he rose,
And gave a soft Command, and charg'd me love you,
Not as a Prince, not as the Tyrants Son,
But something more than Man, and nearer to the Gods.



Thus kneel kind Angels at the Feet of Heav'n,
When ready to destroy the impious World,
They with soft Pray'rs recall the bolted Thunder,
And ev'n o're-take the swiftest Lightnings Course.
Blest that I am in thy most charming, sweet,
Prevailing Oratory; thus cou'd we move
But Tamerlanes far more obdurate Heart,
Then were we blest.



Then were we blest indeed.




O dismal Chance, O fatal Destiny!



What means this dreadful Voice, not Croaking Ravens,
With Midnight-shreiks, e're thus disturb'd my Soul.







Say, what can his ill-tim'd Fate,
Malicious Chance, and inauspicious Stars,
Do to advance his full-blown Spring of Sorrow?



Unheard-of Cruelty! the Faithless Tyrant,
Incens'd by your great Fathers haughty Rage,
Who though in Chains, with his great Spirit frights
The Jealous King, and with a Princely scorn
Vexes his raging Soul; which to Revenge,
Fierce Tamerlane (O cruel Artifice!)
Lock'd in an Iron Cage his Rival Slave,
While he in barbarous Triumph mounted on
His Shoulders to his Chariot.







O Cruelty! Oh more than Hellish Torment!



Impatient of his wrongs, the Royal Captive,
As he through Samarcanda's Streets was led
A publick Trophy in his moving Prison,
Against the massy Bars with rage he dash'd
His Royal Head, while from the fatal Wound
Gush'd out that Blood, which long the greatest Life
The World cou'd ever proudly boast preserv'd,
Who in a Storm of 



O I faint, I faint,
To hear you out will send my Soul away,
E're I can to his Fate my Duty pay.
Farewell, my Lord.



O my dearest Life,
Let me, let me support thy fainting Beauties.



O Adanaxus, now we'r lost again.



Unhappy Fate! thus ever in our Joys
A sudden Thunderbolt divides us.





What shall I do? shall I not go? not now?
When thus the true Idea of that Face
Calls my glad Soul, which we adore in Angels?
(Great Mandricard, I'le sing thee in my Lap)

I come, I come, Asteria, Mercury,

Lend me thy winged Buskins, that in thought
I may in swiftness penetrate the Air.
O welcome, welcome be thou to my Soul,
I kiss thee for her sake, whose Ivory Hands

  35Have deep engrav'd these Golden Characters.

To him Ispatia unseen.


So now, Ispatia, thou hast view'd his Heart,
And seen it flaming with another Dart;
Then to compleat the Sum of all my Pains,
Death is the only Torment that remains.
Exit.



To thee, sweet Saint, I come, I fly to thee.
But what ill Fates have intercepted me?



Arsanes here? wou'd Hell it were his Ghost,
Now by my Arms a far more welcome sight.
Yet now for my defence a well-forg'd Lie,
With a false shew of Penitential Kindness,
Will be most exquisite.





What wou'd this Woman?








Offended with the Name, then change the Art:
For all I yet can see in thee is Woman,
Forc'd Tears, feign'd Flatteries, and deep Dissembling,
These seldom sure possess a Manly Breast.



If ought I've done, can be by what I'le do 



There's death in thy deceitful Eyes and Tongue.



Deceit, and Death, what mean those Mystick words,
Which strike like double Daggers to my Heart?



Art thou not false?



Destructive Fame, thy worst
Blow all thy lying Trumpets through the World,
And to all Ears pronounce me false, yet not
The blasting Breath of all thy hundred Mouths
Can on my injur'd Vertue cast a blot.



The Careful Pilot riding on the Main,
May tack about, and shun the highest Rocks;
But those he fears which skulk beneath the Waves,
The unseen Instruments of grinning Death.
You work my ruine, not with Hand, but Heart,
The lurking Treasure of black Designs.



Had I by any other Man been drawn
In such a Character, so much unlike,

  36So inconsistent with a Princely Mind,
That Man had with his final ruine brought
Swift vengeance on himself for what he said;
By Heav'n! had he but thought it, he had dy'd:
With you quite otherwise I beg my peace,
Nature commands you seal my happiness.



Ha! are the Wounds I bear so light?




This Tongue, this Heart, and Hand are innocent.



Ask'st thou what Wounds? So did fell Atreus ask
His fainting brother, drunk with humane Blood,
And heavy with the weight of his own Bowels
Set to him as a Banquet; what he ail'd.
I tell thee Brother, 'twas wretched thing,
An exil'd Slave, and Heir to Tamerlane.




Is that not blotted out? I'le hear no more;
Since you my Friendship, and my love contemn,
I scorn all Treaties of a further Peace.
Come on, Revenge; like Wolves, and spotted Tygers
We'l live together in perpetual strife,
And when we meet it must be always War.
Of which be this the Sacred, binding Gage.
Throw him the Letter and Exit.



'Twas boldly spoke, and much unlike himself,
He ne'r profess'd himself my Foe till now.





Saw you not Mandricard, my Lord?




Behold this witness of his treacherous hate.

Dazle my Eyes? or is it from Asteria?

What sudden madness seizes my lost Senses?
And makes me think what is impossible?
'Tis all delusion Ha from my Nerina!

Directed too to Mandricard? Oh Heav'n!
At her Apartment.



Oh the Monster Woman!



'Tis sure some feign'd device!



Her own false Hand,

  37Her Hand that writes her Hearts unconstant Love.



How oft have I such tender Characters,
Of the same size and make, lock'd in my Breast,
And kiss'd and worship'd 'em like little Idols.
They'r like what though they are? so polish'd Glass
Resembles Chrystal mimically Fair,
And is not so.



But Women are most Women.
When they are truly Hypocrites.



But my Nerina, glory of her Sex,
How have I always thought her more than Woman!
In whom th' Almighty Painter had exprest
The Fairest Pattern of exactest Angels,
Her Soul he drew the very Lively Image
Of some bless'd Saint, or ever-happy Martyr;
But oh she of that Rank of Angels Proves,
Whose due Commission's only to destroy,
Arm'd with fierce Judgments of the Wrath Divine.



Then shun those Judgments which you see so nigh,
So plain, so manifest, and now shou'd you 



I cannot, and I pray thee do not curse her,
'Tis punishment enough sh'as giv'n her self
To one that is unconstant as her self,
And I with pity leave her to her choice.



O the glad Sound! and will you quit this fondness,
And follow Honour, and hunt after Fame?



No, my Axalla, think not I can see
Her Beauties in my presence ravish'd from me,
And all the Sacred Store prophanely rifl'd.



Then work your just Revenge, on him, on her,
On all 



Be hush'd, and dare not name Revenge;
The Name of Brother aws my rising Fury,
And for Nerina, she is yet so dear,
I'le suffer all things for her, quit my Honours,
My hopes of Scepters, and my right to Crowns,
Nay her dear self for her more certain ease.







Like Love undone by Fate,
Oh cou'd I tell where blear-ey'd Sorrow dwells,

  38Where bellowing out her Soul in discontent,
The empty Walls reverberate her woe.
To some such place, Axalla, let us fly;
There will I on some cold hard Stone lay down
My mournful Head, while from my furrow'd Cheeks
My frequent Tears promiscuously fall;
One day I will bewail my own misfortunes,
Another will I kindly dedicate
To the lov'd Memory of Nerina's Father.
Whole Months and Years in tedious sorrow pass,
For my Nerina, that false, much-lov'd Maid,
Complain of all my angry Foes above,
With mournful sighs the hollow Ecchoes move,
And the last Groans of a departing Love.
To Heav'n these only Vows, these Pray'rs I'le make,

Nerina may her fatal Choice forsake,
And from her bosom cast the lurking Snake.




Enter Tamerlane, Odmar, Abdalla, with other Lords and Attendants.


'TIs time to look about me, I have slept
Too long, lull'd into visionary Dreams
Of fleeting pleasures, which I waking, find
Most dangerous, and for a seeming Son
My Bosom has receiv'd the worst of Foes.

Arsines fled? and Conference with Turkey?

O Viper, Parricide, but say, my Friends.
What timely Fortune has his Crimes reveal'd.



Ev'n that which ruines all Conspiracies,
A squeamish Conscience, and a light Reward.
The Ministers he hir'd to his Designs

  39Stand Witnesses against him.








Now act the Villains home, now is your time.




Friends to our Crown, for Friends you seem to be,
Whose care has been employ'd to serve our State
From those apparent Dangers threatned it.
We charge you in our Holy Prophets Name
Lay forth the Traytors Heart before our Eyes.



Swear on the Alcoran your Accusations
Are just and true Oh the unhappy Prince.



S'heart, well play'd Fox, he seems to hear with grief
What he suborns false Witnesses to swear.




By all the Orders of Tartarian Pow'rs
Bound by Allegiance to our Sovereign,
We here are present to accuse and swear

Arsanes guilty of these Articles:
No more than which himself did testifie,
And gave us in Commission to perform.
First that this Prince holds private Conference
With the surviving Race of Bajaset.

That with the fair Asteria's Love enflam'd,
He seeks his Rival Brothers hated Life;
Then with Axalla that he doth combine,
To Poison Tamerlane our Royal Master,
And with Asteria to usurp his Throne.



Treach'ry unheard beyond the Thought of Man!
But tell me, Friend, where bides the Traytor?









n a lone Wood, my Lord,
After a long Complaint against the Prince▪
His Royal Brother; full of envious hate
And proud disdain; after he had rehears'd
All his pretended wrongs in Banishment
Receiv'd; blushing Scarlet deep with Shame,
He rose to an Arraignment of the State,
And our establish'd Laws 
Then impiously against his Father rag'd,
And swore Revenge.




Comes on to something.




These are practis'd Villains.



Himself he said was streight for Prusia bound,
Where the young Rebel Princes wait his coming.



Perdition on the Viper! how he bites!
Could e're such baseness spring from Tamerlane.

Is this his Piety so far renown'd?
That Loyalty which seem'd inviolable?
Those Oaths that cou'd have forc'd all Heav'n believe him?
Is this his scorn of Honours and Rewards?
And did he starve his hungry Appetite,
That with a stronger Fury he might run
Wolf-like upon our Life and Diadem?
And gaping, swallow all the Golden Prey.
Fly, fly, Arsanes, breath on what Soil thou wilt
Thy hated Life, though every Sea shou'd joyn
In one vast Ocean, their assistant Floods
To part us ever, though thy adverse Feet
In unknown Tracks kick at our upper Earth,
Though o're the Starry Pole thou soaring fly'st
Above old Winter, and deep Beds of Snow,
Our painted Vengeance shall pursue thy Soul,
And spy thee in thy darkest Caverns hid,
Pierce through thy Mansion with our sharp Revenge,
Or send our Curses, where we cannot reach.




See there, Arsanes, how the rowling Waves
Come on amain, and dash thee on the Rock.



Methinks we two now like the Sea-born Giants,
Great Otus, and tall Ephaltes stand,
And grow out all their Acres in a moment.



Our Fortunes Friend in this vast Enterprise
Have made us free to give the Scythian Throne
To whom we please; Come, Mandricard, and claim
Thy vast Possessions, ask us Heav'n next,
And we'l do more with these two Fertile Brains,
Then e're Briareus with his hundred Hands.




Who is discover'd lying on a Couch, a Cupid in Soft Musick descends
over her and Sings.
Song.

HOw pleasant Vertue are thy Slumbers,
Sound thy Sleeps, and sweet thy Dreams,
While thee no Fear, no Guilt incumbers,
Danger frights, or Thought condemns?

2.Thou naked with resistless Armour
Dost thy self revenge, and shield,
Thou silent art so sweet a Charmer,
To thy Reasons all must yield.

3.On thy fair Brow sits smiling Honour,
Iustice waits thy awful Voice,
Thou Heir to Blessings art, thou Owner
Of Rich Fortunes Richest Ioys.

4.Thou, what is Heav'ns greatest Blessing,
Art the Darling Child of Love,
Though Heav'n yet hinder from possessing,
It will all thy Pains remove.




Asteria awakes in great disorder.


What Mystick Objects entertain my Soul,
And hold me in amazement? how confus'd
Are all my Thoughts, kind Joys with Troubles mixt,
Hope with dread Fear, disorder'd mass of Fancy!
The End seem'd good, but oh that End is vain,
As fleeting as its Shade, as womanish
And fond a Dream, as to my weary'd Eyes
Thought cou'd suggest, or Mimick Fancy play.





So on fair Paphos Isle the wanton Queen
Her Shelly Chariot drawn with sporting Doves,
Had lightly enter'd in a smiling Calm,
Ready to cruise upon her Parent Seas,
When from a-far the Warlike God espy'd her,
And brought her back to more substantial Pleasures.



What means this fatal Comet to our House,
Near what new birth of mischief does he shine?



At length my Pray'rs are heard, my Vows have reach'd
The Deity, to which they were address'd.
Accept, O Fairest Pow'r, from a Prince,
The Faithful Sacrifice of Humblest Thanks,
For all the Blessings you have pour'd upon him.



What Blessings, or what Prince? yet shou'd there be
Any my tenderness has gratifi'd,
He's chose an ill Ambassador I'm sure
To pay his just Acknowledgments, which needs
Must taste ungrateful from the Man I hate.



Heav'n, how discordant are her Hand and Tongue!
Think not, Asteria, Mandricard cou'd trust
To any Second his most Bosom Secret,
I the Receiver-kneel to pay the Debt.



If you from me a Kindness did receive,
I'm sure 'twas small, and may be paid with ease.



How unconcern'd she speaks, and looks disdain!
Yes, Madam, Heart for Heart is easie change;
Flames will meet Flames, and Fires joyn with Fires,
Ravage through all, and leave no middle space.



Rav'st thou, or do my Ears drink in a Sound
As real, as 'tis monstrous? Oh my Stars,
Protect me, and remove the hateful Object.



Yet Princess, your fair Hand has otherwise
Decipher'd me the Glorious Mandricard 








Your Hand, which on the happy Paper prest
The Praises of your much lov'd Mandricard.




Curst be that Hand that writes thee ought but Fiend,

  43Curst be that Tongue that speaks thee ought but Monster.



Unfold, Great Alha, this Mysterious Secret!
Come, you dissemble, and a modest shame
Defers our Joys.



I'de clasp a Serpent sooner;
Had my base Hand e're thus bely'd my Heart,
As an infectious Limb I'de tear it from
My tainted Body, for the Wild Beasts, or Flames.



You need not now, Asteria, use such Language,
There are no Oaths, no Promises, no Vows
To be kept now: Sure Death has swallow'd all,
And cold Arsanes in their ruine lies.



Yes, I will keep 'em still to punish thee,
My Faith shall be the Scourge of my Revenge,
My Constancy shall keep thee on a Rack
Of Everlasting Torments, and my Oaths
Shall one by one strike thee with mad despair;
Thou art my Slave, and thou shalt live like one.
Thinkest thou, fond Fomenter of my Grief,
I do not hate that Man to Death, nay Hell,
That caus'd Arsanes Ruine? Proud Prince, I do;
Remember, Sir, my Brothers, Fathers Wrongs,
And blush to ask a Grace of me; to love?
No not to look, or visit me with Monsters.



You treat me, Fair one, so severe a way,
As forces me to plead in my defence.
If in the War your Brother fell, not I,
But Fortune guiding my far-wandring Steel,
Cut off the forward Youth 
For your Great Fathers, and Arsanes Wrongs,
I'm innocent as harmless Infants are.



You innocent! so's Hell; so is your Train
Of Fellow-Villains, Infernal Ministers,
Are they not Prince?



What e're you'l have 'em be
They are, they must; and which of 'em but dares
Offer to plead his Innocence, he dies.



Fine Flatterer! thus did that supple Tongue
Sooth Tamerlane to hate the best of Princes:
Nor have you ended there, but cherish still

  44Your Breast with thinking with what subtle Art
You spread your Snares to catch the Prey design'd,
And glory in the Murderous Success.



How sweet her Looks, yet dreadful to approach!
Madam, a Prince repentant begs your Pardon,
And as the Fury of the Scythian Sword
Is now asswag'd, untaught to hurt or kill,
So let your Anger be allay'd with mildness;
So will the World in peaceful Triumph sit,
And smilling, pall the envious Fates designs.
To them Ispatia.

Ha! whence that Hellish Fury like her self
Has brought her here? Curse on the twining Serpent!
Shall I ne'r shake her off! by Heav'n it comes!
A swift Contrivance whets my sudden Thought,
Which shall divide us ever, far as Heav'n,
Or far as Hell their Center hold from Earth.




Art thou the watry Sourse from whence this Stream,
These daily gushings of my Mourning Eyes
Burst forth, and almost drown my fainting Heart?
Are those the Comets, whose dire Influence
Sheds Ruine on me; is there in that Voice
So sweet an Harmony, so full of Charms,
It can bewitch the Sense of Mandricard?




Yes, Mandricard has learnt to stoop to me,
And at my Feet his daily Homage pay,
Which thus I scorn, and spurn ev'n into Wind.



Unsufferable Creature, does she scorn him?
Oh more, far more than this, I cou'd endure
Her Love; contemn him? nay that is not all,
She Rivals me, and yet professes scorn;
Is't not enough you have ensnar'd his Love?
Caught with a Golden Bait his yielding Heart?
But you must on his Honour raise contempt,
And make him cheap Oh Torture, Oh my Soul!



Know then, Ispatia, if you are resolv'd
To sound my Heart, I frankly must confess
I hate him, hate my Brothers Murderer

  45To death, and pray the Gods he may so love,
So burn with Passion, till I pity him,
Which Furies first shall do unto the Damn'd.
Nay do not rage, but thank me that I hate him,
For had I lov'd, Ispatia, had I lov'd,
You might have found him lock'd within my Arms,
Not prostrate at my Feet, nor had you e're
Have been admitted to reprove me for it,
As now you do.



'Tis like I shou'd not, Captive,
Nor am I now perhaps, by your good leave;
Yet I'le maintain the happiness I've sought,
Stay here and pierce through either Heart, as far
As Sharp ey'd Jealousie can look.




With this one Promise then my Happiness,
To hold him ever after from my sight.
But see, he comes 




A Priest! what Omens now
Swell big that holy Harbinger of Fate?



This holy Man, Ispatia, as of old
He joyn'd our Hands before the smiling Gods,
So wou'd he now our Hearts; one Kiss upon
The Sacred Alcoran, and our Love is Seal'd.







O thrice happy Hour!



What sudden Ague seizes my chill'd Limbs?
How my Eyes dazle, and my Senses swim!
What have we done, my Lord?




'Tis but a Fit, a Qualm, a certain Scout,
Or flying Messenger from Deaths Tribunal,
To summon thee to Everlasting Rest.



What means my Lord?



Oh 'tis a Sovereign Balm,
A Cure to all Distempers to be plain,
The Book was poison'd, and thou hast drunk the Venom.



O Traytor! yet e're I expire, hear me.







Not long ago, my Lord, you did receive

  46A Letter from that Princess.








The Pow'r of Penitence I here implore
Your Pardon.



What means the Fury?




You took, embrac'd it, lock'd within your Bosom
The outward Manuscript, within your Heart
The sweet Contents.



Which do enrich my Soul!



But now, ungrateful Man, be't spoke at last.
To fright thy Lawless Passion be it spoke;
I, not Asteria, wrote those Fatal Words
Which cause my Death.



Then wou'd to Mahomet

They may prove thy Damnation too.







Well, Traytor, thou hast had thy Fatal Wish,
As it is sure I die; but know base Poisoner,
Thy wily Treasons have not set thee free,
Nor will Ispatia leave thee even in Death,
I'le fright thee in thy Dreams, I'le haunt thee waking,
I'le scourge thy Conscience with Whips of Remorse.
The Sting of Serpents shall be nothing to it.
Yes, I will have Revenge, I will; I'le strike
Thee mad with terror, when thou dar'st approach
My Rivals Beauties; Clasp her, and I'le glide
All Cold between, and dash the fancy'd Joy.
O Alha, Mahomet, O Courteous Heav'n,
Give me but Power as here I yield my Soul
Up to your Mercy in Deaths cruel Pangs.




Remove the hated Body from my sight.



And are there Pow'rs in Heav'n, and can they see
This Sacrilegious Mischief go unpunish'd?



What ever Deities in Heav'n there are,
They prove the Deed, and smile upon the Doer.
And thus by giving thee reward it; now Priest.




Look down, O Mahomet, from Heav'n, behold

  47My hard distressed Fortune; save, oh save
A Virgins Chastity, unsoil'd, unstain'd,
And right with Miracles thy Pow'r contemn'd.




This way, this way the mournful Ecchoe calls.
Oh the bold Traytors, Sacrilegious Villains.

They run, they fly; now injur'd Vertue, seek

Thy safe Retreat, while I pursue the Villains.




Who e're you be just Mahomet reward you.




Arsanes sitting melancholly on a Green Bank, while his  sings this
SONG.


BEhold ye Sylvans that frequent
This silent, sighing, mourning Grove;
Behold the Fountains, Birds lament,
Vnhappy Damons fatal Love.

Chloris to him her Heart denies,
For which the gentle Shepherd dies.

Ch. Chloris to him &c.



Bright Chloris fairest of her kind,
That charm'd with Smiles the yielding Swain,
False Chloris falser than the Wind,
That turns his Fairy Ioys to Pain.
Her Vows, her Oaths which tir'd Heav'n,
Were for so many Curses giv'n.

Ch. Her Vows, her Oaths &c.



Then fill with hollow Sighs the Day,
With Cypress strow the mourning Green;
Let nothing fresh, let nothing gay
O're all the fading Plain be seen;

•or see the Swain lies bleeding there,
Wounded by Love, dead with Despair.

Ch. For see the Swain &c.




Thus in a Chaos of cold discontent
I pass the weary Minutes, breathing forth
My daily Passions from my wasted Spirits;
Unhappy, wretched Prince, how Destiny
Allots unjust misfortunes to thy Youth!
Which to others is a flowing Spring of good,
To thee's a frosty Winter of cold Sorrow.
Oh my Nerina! how thy doubtful Faith
Strikes deep my Heart; nor can I think thee false
To thy false Hand against thy Vertue plead.
So, thus I may gaze here till I am blind,

But never here shall satisfaction find.








In just Obedience to your great Commands
I went to the Apartment of Asteria;

Where first I heard what seiz'd my Soul with horror,
And num'd my Senses with a Marble Fear;
I heard, Arsanes, your Nerina shrieking,
With all the Struglings of a Ravish'd Maid.
When from her Chamber rush'd in furious hast
The Villain Mandricard, and the prophaner
Villain a Priest, who grasp'd the Sacred Store.
Rais'd by the Pow'r of so just an Anger,
Your Old Mans Blood glow'd with a Youthful Heat,
While with our Swords I and the Faithful Zanches

Pursu'd the Traytors, forc'd 'em quit their Treasure,
And made 'em thankful to their Stars for Life.



O Golden Minute! Thanks O Gracious Heav'n!
And thou its kindest happiest Instrument.



What Past before her fair Hand will unfold,
This Letter to your Hand she charg'd me bring.



They'r welcome on what ever Errand sent,

Axalla, see the wond'rous mighty Proof

Of her wrong'd Innocence, she writes, not she,
But fond Ispatia, as dying she confess'd,
Was Author of those Lines which drove us hither
In so much Fury, and so much Despair.



'Tis as Axalla's Heart cou'd wish it shou'd be.



How cou'd I trust these Characters which are
Unlike, as Faith and Falshood, Love and Hate,
Hope and Despair; and shou'd I then have curst,
Curst her sweet Vertue for anothers Crime?
Such words wou'd sure have blasted me, such words
Had gave my Heart the lie, had swoln my Tongue
With its own Venome, nay had press'd and grip'd
My thoughtful Sense with wrecks of dire remorse,
And the black Scourge of self-tormenting Conscience.



But see, my Lord, the tenderest words she writes!
See at the end of her Complaints her Pray'rs,
She begs Protection from your Royal Hands.



Protect her! yes, against the Universe,
Brother, and Father; Fortunes Darts, and Fates
Decrees, the business of our Watchful Eyes
Shall be to mark her Enemies, our Strength
And well-collected Vertue be her Guard
Where e're she moves: Let us not wast in words
One moment of our Life, these happy Hours,
A swift Obedience calls our Hearts and Hands,
For from Nerina came the soft Commands.






WIth equal Joy, as when the first-born Man
Through a sweet Paradise led his Infant Bride,
With all the Pleasures of a welcome Love
Do I unsatiate with Asteria's Charms
Pass the glad day.



Did not my Fathers Fate
Oppose the sweet delights of growing Love,
This day I cou'd with mighty Queens dispute
The Number of bless'd Minutes.







My Heart, I can profus'dly wish!



My all that I can ask, and Heav'n can give.




Or I'm mistaken, or
This is the Traytor, apprehend him.








Arsanes, Sir, me thinks you much resemble
That great, out-witted States-man Prince.



'Tis he; Slave, speak thy Errand.








No more; 'tis Blasphemy
To ask, or to dispute the Cause, I go
Where e're he calls to shameful Bands, or Death.
Lead on but oh, my Heart, forget her not









We must not wait
Fond Lovers tedious partings; Lead away.



Farewel, Fair Star, for ever.




He's gone, he's gone;
Hurry'd away by Traytors to his Death,
And oh, ye Pow'rs, I had not power to speak
My last Farewel; Ile follow though, and pierce
Without regard of Life or Being, through
All that does, can oppose me; break through Fire,
Through Flames, o're Mountains pass, and swelling Seas,
Through Files of Tartars, Swords, Lances, Javelins.
Arm'd with resistless Love, and Rage, I'le fly
Like Lightning in a moment to his Cell,
With all the force of parting Love embrace him.
Bath with my Widow-Tears his panting Breast,
Bask in his Eyes, share that Eternal Rest
His Noble Soul shall claim among the Blest.
Exit.


  51Mandricard is discovered asleep, the Ghost of Ispatia by him with a
Dagger in her Hand, threatning him.


Rest, rest, my Soul, at last great Heav'ns Care,
Let never Innocence of Heav'n despair.
Thus sent, thus arm'd, an injur'd Shade I come
To scourge thee, Prince, for thy untimely Doom.
Thy Conscience thus just Alha does unseal,
And to thee all the horrors of thy Crimes reveal.
With Frenzy shalt thou rage, with Sorrow groan,
And in deep thought thy dazled Senses drown.
An inward Hell thee, Poisoner, shall burn▪
Nor shalt thou ever to thy self return.
Exit.


Mandricard rises frighted and raging.


I wou'd have torn her, and have sacrific'd
Her Members to Ispatia's wandring Ghost;
Nay haunt me not, dear Shade, I've sworn to do it,
With as much Art I'le work thy Rivals Fate,
As th' wiliest Devil of 'em all can wish.
What Sorcery this Turkish Beauty bears!
Ha! where so swiftly fled! have Harlots Wings?
Then to the Icarian Flood I'le steer my Course,
Drain it, and rob the unexperienc'd Boy
Of his ill-manag'd Quills, born on whose Force
I'le mount, and catch her in her hottest Chace.





My Lord, Lord Mandricard.




Did not you see a Monster up the Hill.
Sharp radiant Arrows arm'd her Magick Eyes,
Her Face, or no Face, or her double Face,
Shew'd crooked, Nature shrowded by false Art,
These well-known marks make ill for her escape.
Hey follow, seek, 'tis worth our pains, and more,
Millions to one but we shall seize the Witch.
See ho! see there o're yonder Plain she fleets!

  52O for an Arrow from Diana's Quiver!
Spread wide your Nets, mark where to Autumn Gray
The verdant Spring is chang'd, that, that's her Road,
Made hoary by her Sorcery and Charms.
She's near, she's near; my Nostrils draw the Scent
Of Paints, of Powders, Daubings, strong Perfumes,
A Whore will scent a Mile so nimble ha,
'Tis noble Sport, so hei, follow, so hei.




Was ever such a Change in Nature wrought!
So sudden, yet so perfect!




Your Stratagems have done, had I been heard,
He had e're this have worn a Crown by Arms
Nobly atchiev'd.



Thine were the means to sure
Destruction, this we may amend.




Dost thou not see our hopes in frenzy drown'd?
Brave had you fell my way, as shameful this.



We'l follow him 







Our Counsels may 



Make him a Fool, as they have made him mad.



What shall I do?



Die in the Act like Men.



Or live, and work more Ruine.




Traytors at last, most infamous and base.

A Noise of Fighting.


What Noise is that?



'Tis the dear Shout of Battle,

Abdalla, to thy lov'd Vocation.





I'le follow, and thy dangerous Fortunes share.




Axalla, Zanches, and others.



Arsanes, live; or perish all thy Friends.



Revenge, Revenge our Prince Arsanes wrongs.



They fly, they fly; see, O the wrong'd Arsanes,






We must not thus give up
To Slaves our Lawrels while Abdalla lives.



Die then perfidious, base, eternal Villain!








Dead or alive he will my Ruine prove.







You'r rash, and unadvis'd;
Prove thy self worthy of the Name thou bear'st
Our Counsellor, or die.




Meets your Commands; let, Sir, Arsanes live;
Free him.







These Reports will quell
Th' incensed Crowd; while I in Ambush laid
In some dark secret Corner of the Palace,
Rush on him swell'd with pride, and reeling with
The drunkenness of Love, end him, my Lord,
Big with large expectations of delight,
And from your Royal Scepter take the Guilt.



Thou art my Soul, my Empires Prop, and Refuge,
Who hast reviv'd it sinking from its Ashes;
Next to our own, when thy Blest Hand performs
The happy Work of thy projecting Brain,
I'le Crown thy Head with Lawrel and with Gold,
Boasting of thee our Life and Throne to hold.




Now Odmar, for thy share expect no less
Than Scepters for thy dear contriving Wit;

  54Ha, ha, ha, ha, to see the Shallow King
Expect Security and Bliss from me.
Vain Fools who think we work for any Ends
But for our own How tamely the dull Crowd
Lay down their Arms, and leave their Prince defenceless;
Die, die, Arsanes, and live Mandricard,

And I thy happy Father; with what ease

Odmar a Crown has purchas'd to his Race!
Me thinks I see my numerous Royal Offspring
Steal softly by, all Crown'd; no more, let others
By Blood and Civil Wars an Empire gain.
Tis Fraud alone false Titles can maintain.







I wonder how the Grave and Wise define
Th' uncertain motions of ambiguous Chance,
While equally she flatters, and destroys.
'Tis true I'm free, live, have large promises
To Love and Reign, as my high Birth requires.
But oh, what safety's in that Freedom found
From the sweet quiet of the Mind exil'd!
That I in Chains!









What hast my Friend,
To view this Load of Shame?







I said my Shame.
Am I not mark'd in every Limb a Villain?



This Temper suits not with your Fate, my Lord,
Thick Crowds of Friends expect you at the Court,
Waiting to Crown your vast Desert with Honour.
Which Tamerlane by me commands you take.



What sort of Honour is to Rebels due?







Am I not one? how came I here?



Leave those jealous Thoughts:
Rank'd in long Rows the gazing People stand

  56An endless Multitude; while smiling Virgins
From Windows, mixt with Joyful Matrons, lean,
All hoping, and all wishing, praying too
For your Approach; Arsanes is the Sound,
The only Sound the Gods can hear from Earth.



Triumphant Villain that I am!




Fool that I am to court a dreaming Zealot
To sublime Honours; stupid, thankless Prince;
Is this the Character our love deserves?
Traytors and Villains! Oh the hateful Name!
Go, Prince, and as thy unman'd Soul requires,
Neglecting Palaces, in Dungeons dye,
Slave-marking Iron press with vilest pain
Those Limbs, which Sword, Steel, Fire have sustain'd.
Farewell, Arsanes, neither Prince, nor Man.



Hold, Noble Friend; pard'n, oh Axalla, pard'n
A few rash words; the Act in you was good,
Friendlike, and Just; and were it not forbid,
Forbid by Duty, it were so in me;
But oh!








Thou sacred fort, fair Guardian of my Breast,
Where art thou fled? me thinks I'm left alone,
Disarm'd, defenceless, since I saw thee last.



Still in the tedious maze of fearful doubts!



Where e're I turn I see my Ruine nigh.



Mark then your surest way to Life or Death,
Bright Honour, or base Shame; the King, Arsanes,

Brooks heavily the scorn of his Commands,
Your Friends their ill accepted Love repent,
And sad Nerina all in Tears protests
She never thought Arsanes cou'd deny
Her any thing.



Hold, thou hast said enough;
Words of such wond'rous sense, so moving, full
With Arguments of such prevailing Pow'r,
Wou'd raise the dull Lethargick from his Dream;
That Threefold Chain of Duty, Friendship, Love,

  56Wou'd bind the Roving Sylvan Honours Slave;
Faith draws the Wills of Men to my defence,
Duty and Love Auxiliary Gods.





Traytor! 'tis a Name of vast import!
Not arm'd with furbish'd Brass, nor lock'd in Steel,
He bears the noiseless Weapons of Deceit.
Lies politick, and subtle Flatteries
Raise him to trust; what cannot Villains trusted?
We change, destroy, make Princes, and unmake.
Unenvy'd be henceforth Cassander fam'd,
Dire Sylla, Close Sejanus, Cruel Marius,

Seditious Gracchi, God-like Catiline,

With all the Glorious Traytors of each Age;
Not the false Smerdis with his Magick Train
Could sound the dark Abyss of Odmars Plots.



Long live Great Tamerlane, and Prince Arsanes.





Hark, now me thinks I see this Lover come
Hot with desire; see how the too rash Fool
With what large hasty steps he meets half way
My Daggers Point; now, Heart, for thy Revenge!
Heav'n guide my Hand where I resolve to strike!
Here will I make my Vigilant Retreat,
All Passages but through this Gate are bar'd
To the dear Lodgings of his lov'd Asteria;

While the dark Night shall shrow'd me and my Guilt.






No not so much as one poor Cypress Torch
To light her to her Grave ah the much-wrong'd Ispatia!





As sure a Thrust as ever Malice made.
Lye there thou empty Blaze of Fame; while I
Run with false Tears, devulger of thy Fate.
Oh how the Crowd will fret! the Prince Arsanes,

The Noble Prince lies murder'd in the way.
Help, help, the Prince is murder'd. oh, oh, oh, oh.




Darkness and Horror! whither am I going?
What greedy Horse-leech sucks my Vital Blood,
And draws me to a Being like Ispatia's?
Laugh, laugh, ye Furies, and ye Devils grin,
Scourge me with Scorpions, punish me with Flames,
Eternal Flames; tear, consume, devour me,
Let Hell surround me with her greatest Torments,
Severest Plagues prepar'd for blackest Souls;
But turn the wrong'd Ispatia from my sight,

Ispatia's Presence is a Thousand Hells.


Re enter Odmar with a dark Lanthorn.


But to be sure thou'rt dead, it much concerns.
By Heav'n 'tis Mandricard, Death, Furies, Hell,
And thou, curst Hand, false Author of my woe,
Thou Traytor to my Will, and Rebel to my Aim;
Oh the black Curse of Chance 
And plague of Accidents! so gross an Error
Was wrought sure by the envy of the Stars.
My Mandricard, my Son, oh, oh, my Son.





Keep back the Rabble, and your selves retreat,
While I survey and mourn my hapless Son.
Well, Friend, thou'st done the business.




To make the Strumpet Fortune frisk and laugh.



What mean you Friend?



I mean there is in Heav'n
A Jubilee among Arsanes Stars.



That he's come there 



That he is not come there.



Thy Mystick Speech I cannot comprehend,
Nor sound thy Sense, no nor thy Ghastly Looks.



This will explain 'em all 





By all the Gods
'Tis Mandricard, Curst Villain Oh my Son.







What wou'd thy Mirth?



Seeing once a Corse
On a Black Beer to gloomy Pluto born.

•laught to see the Sympathetick Crowd
Howl, yell, lament, as they were Parents all.
What was the Corse to them, or they to it?



Yet Ridling, Slave? what hoa my Guards who waits?
Seize there the Murderer.




I scorn to perish by a Fate so base.
Thus do the Noble dye 

What mean those Tears?

Know, King, thou shou'dst have shed those very Tears
Some twenty years ago, when Mandricard

Your Son, my Charge, a tender Infant dy'd;
Then the wish'd Glory of my days began;
He dey'd; I to his room my Son advanc'd,
My own Themyre, suppos'd your Mandricard.

My swell'd Ambition yet did higher aim,
A King, at least the Father of a King
I was resolv'd to raise my self. Think, Sir,
By me how oft Arsanes has been made
By me a Traytor, never of himself.
This was the last unlucky Cheat I acted,
Which the curst Fates had otherwise decreed,
And turn'd on me the Ruines of my Wish.
Scarce can I more; my Death comes swiftly on;
While from my Actions I this Glory draw,
None cou'd but Odmar, Odmars Plots destroy.




Remove the wretched Bodies from my sight,
The hated Traytor, and the curst Impostor!
First let 'em hang a publick Spectacle
In our high Road which to the Palace leads,
Then when all Eyes are glutted with the sight,
Cast 'em to Birds and Beasts a welcome Prey.




Prepare, Great Tamerlane, for your defence,
Uproars and Tumults every where are ris'n.
Fame of Arsanes Death has arm'd the Crowd,

  59With Fury, Rage, Suspicions, Frenzies, Fears,
Your self the sole Promoter of his Fate
Are sworn, arraign'd, on you they vow Revenge.



Hast quickly, and with Trumpets Sound pronounce
The Rumour false; their lov'd Arsanes lives;
By blest mistake 'tis Mandricard is fal'n.

Call to my Arms the Noble Prince Arsanes,

And his fair Mistress; at last my Eyes are open,
Unseal'd to Truth, I see and am confirm'd
No close Conspiracy, or black Design,
But Love, and only Love, their Hearts did joyn.





Thanks, O Propitious Heav'n, thanks my Stars,
And all ye Angels Guards of Innocence,
Which have restor'd, and brought into his Right
The wrong'd Arsanes, welcome O my Son,
Thy Enemies are dead, the Impostors dead,
And with them all Suspitions of thy Faith,
Thy Injuries are dead Oh my Arsanes,

A Father in the Face of Heav'n salutes thee
A happy Bridegroom, from a Fathers Hand,
Receive thy Fairer Vertues, Fair Reward.



O Extasie! Oh Paradise of Joy!
I come scarce hoping for a Pard'n, and find
A full Reward, Inestimable Treasure,
Eternal Bliss; nor is it Fairy Treasure!
No, no, I have it here, I hold it, grasp it,
A Real Pleasure, and Substantial Good.
But oh let not the fulness of my Joy
Make me unmindful of the Noble Giver.
Oh, my Asteria 








Thus let us kneel,
With Thanks unto our Father.







Our new Creator, thus let us lie prostrate,
And wonder at our sudden Happines.



Rise and believe it granted; now witness Heav'n,

  60And ye kind Stars, that smile upon our Throne,
With what untroubled Joy I joyn the Hands
Of the blest Loyal Pair.
The Sacred Tye just Alha shall confirm,
And as we Sign, Seal your Eternal Loves.



Thanks O our Royal Father, God-like Prince,
And double Author of my happy Being.
So may Great Alha all your Actions Crown,
And with Eternal Blessings Guard your Throne.
As I your worthy Praises loudly sing,
The Kindest Father, and the Justest King.


