




VVHo trust in Thrones, in proud Escu∣rials reign,
Nor fear the a Easie Gods, possest with vain
Credulity of a still Prosperous State,
Me let him look on, and Thee Troy! By Fate

  2A greater Document was never shown
On what a slippery Hight Pride stands! O'rethrown
Is bAsia's strong Support, of cGod-like Hands


  3Th' egr•…gious Labour; under whose Commands
He who cold dseven-mouth'd Tanais drinks, once bore
Confederate Arms; and he who does adore
The Rising Sun, where Tigris warm Streams stain
Their Waters in the eErithraean Main;

And she whose Realms the wandring Scythians bound,
Who beats with widowed Troops the Pontick Ground.


  4Sp•…ild by the Sword, now her own Ruins Weight
Bears fPergamus; Her Tow'rs which glister'd late
With their fir'd Buildings fallen: All, All's oreturn'd
In Flames; gAssaracus his Palace burn'd.
Nor Flames the Victors greedy Hands prevent,
But while yet burning, Troy's for Pillage rent.
Smoak in Waves rising takes Heaven's Sight away,
And black-burnt Cinders smeer the Face of Day.
Measuring with greedy Eye Troy's long sought spoil
The Victor stands, and now his Ten Years Toil
Forgives; astonish'd at her Ruins, He yet
Scarce thinks it vincible, though won he see it.
The Dardan Wealth Greek Souldiers bear away;
Nor can, a thousand Ships contain the Prey.


To Witness here I call the Adverse Powr's!
And * Thou, once Ruler of the Phrygian Tow'rs,

  5Beneath the Ruins of thy Empire laid
My Countries Ashes! and thy * Dearer Shade,
Who standing, Ilium stood. Ye lesser Ghosts,
My Childrens numerous Souls! What ever Cross
Hath fall'n, what Ills th' inspired Maid foretold,

h (The God belief forbidding) those of Old
Saw pregnant Hecuba; nor held my Peace,

Before Cassandrai a vain Prophetesse.

Not crafty Ithacus, nor Diomed,

Nor trecherous Sinon, through your Buildings Spread
These Flames; These Fires are mine; and with my Brands


You Burn. But why lamenting thus Troy's Ruins, Stands

  6Too long-liv'd Age? Here Wretch! look here, On These
(Troy's an Old Grief) more fresh Calamities.
I saw (O cruel fact!) the Old King slain;
And, a worse Crime, the sacred Altars stain

k Then armed Ajax dar'd. When with Hands wreath'd
In's Hair, his Head reversing, Pyrrhus sheath'd
In a deep Wound his cursed Blade; which strook
Up to the Hilts, when the King willing took;
Drawn forth, his Aged Throat scarce reek'd with Blood.
Whom not the sense of his extreme Age, cou'd
From so abhorr'd a Murder once restrain,
Nor present Gods, nor yet lIoves Sacred Fane,

The Glory once of this now levell'd State.

  7He to so many Princes m Father late,
Now wants a Sepulcher, nand Funeral Fire,


His Troy in Flames. Nor can All This Heav'ns Ire
Appease. To Lords, lo•…Priam's Daughters by

  8The o Urn are given. Whom, a scorn'd Prize, shall I
Attend? Some one may his Wife Hector's make,

  9Some pHelenus, some may qAntenor's take:
Perhaps some one thy Bed, Cassandra, seeks;
I'm only a fear'd Lot to All the Greeks. Cease you my Captive Troops! Your Plaints forbear!
Beat with your Hands your Breasts, with Cries the Air,
And Troy's sad Obsequies perform: Now round

Id•…, that dire Judge's Fatal Seat, resound.



CHORUS Of Captive Trojan Ladies.

No rude Crew un-inur'd to Tears
Bid you to mourn: Successive Years
Can witness, this w'have never ceast
To do, since first the Phrygian Guest

  10rAmyclae reach'd, and sCybels Pine
Did plow blew Neptune's foaming Brine.


Ten times have Snows crown'd Ida's Head,
Bar'd for the Funerals of our Dead.
Ten times the Mower's Hand hath shorn,
With fear, the tufted Fields of Corn,
Yet no Day void of Miseries;
New Matter still new Grief supplies.


  11On to our Plaints, and as We weep,
Do Thou, O wretched Queen, t Time keep
With thy advanced Hand: Whilst We,
Skill'd in our Parts, do follow Thee.





You faithful Consorts of our Woe
Unbind your Tresses: Let your Hair
About your sad Necks loosely flow,
Powder'd with Troy's warm Ashes: Bare
Your Arms; your Vestures, slackly ty'd
Beneath your naked Bosoms, slide
Down to your Wasts. For whose Bed drest
Vail'st Thou, O Captive, Shame! thy Breast?
A looser Zone your Garments bind!
Your Cries with frequent strokes be join'd!

  12Hands prest t'assail! Aye, now you please,
Thus habited! Now Troades

I know you all: Again renew
Your mournful Plaints, and strive t'outdo
Th'Expressions common Sorrows vent,
'Tis Hector whom We now lament!






v Our Locks oft torn to wail the Dead,
See! We have all vnfilleted,
And 'bout our shoulders loosely thrown;
Upon our Heads warm x Ashes strown.





Fill then your Hands; From Troy this yet
Wee lawfully may take; and let
From your devested Shoulders slide,
Your Garments, down on either side.

  13Now y bared Bosoms call for Blows.
Now Sorrow All thy Powr's disclose.

Rhaet•…an Shores with Plaints resound,
And Eccho the sad Cries rebound:
Nor, as shee's wont, ingeminate
The last of Words, but iterate

Troy's Plaints entire; that All the Main
And All the Heav'ns may ring again.


Now let remorseless Hands infest
With sounding strokes each suffering Breast,
W'are not with usual stripes content;
'Tis Hector whom We now lament.





For Thee our Arms We beat, and Blows
On bleeding Shoulders thus impose.
For Thee our Heads these Strokes do bear,
Our nursing Breasts for Thee We tear.
The Wounds which since thy Death remain
Yet green, now freshly bleed again.

  14Thy Countries strength! Fates Remora!

The tired Phrygians Only stay.

Troy's Rampart! who upheld'st Her Tow'rs
Ten Years against Assailing Pow'rs.
With Thee she fell; One Day z a Grave
To Hector and his Country gave.





Turn now your Plaints; Let Priam too
Be wept for: Hector hath his Due.





Receive our Tears a twice captiv'd King!
Thee Reigning, Fates no Cross did bring
Single on Troy; twice did she feel

  15bHerculean Shafts, twice Grecian Steel.
When after All the Tragic Falls
Of Hecub's Race; and Funerals
Of Princely Sons; thy self in fine
Did'st close their Tragedies with thine.
And to c great Iove, a Victim slain,

Troy's shores thy d Headless Trunk sustain.





Your Tears on other Subjects spend,
Ye Ilian Dames, my Priam's End
Is not to be lamented. All
Deceased Priam Happy call.
He to th' Infernal Shades went free,
Not thrall'd in Grecian Slaverie.
He ne're th' Atrides saw, He never
The false Ulysses knew, nor ever
Shall e Bow his Captiv'd Neck, a Prize
In their Triumphed Victories.
Not shall his Hands, which 〈◊〉 sustain'd
A 〈◊〉, be behind Him chain'd,

  17Nor in Gold Fetters manacled
Following the Victors Carr, be led
In Pomp through proud Mycenae.







Deceased Priam happy call;

f Attended at his latest Fate
With the whole Ruine of his State.
Who now in the gElizian Groves
Delightful shades securely roves,
And 'mong the h Pious Ghosts makes Quest
For Hector. Happy Priam! "Blest
"No less is Hee
"Who e're he be,
"Who falling in Wars bloody strife,
"Sees All things perish with his Life.











Chorus of old Trojans.




HOw i long in Port the Greeks still wind∣bound are!
When War they seek, or for their Homes prepare!





The Cause declare them and their Fleet detains,
What God it is that their Return restrains.





Amazement strikes my Soul; a trembling Cold
Palsies my Joynts. Prodigious Truths when told

  20Are hardly credited; yet these, these Eyes
Were Witnesses: And now the Sun's uprise
New gilt the Mountain Tops, and Eastern Light
Had clearly vanquish'd the whole Hoast of Night;
When on a sudden k the sore-shaken Ground,
Breath'd from its Center l a strange bellowing Sound:
Woods bow'd their Heads, the sacred Groves with loud
Cracks rung, like Thunder breaking through a Cloud;
Stones from cleft Ida's Quarries fell: Nor shook
The Earth alone; The Sea, with Terror strook,
Th' Approach of her Achilles felt, and laid
Her swelling Waves. Th' Earth yawning then display'd

  21Her Immense Caves, and from the Depths of Night
Open'd a passage to Aetherial Light:
The Tomb disburd'ning, whence the Ghost arose
Of great Achilles; Such when mThracian Foes
(The Prelude of thy Fates, Troy!) he o'rethrew,
And the white hair'd nNeptunian Cycnus slew.
Or when in Heat of Fight with strenuous Force
Through Troops he charg'd, and o stopp'd the Rivers Course
With slaughterd Carcasses, while Xanthus Tide,
Seeking a Passage through, did slowly glide.

  22Or such when Victor trailing by the Heels

pHector and Troy, born on Triumphant Wheels.
Then with this voice of Anger fills the Coast:

Go, Go ye lingring Greeks, and rob our Ghost

Of it's due Honours; weigh ingrateful! weigh
Your Anchors, through our Seas to make your Way.

'Twas not with Trifles Greece did satisfy

Achilles Anger, nor a Price less high


Shall she now pay. Polyxena be wed


T' our Ashes; and her Blood let Pyrrhus shed.

This said, he shrouds himself in Night, and sinks
To Hell again: the Earth together shrinks,
Closing her gaping Clefts; the quiet Main
Becalmed lies; the Winds their Rage restrain,
The smooth Seas move with gentle Murmurings,
And qTriton thence the Hymeneal sings.












VVHen Home you thought to Sail, full Fraught with Joy,

rAchilles fell; by whose sole Arm fell Troy.


  24Whose All-ore-mastering Valour soon repaid
The Loss of that delay which sScyros made,
And tLesbos, that divides th' Aegean Flood;
For Troy's Fall doubtful still, he absent, stood.
Should you now haste to satisfy his Will,
Yet were it tardy Satisfaction still.
Now every Chief his proper share hath took;
For less Reward can so much Virtue look?

  25Merits he Nothing? Who, when (charg'd to shun
Wars Hazards) his Life's Course he might have run
In peaceful Quiet beyond Nestor's years;
Yet slighting his Disguise and Mother's Fears,
He v himself Man, by assum'd Arms, confest.
When Telephus with barbarous Pride represt

  26Our Entrance into Mysia,x his yet rude
Hand in that Prince's Blood he first imbru'd.
Who felt with what a force the Same could wound,
Yet in his Cure, that no less gentle found.

  27yThebes and Eetion by his Arms pursu'd,
Both tell; His State and He at once subdu'd.
The small zLyrnessus Mountain-seated Tow'rs,
He with like Slaughter level'd by his Pow'rs.
Enobled by fair Briseis Captive made.
He aChryse, cause of Kingly Difference, laid

  28In her own Ruins. bTenedos renown'd
By Fame, and cCilla rich in fertile Ground
To Phoebus sacred, whose fat Pastures fed
Large Thracian Flocks, by him were vanquished.

  29What? and those Lands through which dCaycus flows;
Whose Streams augment by dissolv'd Vernal Snows.
These so great Slaughters, Nations mighty dread,
Like Whirle winds through e so many Cities spred,

  30Which might have been anothers closing Fame,
Were but his f Marches Actions; thus He came:
And in so many Glorious Conquests sha•…'d
The Spoils of War, while he for War prepar'd.
Though we His other Merits should refrain;
Were not this One sufficient? Hector slain!
He Ilium conquer'd; 'twas but sack'd by you.
Our Parents Noble Praises We'l pursue,
And his brave Acts, for which that Praise is due.
Who knows not Hector, in his Fathers Sight;
In's Unkles, gMemnon, fell by him in fight?

  31Whose Death his Parents Cheeks with sorrow pal'd,
And Morning's rosy Looks in Mourning vail'd.
Himself abhorr'd the fatal Precedent,
And learn'd, that Sons of Gods were not exempt
From Death. hPenthesilea too, of All
Our Fears the last, did by his Valour fall.
A Virgin then might but his Due be thought,
Though even from iArgos or Mycenae brought,
Priz'd you his Merits justly: Can you move
A Doubt yet, or refuse his Will t'approve?
Think you 'tis Cruelty to Peleus Son
To offer Priam's Daughter? when * your own

  32A Sacrifice to Helena was made?
For what even Precedent allows, We plead.






k 'Tis Childish Weakness not to rule our Ire.
"Others the Heat of Youth inflames: This Fire
In Pyrrhus is Hereditary. We
Have felt l thy Fathers Rage; and th' Injurie

  33Of his high Threats have suffer'd heretofore.
'The more thy Power, thy Patience should be more.
Why with the Blood of a Young Virgin slain,
Seek'st Thou so Great a Leader's Ghost to stain?
"'Tis fit this first We learn to know, what e're

"The mVictor ought to do; the Vanquish'd bear.
"No violent Dominions long endure:
"'Tis Moderation makes a Throne stand sure.
"When Fortune swells our State to an Excess,
"'Tis Wisdom to restrain our Happiness:
"The Turns of Chance, and too propitious Powr's
"Still fearing; Conquest teaching, how few Hours
"Can to subversion bring the Greatest State.

Troy's Fall hath rais'd our Thoughts to too elate,
Too stern a Pride; In the same Place We stand
From whence she fell. Once with too proud a Hand
I must confess I bare my self, but what
Might have rais'd others Thoughts, Success; ev'n that
Hath humbled Mine. Thou Priam make me Proud!
Thou bid'st Me fear. "What but a splendid Shroud
"Of Vanity, may We think Crowns to be,
"Our Brows impaling with false Majestie,

  34"Which Chance, in one short Hour, may make her spoil,
"Without n a Thousand Ships, or Ten Years Toil.
"So slow a Fate attends not All. And Greece!

(If with thy leave I may confess it) This

  35I'le say; I would have Ilium distrest,


Nay more, subdu'd;oher Ruin yet represt;

But the hot Rage of an incensed Foe,
And Victory, by Night obtained, know

  36No Curb. What cruel or unworthy Fact
May seem committed, that Revenge did act,
And Darkness, which does Fury forward thrust,
And the Victorious Sword; whose killing Lust
Having once tasted Blood's ne're satisfy'd.
If ought of ruin'd Troy may yet abide
After All This, now let it stand secur'd:
Enough, more than enough, she hath indur'd.


That at thy Father's Tomb the Princess shou'd
Be made a Sacrifice, and with her Blood
Sprinkle his Ashes, or that yet so vile
Cruel a Murder We should Nuptials style,
We'l ne're permit: 'tis We must bear the Blame:
"Who ought, yet not forbids Ill, bids the same.




Shall then Achilles Ghost due Honours want?




Dues it shall have, and every Tongue shall chant
His Praise; and Lands unknown resound his Fame,
And celebrate the Glory of his Name.
If yet his Ashes nought but Blood can ease,
Let that of slaughter'd Herds his Ghost appease.
But let no Blood be spilt to be bewail'd,
By wretched Mothers: How ye Gods prevail'd,

  37Or whence did this inhumane Custom rise
Of making p Man to Man a Sacrifice!
Think but what Hate would to thy Sire accrue,
Should such dire Rites be to his Honour due.





Thou insolently Haughty in Success,
As fearfully dejected in Distress!
Tyrant o're Kings! does new-sprung Love infest
Yet once again with suddain Flames thy Breast?
Does Agamemnon think that he shall still
Thus wrong Achilles? No; know Pyrrhus will,
Or see this Victim offer'd to his Grave,
Or else a greater, worthier Victim have:

  38This Sword here thinks it does too long abstain
From Royal Blood, and Priam's Ghost would fain
Have a King's bear it Company.






The greatest Praise that is to Pyrrhus due,
Is that he murder'd Priam, whom his Sire

q Spar'd when his Suppliant.






We know't: that They who were my Father's Foes

Were forc'd to be his Suppliants; you 'mongst those.
But Priam was the Stouter of the Two,
He came in Person to petition; You
Not yet so Valiant as to supplicate,
Like a tame Coward, chose to delegate

rAjax and Ithacus to make your Prayer,
Whilst you lay sculking, and kept close for fear.





But your brave Father fear'd not 'tis confest,
He 'mongst fir'd Ships, and slaughter'd Greeks could rest
Secure; unmindful of his Charge; and run

s Upon his Lute nimble Division.





Yet was great Hector, who your Arms despis'd,
At sound but of his Lute with fear surpriz'd.
And in the mid'st of Terror and dismay
His Navy yet in peaceful Quiet lay.




Yes, the same Navy Priam durst to board.



"'Tis Kingly to a King Life to afford.



Then why a King did you deprive of Breath?



"There's Mercy sometimes shown in giving Death.



So you'd in Mercy Sacrifice a Maid?




And such a Sacrifice can you dissuade,
Who offer'd your own Child?






"Kings should prefer before their Childrens Blood.




Forbid a Captiv's Death no Law e're did.



"What the Law does not, is by Shame forbid.



"What likes, is lawful, by All Victors thought.



"T' whom much is lawful, to like, little ought.




'Fore these thus vant'st thou, who by Pyrrhus are
Freed from the Bondage of a Ten Years War?




Breeds tScyrus such high Blood?







v No Brothers Sins.




Which strait'ning Seas inclose.




Yes, Seas that owe us a Relation;
Indeed xThyestes noble House W' have known,
Great Atreus too.





Out thou Girls Bastard Brat,
Got by Achilles, when scarce Man.






Achilles, who to the whole World ally'd

y Enjoys the Honours of the Deifi'd,


  44Who can a Claim to Seas by Thetis move,
To Hell by Aeacus, to Heav'n by Iove.





Yes, He who fell by Paris feeble Hand.




Whom yet not any of the Gods durst stand
In open fight.





Sir, I could rule your Tongue,
And give your Boldness due Correction;
But that this Sword of Ours, knows how to spare
Ev'n Captives: Let the Gods Interpreter,

Calchas, be call'd, and what the Fates command
By Him, to that We willingly will stand.







Thou Sacred Minister, who loos'dst the Bar
Which stop'd the Grecian Navy, and the War,
Whose Art unlocks the Heavens, expounds their Laws,
And from Beasts Entrails, Thunder, Comets, draws
The sure Presages of ensuing Fate,
Whose Words We purchas'd at so dear a Rate,
Now here declare what 'tis the Gods intend:
And this our Strife, let thy grave Counsel end.





The usual means, Fates of Return afford
The Greeks. To th' Tomb of the Thessalian Lord
The Virgin must be sacrific'd; so drest
As Grecian Brides are at their Nuptial Feast,

  46And Pyrrhus wedded to thy Sire by Thee,
With these due Rites shall she espoused be.
Yet is not This our Fleets sole Remora.

More Noble Blood than Thine, Polyxena,

The Fates require. Great Hector's only Son
From some high Turret must be headlong thrown;
So have the Gods decreed he should be slain.
Then may your Conquering Navy plough the Main.*






IS it a Truth? or Fiction blinds
Our fearful Minds?
That when to Earth We Bodies give,

z Souls yet do live?
That when the a Wife hath clos'd with Cries
The Husbands Eyes,

  48When the last fatal day of Light
Hath spoil'd our Sight,

b And when to Dust and Ashes turn'd
Our Bones are urn'd;
Souls stand yet in no Need at All
Of Funeral.
But that c a longer Life with pain
They still retain?
Or dye We quite? nor ought We have
Survives the Grave?
When like to Smoak immix'd with Skies,
The Spirit flies.

  49And d Funeral Tapers are apply'd
To th' naked Side.
What e're Sol's Rising does disclose,
A Setting shows;
What e're the Sea with flowing Waves
Or ebbing laves;
Old Time that moves with winged pace
Doth soon deface.
With the same swiftness the Signs rowle
Round, round the Pole,
With the same course Day's Ruler steers
The fleeting Years;
With the same speed th'oblique-pac'd Moon
Does wheeling run:
We all are hurried to our Fates,
Our Lives last Dates;
And when we reach the Stygian Shore,
Are then no more.

  50As Smoke which springs from Fire is soon
Dispers'd and gone;
Or Clouds which we but now beheld,
By Winds dispel'd;
The Spirit which informs this Clay
So fleets away.

eNothing is after Death; and this
Too Nothing is:
The Gaol, or the extremest space
Of a swift Race.

f The Covetous their Hopes forbear,

g The Sad their fear.

  51Ask'st thou when e're thou com'st to die,
Where thou shalt lie?

h Where lie th'unborn. Away Time rakes us,
Then Chaos takes us.
Death's Individual; like kind
To Body or Mind.

i What e're of Taenarus they sing,
And Hell's fierce King,
How Cerberus still guards the Port
O'th' Stygian Court,
Are all but idle Rumours found,
And empty Sound;
Like the vain Terrors of the Night,
Or Dreams that fright.

















VVHy tear you thus your Hair, and weeping beat
Your wretched Brests, ye Phrygian Dames? We yet
Suffer but lightly, if we suffer what
Is onely to be wept. Troy fell but late
To you, to me long since. When in our view
Cruel Achilles at his Chariot drew
My Hector's Limbs; whilst with a Weight unknown
The trembling Axletree did seem to groan.
Then, then was Troy o'rethrown, then Ilium fell;
Sense of that Grief makes me unsensible.
And now by Death free'd from Captivity
I'd follow Hector; but this Boy here, he
Witholds me; he (sweet Child) my Will restrains,
And from a much-desired Death detains.
'Tis he that makes me yet the Gods intreat;
He to my Griefs a longer time hath set.
And though my greatest Comfort, took from me
The greatest Comfort in my Misery,

  53Security from Fear; no place doth rest
For happier Fortune with the worst opprest
And saddest Miseries: "For to fear still
"When Hope hath left us, is the worst of Ill.




What sudden Fear does thy sad Mind surprize?




From our great Ills still greater Ills arise.
Nor yet can Iliums fatal Woes have end.




What further Miseries does Heaven intend?




Hell's open'd; and our Foes, that we might n'ere
Want Terror, rising from their Graves appear.
And can this onely to the Greeks befall?
Sure Death is equally the same to all.
That common Fear all Phrygians doth distress;
But my sad Dream doth me alone oppress.




Declare, what did thy dreadful Dream present?




Two parts of quiet Night were almost spent,
And now the k Seven Triones had wheel'd round
Their glittering Wain, when Rest (a Stranger found
To my afflicted Thoughts) in a short Sleep
Upon my wearied Eyes did gently creep,
(If such Amaze of Mind yet Sleep may be.)
Strait to my thinking I did Hector see.
Not such as when against the Argives bent
On Graecian ShipslIdaean Flames he sent;

  55Nor such when he his Foes with slaughter struck,
And real Spoils fromm false Achilles took.
Nor did his sprightly Eyes with Lightning glance,
But with a sad dejected Countenance
Like mine he stood; his Hair all soil'd and wet,
(It joy'd me although such to see him yet.)
His Head then shaking thus at length he spake;
Awake, my dear Andromache, awake,
And quickly hence As•…yanax convey;
Let him be closely hid, no other way
Is left to save him: thy sad Cries forbear.
Griev'st thou Troy's fall'n? would God it wholly were.
Quickly dispatch, and to some secret place
Convey this small last hopes of all our Race.
Sleep from my Senses a cold horrour shook,
When staring round with an affrighted look
Wretch, I (my Child forgot) for Hector sought;
But lo the fleeting shadow, whilest I thought
To have embrac'd it, fled. O my dear * Joy,
True Bloud of thy great Sire, sole Hopes of Troy!


  56Unhappy Issue of too fam'd a Race!
Too like thy Father, even such a Face
My Hector had; his Gait such, so he bare
His conqu'ring Arms; so did his curled Hair
Part on his threatning Forehead, n so from's Head


Covering his Neck, 'bout his tall Shoulders spread.
O Son, too late unto thy Countrey born,
Too soon unto thy Mother! will that Turn,
That happy Revolution never come,
That I may see thee build up Ilium,

And her fled Citizens reduce once more,
And to their Town and them their Name restore?
But I forget my self, and fondly crave
Too happy things: "Enough poor Captives have
"If they may live. What place, Wretch, can secure
Thy Fears? sweet Child, where shall I hide thee sure?
That late proud Palace, rich in Wealth and Fame,
Built by the Gods, worthy ev'n Envy's Aim,

  57Is now to a rude Heap of Ashes turn'd,
All's levell'd with the Ground, the whole Town burn'd
In wastful Flames; nor doth there now abide
So much of Tr•…y as may one Infant hide.


What place would fittest serve for my intent?
Hard by's my Husbands stately Monument,
Which ev'n the Enemy doth reverence,
Which with much Cost, nor less Magnificence,
(On his own Sorrows too too prodigal)
Old Priam built; there I may best of all
Intrust him with his Sire. A cold Sweat flows
O're all my Limbs, my Mind distracted grows,
And dreads the omen of the dismal place.





"Oft a suppos'd Destruction (in this case)
"Men from a real Ruine hath preserv'd.
No other Hope of Safety is reserv'd.
A great and fatal Weight on him doth lie,
The Greatness of his own Nobility.




Pray Heav'n no one discover or betray him.



Let there be none to witness where you lay him.



How if the Enemy demand the Boy?



Say, He was murder'd in subverted Troy.




What boot's it to lie hid a while, that past,
To fall into their cruel Hands at last?





Despair not, hope for better Fate: "The first
"Charge of the Victors Fury is the worst.





Alas what should we hope, if he can ne're
Be kept conceal'd without apparent Fear?





"Choice of their Safety the Secure may make,
"Those in distress must hold of any take.





What Desert place or unfrequented Land
Will give thee safe Repose? What friendly Hand
Protect us? To our Fears who'll comfort yield?
O thou who always didst, thy own now shield,
Great Hector! This dear Treasure from thy Wife
Receive, let thy dead Ashes guard his Life.
Come Child, enter this Tomb; back why dost start?
Scorn'st thou to lurk in holes? His Fathers Heart
In him I see; he shames to fear. Quit, quit
Thy Princely thoughts now, and take such as fit
Thy present state. See all of Ilium

That's left, a Child, a Captive, and a Tomb.
Submit to Heavens Decree, nor fear to enter
Thy Fathers Monument; go boldly, venture.
There, if on Wretches Fates compassion have,
Thou'lt Safety find; if Death they give, a Grave.





He's hid: but lest thy Fears should him betray,
Remove some distance hence another way.





"The nearer that we fear, we fear the less:
But if you please let's withdraw 






Madam, your sad Complaints a while suspend,
The oCephalenian Prince this way does bend.





Cleave, Earth! and thou, dear Spouse, rend up the Ground
From lowest Hell, and in that dark Profound
Hide our Loves pledge. He comes, he comes, his Pace
And Looks speak Plots; there's Mischief in his Face.










THe Minister of a severe Decree
I come; yet beg this first, that you would be
So charitable tow'rds me to believe,
(Although they utterance from my mouth receive)
The words I shall deliver are not mine,
But what the Votes of all the Greeks enjoyn.
Whose late Return to their lov'd Homes withstands
Great Hectors Heir: Him Destiny demands.
Still doubtful Hopes of an uncertain Peace,
And fear of Vengeance will the Greeks oppress,
Nor suffer them to lay down Arms so long
As thy Son lives, Andromache.







Does Calchas your great Prophet sing?






He had said nothing, Hector tells us so.

  62Whose Stock we dread: "A generous Race aspires
"Unto the Worth and Virtue of their Sires.
So the great Heards small Play-fellow, which now
Sports in the Pastures with scarce budded Brow,
Strait with advanced Crest and armed Head,
Commands the Flock which late his Father led.
And so the tender Sprout of some tall Tree
Late fell'd, shoots up in a short time to be
Equal to that from whence it sprung, and lends
To Earth a Shade, to Heav'n its Boughs extends.
So the small Ashes of a mighty Fire
Carelesly left, into new Flames aspire.
"Grief does indeed matters unjustly state,
"And makes of things but a wrong Estimate.
Yet if our Case you duly shall perpend,
You'll not think strange if after ten Years end,
Th'old Souldier spent with Toil new Wars should fear,
And never enough ruin'd Troy; for ne're
Can we enjoy Security of Mind,
Our selves not safe, whilest still we fear to find
Another Hector in Astyanax.

Then rid us of this Terror that thus wracks
Our thoughts. This is the onely cause of stay
Unto our Fleet, ready to wing its way.
Nor think me cruel 'cause by Fates compell'd
I Hectors Son require; had Heav'n so will'd,

  63I had as soon ask'd pAgamemnon's Son,
Then suffer what the Victors self hath done.





Would God, dear Child, I had thee in my Hand,
Or knew thy present Fortune, or what Land
Now harbours thee; though Swords transpierc'd my Breast,
Though galling Chains my captiv'd Hands opprest,
Or Flames beset me round, they ne're should move
Me yet to quit a Mothers Faith or Love.
Poor Infant, O where art thou? what strange Fate
Is fall'n on thee? wandrest thou desolate
In untrac'd Fields? or perishedst thou, my Joy,
Amidst the Smoke and Flames of burning Troy?

Or hath the Victor in a wanton Mood
Of Cruelty plaid with thy Childish Bloud,
And murder'd thee in sport? Or by some Beast
Slain, do thy Limbs Idaean Vultures feast?





Come, come, dissemble not; 'tis hard to cheat

Ulysses: Know we can the q Plots defeat

Of Mothers although Goddesses.•…ay
With these vain shifts, and where thy Son is, say.





Where's Hector? Priam? all the Trojans? You
For one ask, I for all.






Since our Persuasions cannot gain a free,
A forc'd Confession from thee.






Is 'gainst the worst of Fate secured still,
That die not onely can, but ought, and will.




These Boasts at Deaths approach will quickly fly.




No, Ithacus; if me thou'dst terrifie,
Threaten me Life, for Death's my wish.






And Tortures shall enforce thee to disclose
The Secrets of thy Brest. "Oft-times we see
"Severity works more than Lenity.





Doom me to Flames, dissect with Wounds, and try
All torturing Arts that witty Cruelty
Did e're devise; Thirst, Famine, all Plagues, through
My Bowels burning Irons thrust; or mue
Me up in some dark noisom Dungeon: And
(If yet you think not these enough) command
Whatever Cruelties on captiv'd Foes
A haughty barbarous Victor dare impose:
No Tortures e're shall a Confession wrest,
Nor Terrors daunt my stout Maternal Brest.





This obstinate Love thou to thy Child dost bear
Warns all the Greeks to like Parental Care.
After a War so far, so long, loss I
Should fear the Ills Calchas does prophecy,
Feard I but for my self: but 'tis not us
Thou threatst alone, but my rTelemachus.






And must I comfort then afford my Foes
Against my will? I must. Sorrow disclose
Thy hidden Griefs. Now ye Atrides chear!
And be thou still to Greeks the Messenger
Of happy News, Great Hector's Son is dead.




Where be the Proofs may make this credited?




So fall on me what e're the Victor's Rage
May threat; so Fates to my maturer Age
An easie close; and where I had my Birth
Afford me Burial: So may the Earth
Lie light on Hector's Bones, as he bereav'd
Of Light lies 'mongst the Dead, and hath receiv'd
The dues of Funeral.





Fate's in his Fate
Accomplish'd, and firm Peace to Greece, then strait
Pronounce, Ulysses. Stay, fond Man, what dost?
Shall Grecians thee, and thou a Mother trust?
Perhaps she feigns, nor fears her dreadful Curse.
Fear Imprecations they that fear nought worse.
Sh'as sworn 'tis true; if so, then her Sons loss
What can she fear to her a heavier Cross?
Now •…mmon all thy slights together; be
Wholly Ulysses. Truth's ne're hid long. We
Must sift her throughly. See, she weeps, sighs, mourns,
With anxious steps, now this, now that way turns.
And our words catches with a heedful Ear;
We must use Art, she does not grieve, but fear.


That with the sorrows of some Mothers we
Condole 'tis fit, but we must gratulate thee,
Happy in misery and thy Sons loss!
For whom a heavier Death intended was,

  68Who from that lofty Tower which now alone
Remains of Troy was destin'd to be thrown.





My Heart faints, Fear shakes all my Joynts, a cold
Congealing Frost upon my Bloud lays hold.





See, see, she trembles; this must be the way.
Her Fears a Mothers Love in her betray.
I'll fright her further yet. Go, search with speed
This Foe, that by his Mothers Fraud is hid,
This onely Plague of Greece; find him where e're
He lies. So, have y'him? bring him here.
Why lookst thou back and tremblest? Now he dies.






Would God this Fear from present grounds did rise;
'Las, 'tis with us habitual. "The Mind
"From what it long hath learnt is late declin'd.





Since thy Sons better Fate prevented hath
The Lustral Sacrifice, thus Calchas saith,
Our Fleet may hope return if we appease
With Hector's Ashes the incensed Seas,

  69And raze his Monument unto the Ground.
Now since the Son by death a way hath found
To scape the Justice of his destin'd doom,
We must exact it from his Father's Tomb.





What shall I do? my Mind a double Fear
Distracts; here my poor Child, the Ashes there
Of my dear Husband. Which shall I first prize?
Bear witness ye relentless Deities,
And thy blest Manes, real Gods to me!
Nought, Hector, in my Son I pleasing see
But thy self onely: Long then may he live
Thy Representative. And shall I give
My Husband's Ashes to the Waves? O're vast
Seas suffer that his rifled Bones be cast?
Let t'other rather die. And canst thou be
Spectatress of thy own Childs Tragedy?
See him thrown headlong from the Tower's steep height?
I can and will, rather than Hector yet
Be after death the Victor's Spoil again.
Think yet this lives, hath sence, can feel his pain,
Whilest t'other Fates from Ills secured have.
Why staggerest thou? resolve strait which to save.
Ingrateful, doubt'st thou? there thy Hector is.
Mistaken Wretch, either is Hector: This
Yet young and living, who in time may be
Th'Avenger of his Father's death. Still we
Cannot save both. Resolve o'th' two howe're
To save him yet whom most the Grecians fear.





The Prophet's words shall be fulfill'd; the place
I will demolish.
















The Faith of Gods and thee,

Achilles, we appeal to. Pyrrhus, see
Thy Father's Gift made good.






Down it shall go,
And with its Ruines the wide Champain strow.





No Wickedness ye Greeks have you refrain'd,
But this alone; Temples you have profan'd,

  71And Gods propitious to you; yet ye you spar'd
The Mansions of the Dead. I amprepar'd
To hinder their intent, and will oppose
With weak unarmed Hands these armed Foes.
Anger and Indignation strengthen me!

Penthesilea like I'll 'mongst them flie,
Or s mad Agave, that the Woods did trace,
Shaking her Thyrsus with a frantick pace,
Dealing dire Wounds insensibly, and by
Defending bear his Ashes company.





What does a Womans passion move your hearts,
And vainer Cries? On Slaves, and ply your parts.





First by your bloudy hands let me be slain.
Up from Avernus! break thy fatal Chain;
Rise, Hector, rise, Ulysses to subdue,
Thy Ghost alone will be sufficient. View
How Arms he brandishes! how Flames do flie
From his stout Hands! See y'him? Or is it I
That see him onely?




Down with't to the Ground.




What dost? wilt see one Ruine then confound
Father and Son▪ Perhaps my prayers may yet
Appease them; strait resolve, or else the weight
O'th' falling Tomb will crush thy Child to death.
First lose he any where his wretched Breath,
Or e're the Father the Son's ruine be,
Or Son the Father's. Thus, Ulysses, we

t Low as thy Knees fall, and beneath thy Feet
These Hands (which yet no Mans e're touch'd) submit.

  73Pity a Mother's woes, with patience hear
Her pious plaints, and lend a gentle Ear.
"And how much higher Heav'n hath advanc'd thy state,
"So much the less depress a Wretches fate.
"When to the Miserable we extend
"Our Charity, we unto Fortune lend.
So to the chast Embraces of thy Wife
May'st thou in peace return, and Fates the life
Of old Laertes till that day extend.
So may thy Son, thy Age's hope, transcend
Thy hopes and wishes, live more Years to see
Than hath his Grandsire, wiser prove than thee.
O pity! all my comfort's in this Boy.




Produce him first, then what you ask enjoy.












FOrth from the hollow Entrals of the Tomb
Thou wretched Theft of thy sad Mother come!
The Terror of a thousand Ships here see,

Ulysses, this poor Child! down on thy Knee,
Thy Lord with humble reverence adore,
And Mercy with submissive hands implore.
Nor think it shame for Wretches to submit
To what e're Fortune wills; the thoughts now quit
Of thy great Ancestors, nor Priam call
To mind, nor his great Pow'r; forget it all,
And Hector too: assume a Captives state.
And though unsensible of thy own fate,
Poor Wretch, thou be, yet from our sence of woes
Example take, weep as thy Mother does.
'Tis not the first time Troy hath seen her Prince
Shed tears: so Priam, when a Child long since
The wrath of v stern Alcides pacifi'd;
He who so fierce was, who in strength outvy'd

  75Ev'n Monsters, who from Hell's forc'd Gates could yet
Through ways impervious open a Retreat:
Quell'd by the Tears of his small Enemy;
Resume (says he) thy former Royalty,
And in thy Father's Throne and Empire reign.
But Faith more firmly than he did, maintain.
Happy that such a Victor him did seize!
Learn thou the gentle wrath of Hercules.

Or onely please his Arms? See 'fore thine eyes
No less a Suppliant than that Suppliant lies;
And begs but onely Life, his Crown and State
He leaves to Fortune and the will of Fate.





Trust me the Mothers Sorrow moves me much,
But nearer me the Grecian Mothers touch,
To whose no little Grief this Child aspires.





And shall he then the Ruines which these Fires
Have made, repair? these Hands erect Troy's Fall?
Poor are the hopes she has if these be all.
We Trojans are not so subdu'd, that yet
We should to any be a Fear: is't Great

Hector in him you look at? think withall,
That Hector yet was dragg'd 'bout Ilium's Wall.
Nay he himself, did he now live to see

Troy's Fate, would of an humbler Spirit be.
"Great Minds by pressures of great Ills are broke.
Or would you punish? Than a Slavish Yoke
What to free Necks more grievous? let him bring
His Mind to serve. This who'll deny a King?




Not we, but Calchas this denies to thee.




O thou damn'd Author of all Villany!
Thou by whose Valour none yet ever dy'd,
Whose Treacheries the Greeks themselves have try'd.
The Prophet and th'abused Deities
Dost thou pretend? No, 't's thine own Enterprize,
Thou base Night-Souldier. Thou whose Manhoods proof
The Sun ne'r witness'd; only stout enough

  77To kill a Child: Now thou may'st brag and say,
Thou hast dar'd something yet in open day.





Enough the Greeks, too well the Trojans, know

Ulysses worth; but time we cannot now
Spend in vain talk. The Fleet does Anchor weigh.





Yet so much time afford us, as to pay
A Mother's last dues to my dying Boy;
And by our strict Embraces satisfie
My greedy Sorrows.





Would our power could give
Thy woes relief; yet what we can receive,
As long a time as thou thy self shalt please
To part and weep. "Tears Sorrow's burthen ease.





O thou sweet Pledge of all my hopes! the Grace
Of a now ruin'd, but once glorious Race!
Terror of Greece! the Period of all
Thy Countries Ruines! her last Funeral!
Vain Comfort of thy wretched Mother, who
(Fondly God knows) of Heaven did often sue,

  78Thou mightst in war thy Father equallize,
In peace thy Grandsire; but Heav'n both denies.
The Ilian Sceptre thou shalt never sway,
Nor shall the Phrygian Realms thy Laws obey,
Nor conquer'd Nations stoop thy Yoke to bear.
The Greeks thou ne're shalt foil, nor Pyrrhus e're,
T'avenge thy Sire, at thy proud Chariot trail:
Nor with light brandish'd Arms wilde Beasts assail
In the wide Forests: nor, when e're it falls,
Shalt solemnize Troy's chief of Festivals,
And x well train'd Troops in noble Motions lead:
Nor 'bout the sacred Altars nimbly tread;

  79And when exciting Notes shrill Cornets sound,
In yPhrygian Temples dance an antick round.
A Death than Death it self more sad, for thee
Remains; and Trojan Walls shall something see
More woful yet than Hector dragg'd.






Thy mournful plaints; immoderate sorrow knows
No bounds.





The time we for our Tears demand
Alas is small; permit yet with this Hand
I close his Eyes in life though not in death.
Dear Child, although so young thou lose thy breath,

  80Yet thou dy'st fear'd. Go, thy Troy looks for thee;
Go, and in freedom thy free Trojans see.









'Las, why dost thou wring
My Hand, and to my Side (vain refuge!) cling?
As when a sucking Fawn a Lion spies,
Or roaring hears, strait to the Hind it flies:
Yet the fierce Beast frighting the Dam away,
With murdering Fangs seizes the tender prey.
So from my Bosom will the cruel Foe
Drag thee, poor Child! Yet (Dearest) e're thou go
Take my last Kisses, Tears, and this torn Hair;
Then to thy Father full of me repair.
Tell him, if former passions Ghosts do move,
Nor Funeral Flames extinguish those of Love,

Hector is much to blame, to let his Wife
Enthrall'd by Greeks, thus lead a Servile Life,
Though he lie still, Achilles yet could rise.
Take from my Head again, and from my Eyes,
These Tears and Tresses; all that now is left

Andromache, of Hector since berest.
These Kisses to thy Father bear from me:
But leave this Robe, that may some Comfort be
(When thou art gone) to thy poor Mother; this
Did thy Sire's Tomb and sacred Ashes kiss:

  81So shall these Lips, if any Reliques here
Of their lov'd Dust, yet unshook off, appear.





She'll ne're have done; "Grief knows not what is fit.
Bear hence this stop of the Arg•…lic Fleet.





WHat Seats shall We poor Captives find?
Where are our new Abodes design'd?
Planted in x hilly Thessalie,


  82Or shady yTempe shall we be?
Or sent to zPhthia's rugged Fields?

Phthia, which stoutest Souldiers yields.
Or stony aTrachy's? fitter Place
For Cattle of a hardy Race.

  83Shall us bIolchos entertain,
Proud in the Conquest of the Main?
Or Creet, whose spacious Land is round
With c hundred of fair Cities crown'd?
Or barren dTricca? small eGyrton?

Or fModon with light Bents o'regrown?

  84Or the gOetoean Woods Recess,
Which more than once to Troy's Distress
Shafts Fatal sent? Or must we store
Thin-peopl'd hOlenos with more?

  85Or unto iPleuron shall wego,

Pleuron the Virgin Dians Foe?
Or to fair-harbour'd kTraezen get?

  86Or lPelion,mProthous proud Seat?
Third step to Heaven, where Chiron laid

n In's Cell, which eating Time had made
In the Hills side, oft us'd to whet
His * Pupil's Courage, (then too great)
By singing to his Harp's tun'd strings
Battels and bloudy Bickerings?

  87Or make oCaristus, rich in vein'd
Marble, with various colours stain'd?
Or pChalcis, plac'd on a rough Shore,

  88Where the swift qEuripus does roar?
Or shelter in rCalydnae find,
Easily reach'd by any wind?

  89Or sGonoessa, which ne'r fails
Of stormy Blasts and blustering Gales?
Or to tEnispae shall we steer,
Which Boreas angry Breath doth fear?
For Sea-girt vPeparethos stand,

  90Which lies 'gainst xActe's pointed Land?
Or seek yEleusis through the Deep,
Where z silent Festivals they keep?

  91Or Ajax his a true Salamine?

Or bCalydon, by a wild Swine

  92His furious Mischiefs fam'd? Or make
For cBessa and dScarphe, where the Lake-
Like eTitaressus with dull Waves
Creeping along, the Vallies laves?

  93Or shall we at the last set down
In fPylos, Aged Nestor's Town?



  94k Adorn'd with Wreaths of Victory?


Let any Winds our Canvas fill,
And bear us to what Lands they will,
So we poor Wretches lSparta miss,
That bred the Bane of Troy and Greece;

So we at least from mArgos run,

  95So we the proud nMycenae shun.
So we in oNeritos ne're plant,
Shorter and narrower the pZant.


  96So we ne're reach the treacherous Bay,

And Shoals of q Rocky Ithaca.


r Who Hecuba can tell thy Fate?
(Of Queens the most unfortunate!)
What servile Hardships shalt thou try?
Where, or in whose Dominions dye?

















VVHere ever Hymen is unfortunate,
On whom sighs, mourning, blood, and slaughter wait,
There Helen's a fit sAuspex, forc'd t'extend
The Woes of ruin'd Troy beyond their End.

  99False News of Pyrrhus Nuptials I must bear,
Gems, and Greek Habits for his Bride to wear.
Whilst (circumvented by my treacherous Wile)
I Paris Sister of her Life beguile;
And beguil'd be she. "'Tis a Courtesy
"Unprepossess'd with fear of Death, to dye:
Why doubt'st Thou to perform thy task? "On thos•…

"The Guilt of inforc'd Crimes lies, who impose.
Thou Female Glory of the *Dardan Race!
Heaven now begins to shew a friendlier Face
To the Afflicted; does a Mate provide,
Such as not Priam could in all Troy's Pride.
For thee to lawful Hymen's sacred Rites,
The Chief of the Pelasgian Name, invites,
Who rules wide Thessaly: Thee tTethys, all
The Watry Powr's, thee, hers will Thetis call,
The Seas mild Empress! Pyrrhus marry thee,
Thou Neece to Peleus shalt, and Nereus be.

  100Put off these sad, and Festive Habits take,
Unlearn 〈◊〉 Captive art, and Captive make.
Thy H•…r frightfully staring, recommand
To order, by some curious Dressers Hand.
This chance may raise thee to a better State;
"Captivity hath made some Fortunate.





Was this then only wanting to our Woes?
This? To rejoyce, when Troy in Ashes glows?
O time for Nuptials fit! but who denies,
Or doubts to Wed, when vHelen does advise?

Helen the Bane, the Ruin, and the Pest
Of either Nation; See these Graves! where rest
Their valiant Chiefs! These Fields! 'bout which are spred
The bared Bones, sad Reliques of their Dead.

  101These, these, thy Marriage scatter'd, with a flood
Of Europe's best, and Asia's bravest blood:
Whilst thou at ease saw'st both thy Husbands sight,
Careless on which the Victory should light.
Go then, and for these Wedding Joys prepare!
For Nuptial Lights and Torches never care;

Troy's Flames will those supply. Now Troades

The Marriage Rites of Pyrrhus solemnize
As they deserve; that is, with tears and cryes.





Though mighty Grief no curb, no reason knows,
But oft hates those are sharers in its Woes;
Yet 'fore a Partial Judge can I defend
My Cause; who suffer more than you pretend.

Andromache for Hector, Hecuba

For Priam, freely mourns; I closely pay
My conceal'd Sighs for Paris. 'Tis severe,
Hateful and sad, a servile Yoak to bear.
Yet that have I endur'd, these ten years past.
Your Houshold Gods are sack'd; Ilium laid wast.
To lose ones native Land, is a sad curse;
To fear, like me, without Relief, yet worse.
A fellow-sufferance does your Woes asswage.
'Gainst me, the Victors both, and vanquish'd rage.
Whom you must serve, Chance yet hath scarce design'd,
I'me sure, without a Lot, a Lord to find.
You'l say I was to Troy the cause of War,
And her sad Ruin. Take what you infer,

  102To be a Truth; if you can prove that e're
A Spartan Ship me to your Coasts did bear.
But if by Phrygians I a Prize was made,
And to her Judge a Gift by Venus paid,
Excuse then Paris. For our Cause, 'twill come
'Fore a rough Judge; it waits Atrides Doom.
But now, Andromache, thy Plaints laid by
A while, to bow this resolute Virgin try.
I scarce can hold from Tears. 





The thing is sad
That Helen weeps for; it must needs be bad.
But wherefore weeps she? say! what new Deceit?
What mischief plots Ulysses, that grand Cheat?
Must from Idaean Rocks the Maid be cast?
Or from this Tow'r, or yond' Clifts, into vast
Seas hurld? where with his crook'd and ragged side
Lofty Sygaeum does imbay the Tide?
Speak! What beneath thy looks sly vail is laid?
No Ill, but's less, than Pyrrhus to be made
To Priam Son in Law, and Hecuba.

What Pains, what Torments, must we suffer? say!
For this from our Woes sum may well be spar'd;

To be deceiv'd. To dye, w'are All prepar'd.





Would Heav'n, the Gods Interpreter had doom'd
Me to have dy'd; and at Achilles Tomb

  103By Pyrrhus furious Hand t'have fall'n! that I
With thy sad Fate, Polyxena! might vye,
Whom Thetis Son, (t'his Grave first victim made)
Demands for Spouse in the Elysian shade.





See how great joy does her high soul express
At her declar'd death! Royal Robes and Dress
Now she assumes, now yields t'adorn her head;
To dye she Marriage thinks, but Death to Wed.

Her aged Mother yet at the Report,
Is Thunder strook; nor more can Grief support,
With this surcharge opprest. Courage! recall
Your Life and Spirits, Madam? On how small
A Thread hers hang! how little will suffice
T'ease Hecuba of all her Miseries!
She breaths, and comes t'her self again: I find
Death to the Miserable is unkind.





Yet lives Achilles to the Phrygians Woe?
Yet does he plague us? Is he still our Foe?
O Paris feeble Hand! his very Grave
And Ashes thirst our wretched Blood to have.
Once me a happy Troop of Children round
On every side enclos'd; enough I found
T'impart to all my Kisses; nor could tell
'Mong such a fair and numerous Issue, well

  104How to divide a Mother. Now, there's none
Left me but this, my sole Companion,
My Joy and Comfort in Affliction
This, this poor Girl; The last Remain of all

Hecuba's Race! she only lives to call
Me Mother. Leave hard-temper'd Soul my Breast!
And this one Funeral after all the rest
Remit at length to me. * She changes hue,
A show'r of Tears does her pale Cheeks bedew.
Rejoyce dear Child! gladly Andromache,

Gladly Cassandra thus espous'd would be.





We, We poor Wretches, Hecuba, are most
To be deplor'd; who must on Seas be tost,
Now here, now there, and God knows whither hurried!

x She's * happy; by Fates destin'd to be buried
In her own native Land.





You'd grieve yet more
Did you but know what Lot's for you in store.




Is of my Woes yet any Part unknown?



The Captives Dooms th'impartial Urn hath shown.



Whose Slave am I? Whom must I Master call?



Unto the Scyrian Youth, by Lot you fall.




Happy Cassandra! whom Prophetic Rage
And Phoebus from the Lot does disengage.











By any sought for?





You a short-liv'd Prey
Are to Ulysses, 'gainst his will, become.





O who could be Dispenser of a Doom
So cruel and tyrannical! that brings
Queens to be Slaves to those that are not Kings?
What God does so unluckily dispose
Poor Captives? What stem Judge, unto our Woes
Weight adding, does so little understand
To choose us Lords? and with a rigorous Hand
Deals such cross Fates to Wretches? What dire Lot
T' Achilles Arms does Hector's Mother put?

  107Given to Ulysses! Now indeed distrest
I seem; with all Calamities opprest.
I shame at such a Lord, not Servitude.
Must he then who Achilles Spoils indu'd,
Have Hector's too? And must the barren, small,
And Sea-girt Ithaca give me Funeral?
Lead, Lead, Ulysses, when you please; no stay
I'le make, but follow thee, my Lord. And may
My own Fates follow me. No calms assuage
The angry Seas, let them with Tempests rage.
May Wars, Fire, mine, and Priam's Miseries
Pursue you; and 'till those Plagues come, suffice
It, this is sure: You have your Lot; I yet

Have rob'd you of all hop'd for Benefit.


But see with a precipitated Pace
Where Pyrrhus comes? with fury in his Face.

Pyrrhus, Why stopp'st thou in thy Bloody Race?
Sheath in this Breast thy Sword: Let Death in fine

Achilles Father in Law and Mother join.
Go on thou Murderer of the Aged! On!
This Blood fits thee: To Execution
Drag hence a Captive Wretch: And by so vile
Abhorr'd a Slaughter, Gods above defile,
And Ghosts below. What, shall I pray for you?
Seas to such dismal Sacrifices due.
On your whole Fleet, your thousand Ships, like curse
Fall, I wish that shall carry me, or Worse.





TO those that Mourn, 'tis sweet Relief,
When Nations Sorrows eccho to their Grief.
Less felt is that Afflictions Sore
Which numerous Sharer's mutually deplore.
Sorrow is like Infection; loves t'obtrude
It's-self upon a Multitude.
And counts it some content,
Not singly to Lament.
There's none denies to bear that Fate
All suffer under: in a common Woe
None thinks himself unfortunate,
Though he be so.
Take hence the Happy, lay the Rich aside,
Whose Gold, and Fertile Acres is their Pride,
The Poor will raise their drooping Heads. There's none
Miserable, but by Comparison.


To those by great Calamities o'retook,
'Tis sweet to see none wear a chearful look.
Sadly that Man his Fate bewails,

y Who in a Private Vessel Sails;


  109And naked, helpless, and forlorn,
Sinks in the Port to which his Course was born.
Storms and his Fate, he bears with evener Mind,
Wo sees a thousand Ships before him drown'd,
And all the Shore scatter'd with Wrecks does find,
Whilst Waves by Corus dash'd 'gainst Rocks resound.

Phryxus for Helen's single loss complain'd,
When z by the Gold-fleec'd Leader of the Flock

They both were took
(Brother and Sister) on his Back.
And she in mid-Seas fell a help-less Wrack.

Deucalion yet and Pyrrha, both refrain'd
From Tears, when they the swelling Sea beheld,
And nothing but the Sea that sweld:
Of Lost Mankind, all that remain'd.


But these sad meetings, these our mutual Tears
Spent to deplore our miserable State,
The Fleet, which ready now to sail appears,
Will strait dissolve and dissipate.

  110Soon as the Trumpets hasty sound shall call
The Mariners aboard, and all
With favouring Gales and Oars for Sea shall stand,
When from our sight shall fly our dear-lov'd Land:
What Fears will then our wretched Thoughts sur∣prize,
To see the Land to sink, and the Sea rise?
When Ida's tow'ring hight
Shall vanish from our sight;
The Child shall then unto its Mother say,
The Mother to her Child, pointing that way
Which tends unto the Phrygian Coast;
Lo! yonders Ilium where you spy
Those Clouds of Smoke to scale the Sky.
By this sad sign, when all marks else are lost,

Trojans their Country shall descry.
















O Horrid, cruel, cursed Fates! What Crime
Hath bloody Mars yet seen in Ten Years Time
Like sad or barbarous! where shall I begin?
With your Woes, Madam? Or yours, Aged Queen?





Whose Woes soe're you tell, they're mine; each Breast
Bears its own Griefs, but mine's with all opprest,
The universal sorrow: None can say
He's wretched, but he's such to Hecuba.






The Virgin's sacrific'd; and the Youth cast
From the Tow'rs height: Both brave yet at the last.





Relate the Series of their Deaths: declare
This double Tragedy: I long to hear
The sum of all my Griefs. Speak then, and show
The entire complement of all my Woe.





A Tow'r yet stands;* All now that's left of Troy,

Whence, bearing in his Arms his Ages Joy,
His little Grandson; Priam us'd to view
His Troops, and order what those Troops should do.
Thence, (when brave Hector in that glorious Fight
What time the routed Greeks he chac'd in flight
With Sword and Fire) to young Astyanax

The old King show'd his Fathers valiant Acts.
This noted Tow'r, once our Walls chiefest Grace,
(Now a curst Rock, and a detested Place)
Huge crouds of Souldiers with their Troops sur∣round.
A Sea-man scarce to guard their Fleet is found,
All thither flock: To some a Hill does lend
From far an open Prospect, some ascend
The Rocky Clifts, and there, eager to see,
On Tiptoes stand. Some climb this neighbouring Tree,
Some that: Th'adjoyning Woods tremble to bear
The numerous Spectators. Some there are

  113Climb up steep Precipices, some bestride
Ridges of half burnt Houses, others ride
On pieces of the Broken Wall; and some,
To see his Son's Death, get on Hector's Tomb.

Ulysses proudly stalks through all the throng,
As Way was made; leading in's Hand along
The Princely Youth; who makes no sluggish stop
In this sad March; but gaining the Tower's top,
Thence, here and there, with an undaunted Gest,
Casts round his angry Eyes: Of fome fierce Beast,
As a young tender Cub, not able yet
To tyrannize with murdering Fangs, does threat
And vainly snarls, and snaps, and swells with rage;
The Princely Captive on this lofty Stage
Like courage shows; and from all hearts does force
Compassion; ev'n Ulysses feels remorse.
He weeps not yet for whom all else shed tears.
Now whilst Ulysses (as * injoyn'd) prepares

  114His solemn Speech; and with set Pray'rs invites
The cruel Gods to those more cruel Rites,
He nimbly of his own accord, leaps down
Amid'st the Ruin's of his State and Town.





What Colchian, or what wandring Scythian,

Or Hyrcan, bordering on the Caspian Main,
That knows no Law, would such an Act have dar'd?
Cruel Busyris butchering Altars, spar'd
Yet Childrens Blood; nor ever Diomed

His Horses with the flesh of Infants fed.
Who'l take thy Limbs, and give them Funeral?





What Limbs could there be left by such a Fall?
His Bones were crush'd to pieces; Nor one Grace,
Or mark was left in Body or in Face
Resembling his Illustrious Father: All
Were utterly defac'd by the sad Fall.
His Neck was broken. His Head 'gainst a Rock
Encountring, dash'd his Brains out with the knock.
Nought but a shapeless Trunk he lay.






Too like his Father.






The Greeks next, (weeping yet for what they'd done)
To act another Crime as barbarous, run
In hast t' Achilles Tomb; whose farther side

aRhetaean Waves beat with a Gentle Tide.
Th' Extreams to that oppos'd, a Champaign Ground
Invests; in th' mid'st of which a Vale is found,
From whose low Edge a hilly Ridge ascends,
And 'bout it like a Theatre extends.
The Shoar is covered with the numerous Press.
Some think this done in order to release
Their Navies stop; some look on the Design
As meant t'extirpate all Troy's Hostile Line.

  116Most of the giddy Vulgar seem to hate
The Act, they come to see and perpetrate.

Trojans attend too; and with fearful Eyes
Expect the last of all Troy's Tragedies.
When strait, as at our solemn Marriage Rites,
In head of all, are born the Nuptial Lights:
Next Helen, as the Brides sad Pronuba

Comes with dejected meen; whilst Phrygians pray,
So may Hermione wed; and so may she
Return'd with shame to her first Husband be.

Trojans and Greeks are both with Horrour strook,
When forth the Princess comes; with submiss Look,
But Cheeks that dy'd in modest Blushes shine,
More Beautiful in this her sad Decline.
As Phaebus seems to cast a sweeter Light
Now near his Set, when the approaching Night
Invades the confines of the doubtful Day.
The vulgar Minds are lost in strange Dismay;
Who (as their Custom is) always commend
Those who are going to their fatal End.
Her Beauty some, others her Youth as much.
Some the sense does of her chang'd fortune touch.
All her high Spirit praise; that Death dares meet.
Fearless, she outsteps Pyrrhus; whilst to see't,
Some quake, some pitty, some admire. Now come
To the Lands Point, Pyrrhus his Fathers Tomb
Ascends; nor does the stout Virago shrink
Or draw one Foot yet back, though at Deaths brink,
But with a stern look, Pyrrhus to provoke,
Turns to receive the Sacrificing Stroak.

  117Pitty at once, and wonder all minds fill,
Seing her so brave, and Pyrrhus slow to kill.
Soon as his Hand into her tender Brest
Had forc'd the murthering Steel, a full stream prest
Of bubling Gore through the large wound: nor dy'd
Her Courage yet: she fell as though she try'd
T'oppress Achilles in his Grave, and force
The Earth to lye yet heavier on his Corse.
Both sides, the Phrygians, and the Greeks lament:
These timerously, their Sighs those louder vent.
This was the Order of the Sacrifice.
Nor on the Grounds hard Surface stagnant lies,
Or floats in streams the sacrificed Blood;
The thirsty Grave soon drunk up all the Flood.





Go, go ye Greeks! now seek your Homes again,
With your wing'd Fleet securely plough the Main,
The Royal Virgin, and the Youth are slain.
The War's now ended. Would my life were so.
Where shall I bear this Burden of my Woe?
How quit my Deaths vivacious Remora?

For whom shall I my Tears sad Tribute pay?
For my Girl? Grand-son? Husband? Country lost?
Or for all these at once? or my self most?
Whose only wish is Death. Cruel! thou hy'st
To murder Infants; to young Virgins fly'st:
Each where mak'st hast to kill: But me alone
Thou fear'st; and shun'st, though all night call'd upon

  118'Mid'st Fire and Sword: Nor Rage of hostile Pow'rs,
Nor Flames, nor Ruins of Troy's falling Tow'rs,
One poor old Woman could dispatch. How nigh
To thee, yet (Priam!) when thou fell'st, stood I?





Away to Sea, ye Captives! now unmor'd
The Greek Fleet hoises Sail: Hast, hast aboard.




