





OH! Stop the Rage of your unjust Desires;
And think, what Sparks of Hell attend your Lawless Fires!






And call my Favours to your lost Remembrance.
For, where Good Deeds are ill Rewarded, there
'Tis Justice, not Vain-Glory, to Recite 'em.
Did I for this, stretch out my Bounteous Hand,
To free you from the Slavery of Pyrates?

Nay, bought you under-hand too; when, perhaps,
They meant, you should have stalk't the Market-Place,
In State and Pomp, with your Price writ on your Fore-Head?
Did I (I say) free you from all this Infamy;
Here sealed, and protected you?






You powrd your larger Sums, to free me from
One Slavery, but to impose a Greater.

  2For, if your Words interpret your Black Thoughts,
I am your Captive still:
And feel the Weight and Misery of Bonds,
In that which you style Liberty.





Then, Chast Diana, take your own Desire,
And to your Native dear Digrace return.
Your Fortunes, without me, are at their Ebbing;
And you may Beg with Vertue: 'Tis within
My Power, to make you Rich. The Prince, my Master,
Left his Dear Princess on her Nuptial-Day;
And, in a Freak of Jealousie, went to Sea:
Where, (rest his Soul!) as my Two Years Intelligence
Informs me, he has made the Fish a Banquet.
His sprightly Lady, for the Disappointment
Of a lost Bridegroom, on her Nuptial-Night,
Like a sad Pensive Turtle, stole away
One Evening; and was never heard of since:
No doubt, she has met her Husband's Destiny▪
I dare almost, with Confidence, pronounce
My self the Lord of thus Magnificent Pallace;
And all this Mass of dazling Wealth, my own:
A fairer Pile, all Cyprus does not yield.
Be thou then mine: Here thou shalt Reign a Goddess;

A Goddess, brighter than our Cyprian-Deity.

Why all these unkind Looks? Fye! smile, Lysandra.

Nothing but Love should on this Shore be found,
Since Loves fair Goddess blest the Hallow'd-Ground.





Heav'ns! What a Villain's this? Cease this bold Language;
For, I am Unalterable: Nay, my Guilt's
Impardonable even to hold Discourse
With such Impiety.





Then know, vain Girl,
The Good from which you flye, I'le force you to.
Are you full-gorged, and wanton?
I'le lure you, with a Vengeance! Come, be plyant;
Or else, behold your Fate.





I would I were so Happy! Kill me, do
Enter a Servant, Running.



Curse on this Interruption! What's your Business?



The Princess is return'd.




Hell and Confusion! How that Name distracts me?



This News brings me some Glimpse of Happiness.






Welcom, dear Traveller: Say, kind Corinna;

Is our great Princess, the Divine Olizia,

Safely return'd? And art thou kindly come,
To bring the Blessed News?




Yes, Sir, I am.




This dazling Bliss, breaks like the Morn upon me:
And thou'rt the Star, that ushers-in the Sun.





I'le take this happy Hour, to fly this Monster.
Exit.




Her secret Flight, and her two years Concealment,
Made us suspect, that some malicious Planet
Had plunged her in her Husbands Fate; and cropt
Her blooming Vertues, with her Tyrant's Crimes.
We, her poor frighted Slaves, believed her Dead.





No, Sir, she lives; and, as the just Reward
Of Vertue, favour'd with the Smiles of Heav'n.






This Sound has all the Musick of the Sphears:
The Groans of Mandrakes! Curse on th' Hellish Note.






Nor is this all the Blessing that I bring ye:
She that so long sigh'd for her Injur'd Name,
Mourning the Cruelty of her first Lord's
Inhumane Jealousy, has bravely changed
Her wither'd Willow, for a fresher Myrtle:
And chose a worthyer Partner of her Joys.









Yes: And this very Night,
Must Celebrate her Nuptials.





I am all Wonder!
But, when I seriously reflect; How comes it,
That she, who lost her Pallace, with that sense
Of her wrong'd Innocence, and blasted Fame,
Should quit her Pious Task, and give the World
New Cause to blemish her, for this rash Marriage?





I'le tell you, Sir: Not to recount the Penance
She suffer'd, for her Jealous Tyrant's Sins;

  4Nor the too long, sad, miserable Years,
We spent in a poor despicable Cottage▪
About Three Months ago, this Gentleman
Landing upon our Shoar, (for near the Sea,
She kept her Humble Court) as Fate would have him,
Made choice of the same Melancholly Walk,
To finish an unhappy Life. There meeting
The near Resemblance of their Miseries,
Toucht her so sensibly, that from Conversing,
She grew to Like him; and from that▪ to Love him.
The Sadness in his Eyes, was her own Mirror.
If Love e're chose Equality, 'twas then.
For, on the Sea, the Common-Scene of Fate,
She had a Husband, He a Mistriss, lost.
And in uniting Two such drooping Hearts,
Their gloomy Cupid matcht his pointed Darts.
In short, They marryed in a Cell; and come
To Consummate their Nuptials in a Pallace.
She's here.








Of Greatness, now are shrunk into a Shadow.
Madam, This blest Return has brought your poor
Despairing Vassals, no indifferent Joys.





I thank thee, honest Pyrgus: But begon.
I have brought Home a Noble Guest.
He calls himself, Philander. Shew your Duty,
In your Respect: Go, and Attend him hither▪
You'l find him writing a Dispatch to th' Court
Of Scicily; t'acquaint his Noble Parents,
What Fortune brings him hither.










After my Sighs and Tears, and all my Sufferings
For my first Cruel Prince, to be thus blest
With a much dearer▪ Treasure, the Affection
Of my Philander! Heav'ns I thank ye! Thus;
Thus ought blest Venus, to be born o'th' Sea.


  5Tempests, and Darkness, Billows, Shipwracks, (Things
By which my first ungrateful Husband perisht)
Were but as Foyles, to set out my Delights;
Placed just before my Joys, as Monsters are
Before the Gates of Pallaces.




But take heed, lest my Transports speak too loud.
What fair Intruder's this?






A persecuted, wretched Maid, who throws
Her self for Refuge, at your sacred Feet.





Can any thing, with such a Form, be wretched?
But say, sweet Innocence, What are those Ills,
Which you can Fear, and I Redress?






My Story will disturb your happier Thoughts.






Boldly, and freely speak; I take delight,
To listen to the Accents of th' Afflicted.
Say then, What unkind Stars
Could frown on so much Sweetness?






That frown on Love. Since then your Princely Ear
Vouchsafes to hear me; know, my Name's Lysandra;

My Country, Sicily; my Parents Noble,
And Wealthy too. I was born Free; tho not
To be so: For not yielding to their Wise,
Grave Councel, to be Sacrificed in th'Arms
Of a Rich, Nauseous Miser, for the sake
Of th'only dearest Lord of all my Vows;
I left my Parents, follow'd him to Sea:
And, trusting to the wavering Tide o'th'Sea
And Fortune, (being embark't in different Vessels,
T'avoyd Suspicion and Pursuit) our more
Unhappy Ship was made a Prize to Pyrates,
And wretched I, their Merchandize. From whom
I was Redeem'd by Pyrgus.











Yes; but to a greater Bondage:
To Prostitute my self t'his foul Desires.
For had your blest Return not Rescued me,
My ravish't Honor had been made his Prey:
Nor has the Horror of it left me yet.





Enough, fair Sufferer; thou'rt for ever Rescued
From Him, and Slavery.





Madam, I owe you
More than the Ransome of my Life; so much
The Safety of my Honour is above it.





Once more enjoy your Freedom: If you deem it
Freedom to live with me, I shall desire
No other Evidence, than your own Complaint,
To prove him Guilty; and I'le punish him.
In the mean-time, my House shall be your Refuge.
Retire; whil'st I consult your Good in Private.





Welcom, my dearest Lord; I cannot shew you
Any new Favours: After I have given
My Self, the small Addition of my Fortunes,
Are but a Tribute.






O're-pow'rs my Soul with Wonder and Delight!
This high and splendid Pile, a Roof more fit
For the Reception of an Eastern Monarch.

And the kind Influence of this smiling Star,

That lights the Gilded Battlements: Such Love,
Wealth, Beauty, are too great for Mortal Blessings.





Oh, do not wonder at this little Offering!
Were my Wealth greater, were the World my own,
My Heart and Treasures ought to go together.





This Bliss is much too mighty for my Humble Fortunes:
And I can never merit half this Glory.





Come, Sir, walk-in; the Genius of this Pallace
Waits with Impatience, to Salute its Lord.






I follow you▪ dear Madam: But implore
Your Leave, for one short Minutes stay; to lose
My dead Panthea's Memory. And since
She sleeping lyes in a cold Bed of Waves,
That she may never float within my Thoughts,
But be drown'd there too, give me leave to Bury her
In one last Tear: And when I have paid that short
Just Funeral-Rite  





Oh my unkind Philander!

Does that usurping Shadow haunt you still?





My dearest Princess, thou art so Divine,
No mean Perfections should obtain thy Smiles.
Alas! I'de only drive the weak Remains
Of her Faint Image from my Breast, to make it
Worthy t'entertain thy Brighter Excellence.
And when I have purged my Drossie Part away,
Then I will come all Kindness; lose my self
In all the Extasies of mighty Love's
Unbounded Pleasures, uncontroul'd Desires;
And make Love's Altars shine with pure Immortal Fires.





Was ever Fate like mine?





To have a Princess of your Birth and Beauty,
Descend in Glory, like a Goddess, on him:
And have so much Divinity repay'd
With such a cold Ingratitude, is hard.





Alas, Ingratitude's all the Return
My Kindness meets. My first ungrateful Lord,
Out of a wild and groundless Jealousie,
Deserted me upon my Nuptial-Day:
And I, like a fond Woman, and true Wife,
Mourn'd for his Absence, invoked the Gods
For his Return to Love, and Me. And when,
Abandoning my Pomp, and all my Greatness,
My sad dejected Mind chose a poor Cell,
To fit my Humble State: Where, when I had heard,
An angry T••pest had revenged my Wrongs,
And punisht his Unkindness with his Fate,
I met this dearer Idol of my Eyes.

  8And my first Husband's setting▪Light gone out,

Philander's clearer Brightness fill'd my Soul.
But, to compleat my Misery, my own
Inviting Eyes betray'd an easy Conquest.





And, Madam, Could your Kindness be your Crime?
No; for that signal Grace, he ought to think,
His Life's too mean an Offering.






Thinks the Oblation of a Smile too much
After my little Beauty had subdued
That Superstitious fond Idolatry,
Which two long Years, h'had paid to a Dead Mistriss;
After the Sacred Hymeneal Bond
Had joyn'd our seeming mutual Loves; then straight
Her Image made a second Resurrection:
Struck with a sudden Horror, a pale Trembling
Seiz'd him all o're To such an Ebb of Coldness,
His Heart relapsed; that even her very Name
Had greater Influence, than my slighted Beauty.
Goddess of Love, compose his Troubled Mind.
Whil'st all my Kindness does neglected lye,
Shadows, and Ghosts, have greater Charms than I.







Immortal Pow'rs, You that enjoyn Mankind
Such Strictness, teach him to observe it too.
If Constancy best please your Deities,
Why did you suffer me to violate
Vows, that were scarce less Sacred, than your selves?
Why did you suffer me, to gaze on Fair

Olizia? But  
If looser Fires burn brighter in your Sight,
VVhy do I then extinguish 'em? VVhy don't ye
Permit me, to embrace this Lady? Dally
In her soft Arms, and revel in her Treasures;
And quite forget the Name of my Panthea?









Sir, Let me beg your Pardon, if my Business
Make me unwelcom: But t'excuse my Boldness,
My Warrant's sealed by a Commanding Hand.

Gives Phil. a Letter.















So she calls her self.







Read, and be undeceived.






Had I not been more than a half Spectator
Of her untimely Death, thou might'st deceive me.
But yet these Characters are sure the Traces
Of my Pantheas Pen. Your Pardon leave me.






JOy to your Nuptials, and your prosperity in the Princess Olizia. Now I thank the milder Tempests, since my Misfortunes have thus made way to your deserved Greatness. I only request this in Recompence for my Two Years Sufferings, that as I was Redeem'd from Pyrates by Olizias Steward, and now am her Captive, you would procure me free Passage into my Country; where I will So∣lemnize your Marriage with perpetual Virginity, and live a Stran∣ger in my Fathers Family, as I now make my self a double One, whil'st I stile my Name Lysandra to the World; but remain to you, and my unhappy self,
Panthea.


Panthea living! Is it not a Sound
Would rowze a sleeping Lover from his Grave?
But, Oh she lives to see Philander Perjur'd!
Lives to upbraid me of the basest Treason,
The blackest Infidel could e're commit!
Did I upon my Knees, at her dear Feet,

  10Give up my Heart, and my vow'd Soul resigne?
And call to witness that Bright Lamp of Heav'n,
T'attest my Vows:
Vows of that Sacred Force, that ought to be
No less Unchangeable, no less Immortal,
Than that Bright Sun, which I invoked to hear'm:
Vows of that Force, that Death should ne're dissolve.
How dare such Treachery as mine see Light?
Shrowd me, some God, in Everlasting Night.










Where do you lead me? Why this State for me?



'Tis such as does become your Bridal-Chamber.
Exit.





Is this a Place for me?
Can I perform the Rites of a young Bridegroom,
Melt in the Embraces of a yielding Beauty,
Whil'st the Remembrance of my Broken Vows,
And the cold Thought of my despised Panthea

Turns all my freezing Blood to Veins of Ice?
And yet, How can I make a base Return
T'Olizias Love, her kind and generous Love?
She, who t'a Stranger, both my Birth and Fortunes
Unknown, gave me her Heart, her Self, and makes me Lord
Of Treasures, that would tempt a Gynick from his Cell.
And, Shall I pay Ingratitude for Love?
And when she meets me with her dazling Brightness,
To yield the Pleasures of a Nuptial-Bed;
Shall I disdainfully tell her, She invites me
To a poor Treat, that is not worth Acceptance?
An Insolence can do no less than Damn me.
Did I for this betray her to a Marriage?
Guide me, ye Gods, in this unhappy Labryrinth.





Dearest Philander!Rising up; & Advancing to him.

  11  Ha! How does my Lord?
Methinks, you are not well; your Looks are alter'd;
A sullen Paleness hangs upon your Cheek,
As if your kind Olizia did not please you.





Fairest Olizia! true, I am not well.
The Thought of my lost Love.  







Is this the Musick of our Bridal-Night?





Oh, that I durst but tell her, that she Lives!
But that would be a too Tyrannick Cruelty.






Are these your Vows? Is this the Love you promist?
But my Philander, I can still forgive you:
And you'll deserve your Pardon; will you not?
What cannot be recall'd, should be forgotten.
Can Sighs or Tears, or all your Cruelty
To me, restore her Life?





Indeed, I do not merit half this Sweetness:
But I will study to repay your Kindness.

Panthea, now I do remember Thee,
And curse the Fate, that could have Pow'r to part us:
But must thy Resurrection make me Cruel,
Ungrateful to such Glorious Excellence? Aside.

Must I, like an Apostate, break my Faith,
Rend up the Nuptial-Seals of my sworn Heart,
And make my Soul all one perfidious Blot.







Observe that gloomy Brow; I fear in all
That clouded Heav'n, there's no kind Star for me.





Had some propitious God, with the least Beam of Heav'n,
In a kind Dream, but visited my Soul
Before this Marriage-Knot was tyed, and told me,

Panthea lived, I would have left the Altar,
With-drawn my guilty Hand, and with disdain Aside.

Shrunk from th'embrace of the World, greatest Empress,
To have been just to thee: But now my Heart
Is sealed and gone, and thou revivest too late.
Nor is my Crime my Treason, but my Fate.
Madam, forgive a fearful trembling Lover,
Whose awful Feet approach his Heav'n so slowly.
True Piety fears where it does adore.

  12In these kind Arms, and on this rising Breast, Kissing and Embracing.

The Touch of this dear Hand, and this soft▪ Bosom,
Would tempt an Angel; and can Flesh and Blood
Resist th'impetuous Joy? My dearest Life,
Light of my World, and Treasure of my Soul,
Am I the cruel, false, unkind Philander?






No, my best Life, thou art not; now thou'rt kind.
The Raptures of this one▪dear happy Minute,
Would sweeten a whole Life. Farewel my Pains:
Nothing but Joy can come within this Circle.

Corinna, bid Lysandra bring the Banquet
She has prepared.












In all her Riots, all her haughty Love,
Could never Treat her Lord, with half my Pride,
Nor half my Kindness.






Must my Panthea then be a Spectator,
And introduce me to her Rivals Arms? Aside.

Can I out-live that Thought?




What means my Lord?




Must she stand by, and with accusing Eyes,
See my false Hand the Bridal-Nectar hold,
See my false Lips salute the Lifted-Gold?
Whil'st my warm Cheeks with flushing Pleasures glow,
And warmer Veins with pamper'd Fierceness flow Aside.

Then see her Traytor in his Nuptial-Bed,
On Perfumed Down, and spreading Odours laid,
Whil'st her sad Heart, with her brim-swelling Eyes,
Cryes, False Philander! and then breaks, and dyes.





Will you relapse agen, and are you going
To be the cruel and unkind Philander?

Did you but fhew me Heav'n, to take it from me?





Defend me▪ ye Bright Guards of Heav'n: Methinks,
I see Panthea all in Tears, and pale▪
As Death, opening her perjur'd Murderers Curtains.
So Chastly Caesar look't, so Brutus trembled.






Why this Despair, dear Sir? Those Sufferings
Will dye, when you are kind: Indeed, they will.
My gentle Looks shall soften all your Fury.
I'le love you into Peace, as the kind Sun

Dispels the Clouds, till the rough Tempest dyes.





No, Angel-form, thou art too Bright for me:
Thou art all Innocence, a pure Idea,

Too Good to mix with foul and drossie Mortals:
I am all Monster, Savage, alI that's ill.
My Heart's all canker'd, my corrupted Veins
Are only fill'd with circulating Poysons.
In my Blaek Soul, Ten thousand Furies dwell,
Whole Mines of Sulphur, and whole Lakes of Hell.





Oh drive these Visionary Horrors hence!
Dear Sir, do not indulge this unkind Frenzy.





No, Madam; from these precious Sweets I'le flye;
Take hence this Fiend, take hence these Leprous Stems;
My blasting Eyes, and my invenom'd Breath.
Thou art too Excellent, too Divinely Fair,
To live within my Pestilential Air.






Were ever Nuptials, angry Pow'rs, like mine?
The rest
Of my more prosperous Sex, compared with me,
Are Goddesses, in glittering Chariots ride,
And make their Lovers Vassals to their Pride:
But I (poor I) Court mine, and am deny'd.










OH; Gobrias! How I loath those hated Walls?
Under that Roof, that splendid Pile, is lodged
The greatest Fiend, that ever was ordein'd:
Heav'ns Instrument of Vengeance, that e're took
Commission from the Gods, and Pay from Hell.








'Tis very strange, my Lord, that two years Travail.
With all the Pleasures of the ransack't VVorld,
Cannot remove that Woman from your Mind.





Ah, Gobrias! when I first beheld that Beauty
By the false Opticks of my wounded Eyes,
I saw such infinite, united VVonders,
I thought the Magazin of the Blind God,

His Darts, his Quivers, all his Arms were there.
At last, I marryed her; and thought my self
Possessor of a Jewel, much more worth
Than all the Treasures of the East. But Oh!
My Diamond proved but Glass, false brittle Glass.
Oh, she had lost her Honor! She that look'd
All Health without, within was all Contagion.





My Lord, might I advise you, you should scorn her:
Leave her, and her detested Crimes to Fate.
Search Nature's store, and find some worthier Choice,
T'adorn your Nuptial-Bed. Get a Divorce,
And marry once agen: Some brighter Beauty
Would soon dispel her faint and sullyed Image.





No, Gobrias; for her sake, I loath the Sex.
They are all treacherous Joys. Even when they melt
In our Embraces, we but bath in Poysons.





Alas, Sir! those are but the monstrous Forms,
Which the false Light of your wild Thoughts presents you.

  15Come, Sir, let some more charming Face convert you.
You cannot guess, the Charms attend on Marriage:
Where Love and Virtue make the Bridal-Musick.





Could I embrace thy Councel, I were happy.
But know, I loved; and dyed for that fair Devil;

And my wrong'd Love is turn'd t'invetrate Hate;
VVhil'st from that Soursce, Eternal Vengeance flows.





If then you are resolved to be your own,
And her Tormentor, VVhy in this Disguise?






The Mine is not yet strong enough, to blow up.
This Trayt'ress, by returning thus unknown,
And in Disguise, perhaps I may surprize her,
Dallying i'th' Arms of a strong-sinew'd Favourite;
Or revelling amongst a Herd of Satyres;
Whil'st some fair Cupid, with his wanton Ayres,
Stretches her slack'ning Veins, and tunes her Blood
Up to a Pitch so high, fit for th'Embrace
Of his own Mothers fierce, hot, War-like God.

Oh, had I Rage enough, to tear her Heart out,
And make the Blood of this false Scorpion cure me.







Oh, thou unhappy Princess, that such Love,
And so much Beauty, should deserve no more.
This dull Philander, blind to his own Glory,
Flyes from those very Arms  






Corinna here! Her Cozen, and her Confident!
Madam  




A Stranger here at this dark Hour!
Offers to go.



Corinna stay; 'tis Artaban that calls thee.




Prince Artaban! Ye Gods, is he alive!
Poor Princess, now thou art compleatly wretched. Aside.

What Ruins does this rising-Planet threaten?
Are all the Stories of your Watry-Grave
False as the Oceans Smiles, in which Fame told us 




Yes, they are all false, false as the Oaths of Women.









False as that Trayt'ress, that I left behind me.
Dangers I met, and Shipwrack I have suffer'd;
And after two years Travail, am return'd,
To tell you that I Live But, Cozen, say:
How fares our lusty Widow?








I mean our young brisk Wife, the Fair Olizia.



Undone by her, unkind ungrateful Lord!








How could you be so barbarously Jealous?
Did she deserve it from you?






'Tis true, I had the Satisfaction on
My Nuptial Day, to know the great Lord Lysias

Had tasted her dear easy Sweets before me.
But why should I be Jealous? Alas! kind Man,
He had only eased me of my first Nights Trouble,
And laid a good Foundation for a Bridegroom.




Fye, Sir! But what black Monster told you this.



Only the dearest Friend I have on Earth?









Araxes; that brave Gallant Man:
He that would run thro all the angry Elements,
And meet even Death in any shape, to serve me.
This kind Araxes, being return'd from Travail,
And hearing that the King design'd to give me

Olizia, flew with all the VVings of Friendship,
To quench the threatning Fire; but came too late:
The fatal Knot was tyed. Then in my Ears,
He breath'd a Story of that dreadful Accent:
Told me, I had took that Viper to my Bosom. 





Hold your Cariere Pray, how came this Araxes

So wise, so knowing? VVhence had he this wondrous
Intelligence of all her private Sins?





From her own Bawd, Lord Lysias Confident.
He could have told me all their stoln Amours,
And Assignations for three Years together,
Had he suspected when he left this Kingdom,
Her VVitchcrafts would have led my Soul astray.






And all this you believed. Now hear your Folly:
Suppose that Treacherous Lord design'd t'abuse you,
What fitter Instrument than this Araxes?

Who makes so sure a Traytor, as a Friend?




The brave Araxes scorn'd it.





Were not so large, but that the great Lord Lysias

Had Treasures, Favors, Honors to bestow,
Such as might dazle a much surer Friend.
Were you not sensible, that Lord had Courted her
For many Years; and when he saw her Beauty
Design'd your Prize, no doubt his slighted Passion
Converted to Revenge, and to strike home,
And blast your whole Lifes Peace, he chose your Confident,
Your own best Friend, t'administer the Poyson.





I thank you for your galless, soft Morality:
But I have, at present, no such Gentle Thoughts
About me, to be preach'd into a Convert.





Had I been you, I would have search'd the World,
T'have found that Impious Lord; and when I had fixt
His perjur'd Soul low as that Hell that had
Inspired it, I'de have brought his Canker'd Heart
And laid it at her Feet; and then received
Her spotless Honor in my longing Bosom:
Prized her above my Life, loved her next Heaven;
Not left her so inhumanly as you did.





Yes, Madam, had we liv'd i'th' Golden-Age,
When Milk and Herbs were th' only Riotous food,
Then Women were not pampered into Lust,
Then Mans more temperate blood had less gall in't;
And then your Morals, might be practicable.





Was ever such a Cruel Temper heard!
But, she has rewarded that your Barbarity,
And fixt that Mirtle Wreath, which your unkindness
Had forfeited, on a deserving Brow.









She has taken the advantage
Of that false Fame, that told us you were dead.










Indeed, 'twas much unlucky;
But 'tis no more than you deserved.






Confusion on her hot, rank, burning Blood!
Death! Married! Now did I not tell thee, Gobrias?

What precious Saints are Women? Cursed Women!
Married agen! Damn her!







Consider, 'twas your Fault: Do not blame her.
You left her basely, left her all in Tears:
And as a just Reward for your Unkindness,
We had been long confirm'd, that you were lost,
And Dead.





And she like a sad Widow, drank
My Funeral-Wine on her new Wedding night.
Confound the Syren!






Oh, forbear this Fury!
Consider, 'twas a Sin of Ignorance.
Nor is her Error any lawless Love:
Her Love, at worst, has only Marryed; and
You know, that Marriages are writ in Heaven.





Yes, they're writ there; & so are Wars, Plagues, Famines;
So all the Engines of the Sky, th'Events
Of Thunders, Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges,
Design'd from the Foundation of the World,
To ruin Mankind, are all writ in Heav'n.




Oh my rash foolish Tongue!




Marryed! Accursed Woman! By this Hand,
The Sex is all Perdition, wild as Storms,
And Ravenous as the Grave; Their Breath is Wild-Fire,
Their Eyes are Meteors, and their Arms are Quick-Sands:
And whil'st those lead the wandring Fool astray,
'Tis these devour him. Is there a Destroyer,
Like Impudent, Inconstant, Perjur'd, Infamous,
Infernal VVoman. VVoman damn'd the VVorld,
Her Treason drown'd it, and her Lust will burn it!
When Nature shall all blaze, and the Poles crack,
Hell gape, and all its Sulphurous Mines burst out,
Tis only Woman that must light the Fire-brands.






Oh horror! what a Tempest have I rais'd?
Dear Sir, no more; cease this mad Rage.





I've done  
Oh thou hot-Blooded, and insatiate VVitch!
By Heav'ns, I question if a VVomans Lust
E're dyes; but only when her putrid Carkass,
As rotten as her Soul, is housed in Earth,
The Brutal-Monster makes a Resurrection,
And turns a Succubus, to play her Game out.




Barbarian! Why this Storm against poor Women?




I'll tell you the Design of their Creation:
When the Apostate-Angels ward with Heav'n,
And all their Pride and Impudence was grown
Too fierce for Chains to bind, or Hell to tame;
Heav'n in meer Policy,
Invented Woman-kind to match the Devil.

Marryed again! Perdition seize her Soul!
How she distracts me!




Why this Furious Raving!




I Rave! You wrong me; by this Light, not I
A Phlegmatick Philosopher in's Tub,
VVould preach as much as this is. But, dear Cozen,
For once I will be calm, and reason with you.
After I went away, How long was she
In choosing this New Mate, to fill my Place?





VVhen you had deserted her, she offered all
Her Prayers for your Return; courted the Sea,

To bring you back agen: was that true Mourner 




Was that true Witch, that rais'd the wind that sunk me?








I have done: Go on, dear Cozen.




And for that impious Lord, that had abused her,
A hundred times upon her Knees, I've heard her
Call Heav'n, t'attest her Innocence.






That's th'only use that Women make of Heav'n,
To be Fore-sworn by't.






This Blasphemy's too horrid.









I'le be all Gentleness; not speak one word,
That shall offend you.





Learn then t'have a sense
Of her wrong'd Vertue, and your groundless Rage.
When you'd forsaken her, her Greatness seem'd
(Without her dearest Lord to share it with her)
A Burden, not an Ornament of Life:
Then leaving all her Treasures, all her State
Abjured, like a poor Pilgrim, she deserted
Her hated Pallace: And in that Retirement,
When she had long heard your Death, and truly paid you
For two long Years, a pious Widows Sighs.
At last, this Gentleman  






And, Did she hold Two Years, full two whole Years,
Before she Marryed him? In that long time,
How many Grooms and Pages had she tired?





Go, bruitish Infidel, thou deservest thy Fate.
But what have I pull'd down? Methinks, I see
In his wild Looks Revenge, like Trains of Ruine,
Against the poor Olizias Life prepar'd:
Let me who caused her Danger, be her Guard.






Oh, Gobrias! What has my Frenzy done?
This subtle Devil will out-wit me: Alarm
Th'Adulterors, and put 'em on their Guard.
But fly, take the Advantage of the Night:
O're-take her, Seize her, Bind her, Gag her; any thing,
So you but keep that noisy Engine silent.





Who have we here? some kind Night-walking Pander? Pyrgus!









To see thy Lord alive.






My wondring Senses  






Come, suppress thy Wonder!
Thou hast stranger Prodigies t'admire at Home.

Pyrgus, I left thee Honest, Brave, and Faithful.





And, Sir, I'm no ill Steward of that Honesty
You left with me; I have improved, not lessen'd it.





I thank thee, Pyrgus. I have a Business for thee,
Which if thou darest perform 





Which if I dare not,
Curse both my Cowardize, and my Ingratitude:
Speak your Commands, and use my Life to serve you:
I ow't you, as the Author of my Fortunes.





Kind Pyrgus: Know then, I've deceived the World,
And by the help of a Disguise, return'd
Safe, and unknow to any but thy self,
My faithful Gobrias, and the false Corinna:

But I have spoyl'd her Rhetorick, for some
Few Minutes. Having stopt her Ravens-Croak,
I must obtain thy Art and Int'rest,
To introduce me safe, and privately,
Into your Ladies Bed-Chamber.









Do, and I'le make thee happy; do, and make me
Thy Vassal. To behold 'em Kissing, Courting,
Embracing; Oh, How that dear Scene transports me?
Now Sorceress, I'le countermine your Charms;
And whil'st she fryes in her warm Satyres Arms,
I'le make her Veins with a new Poyson swell,
And put her in a Sweat more hot than Hell.






Philander and Olizia in a Bed-Chamber.



HAve I not yet deserved your Heart, unkind Philander?

I have a mighty Sum to reckon with you.





And 'tis a Debt I am too poor to pay.
Let me but count it up; then blush, and Dye.
The Trojan Youth, whose dazled Eyes survey'd
Three tempting Courting Goddesses at once,
Did not behold thy Worth. The fair Olizia,

Has in her all their Deities: Their Charms,
Beauty, Wit, Glory, are united here.





Oh Sir, lay by this airy, flattering Style!
Yet you speak kindly, and there is some Bliss
In a kind word, to her that has no more.





Mirror of Goodness! Thou art all Divine:
And he that should embrace such infinite Charms,
Ought to be Lord of all th'united Graces,
That Lover e're possest. Greatness should wait
Upon his Birth, and Honor on his Sword:
And to Crown all, his undivided Soul
Should be entirely thine: whil'st no less Lights
Should shine before thy Sun. But I, poor I,
Unworthy, far unworthy, want all these.
And for thy Wrongs, and my Ingratitude,
When my just Grief has bow'd me to the Dust,
And the kind Grave has purged my Dross away;
Thy Love I only can in Heav'n repay.





Can't you be Just, unless you Dye? Nor must
You love me, 'till we meet among the Stars?
'Tis very hard: Yet 'tis some Joy to think,
I shall find Love in Heav'n; For I've but little here.






Oh, matchles Sweetness! And thou cruel Heart,
Since my Pantheas Pow'r has harden'd thee
To that Inflexible and stubborn Marble, Aside.

Too stiff to kneel to this Celestial Creature;
Own, own the Cause of thy Impiety:
Cheat her no more; but say, Panthea Lives.
Dear Madam, I've a sad Truth to tell you.





And is it sad, dear Sir? Out with it then.
For since th'unkind Philander will not love me,
All that is Sad, all that is Miserable,
Should center here.





More weight to my Confusion!
Yet I must speak.  




What would you say?











What? That you have got some other
Dear Ghost, besides Pantheas? Alas,
You need no more; her Pow'r alone's too Great.
And whil'st
For her cold Shade, you from my Arms retire,
Her Ashes have more Lustre, than my Fire.





Now you present my Guilt in all its Horrors.
But Madam, whil'st I gaze on this bright Glory,
And stand like a Damn'd Soul, that's placed within
The Sight of Paradise, and must not enter,
Impute it to a strange commanding Cause:
Imagine, that the lost Panthea lives.






Panthea lives! Then Gods shut in your Day;
Light, and the World, and all your Joyes farewel.
There wanted but this Stroke: This dreadful Word
Has all the wounds Despair and Death can give. Swoons away.






What have I done! The killing Sound has closed
Her fainting Eyes: her Rosy Sweet's shut up,
Like a be-nighted Flow'r. She's gone! She's gone!
My dearest, sweetest, kindest Life return:
Return, and keep thy mourning Slave alive.
Revive, look up, open those orient Lights,
And take my Sighs, my Soul into thy Eyes.






Why do you wake me? Now Panthea lives,
You should be kind, and give me Leave to dye.
Let my Heart break; do, let it break: Since she
Fills all your Soul, there is no Room for me.






She's gone agen! Return, dear Saint, return.
Look up, and live: It is not I alone,
That call thee back; the Gods themselves invite thee.





Why do you raise me from Death's gentle Sleep,
And force a poor lost wretched thing to live?
You ne're were truly Cruel, till this Hour.
Oh, let me dye! I dye to make you Happy.
Then your Panthea may possess you all.
Go to her Sir, and tell her when I'm Dead,
And laid aside forgotten in the Dust,
Shee needs not fear a Rival.
Then she may safely please her Loved Philander,

Meet your kind Looks, and fill those dear, dear Arms:
And like a Star all Glorious, all Divine,
Rise in that Heav'n, where I must never shine.





Talk not of Death; Live to inrich the Universe:
Live to bless me. Alas! I only said
She Lived, to try your Courage.









Ah that my Pity should make me a Traytor!
But, Is it Treason to preserve a Life
So Precious? No, she cannot, must not dye,
If Love can save her.





But Sir, Are you sure

Panthea does not Live?





Name her no more.
All that is Excellent, all that's Divine,
Lives in thy Arms: Fixt in that glorious Sphear,
Let me look down on poor and abject Mortals.





My kind dear Lord; What a bright Change is here!
Did you then only fright my Soul away,
To call it back again with such blest Musick?






Shall I like an unsatisfyed dull Fool,
Be willful blind to such Tryumphant Bliss?

  25Or like young Alexander's mad Ambition,
Idly and wildly rave for other VVorlds,
VVhen I have all, all Natures VVealth in Thee?
No my best Life.







Stand there: Your Slaves are ready.
Exit.




Patience, ye Gods! Hold, hold my boyling Blood.
Oh! 'twere a rare and excellent Revenge,
To joyn their Hearts on my Swords Point, as close
As their Engendring Lips.




VVhat Man art thou?




One that comes hither to behold a Sight,
VVould damn a Saint, and blast a Basilisk:

To see two brooding Vipers mix their Poysons,
And a lascivious, lewd, Adult'ress burn
VVith Lust far more tempestuous, Flames far hotter,
Than that great Day, when the Young Charioteer
Misled the Sun, and set the World on Fire.
Look here, Have you forgot this Face?












Ha! is he Risen from a Grave?








Stir not a Foot; and stop your idle Clamors,
Lest my winged Fury launch your bloated Soul
Into those Lakes of Everlasting Brimstone,
And antedate your just, your just Damnation.





To see you Live, is no small wonder! But
As you deserted me a True Barbarian,
I have no hopes you are return'd a Convert.
It is not VVinds or Seas, or Change of Air,
Can tame a Savage, or can calm a Tyger.
Go on then, Sir; VVhat Death is't I must dye?





Dye! By this Light, a Question worth disputing
And it would puzle an Ingenious Artist,
T'invent a way to kill thee; For by Fire
Or VVater, 'tis impossible to do't.

  26Betwixt thy Falshood, and thy flowing Lust,
Thou art too Rank to Burn, too Light to Drown:
Nay, should I bury the Incarnate Monster,
Like the slain Gyants, under Piles of Mountains,
Thy Lust (like Etnas Flames) would burst 'em thro.





If thou art he, who in a blinded Fury
Could leave this dear inestimable Treasure,
And basely durst suspect her spotless Honor,
Whose unexampled Virtue is alone,
Enough t'atone for all her Sexes Frailty:
Take heed how you provoke the Gods, by hurting
This brightest, nearest Image of themselves.





Young angry Sir, spend not your Breath in vain;
Keep it to curse the Hour thou saw'st that Face:
I have a Scourge for thee, and this brisk VVanton,
Fierce as the Vengeance of a God,
And swifter than a Pestilence. Come in there
My Imps of Fury, enter.






Cruel Monster, what are these?



The Light'ning to my Thunder.





Surpriz'd, unarm'd, and made so tame a Sacrifice!




Prepare to Execute what I commanded you.



Inhuman Savage, What's thy black Design?




T'oblige Mankind, and purge th'Infected Air:
For whil'st that Monster breaths, she can't breed less than Plagues.





Oh bloody Tyrant, aim your Rage at me!
Send me to Ruin, kill me, burn me, drown me:
Do any thing, so you but save her Life!
Think when you murder that Celestial Form,
You wound all Mankind at the dismal Blow:
Not only all the Mourning Globe, the Gods
Themselves will suffer, when such Virtue bleeds.









Do not touch one Hair
Of that dear Gallant, God-like Man: On mine,
My Head alone, pour all your Impious Vengeance.
Live, my kind dearest Lord.







Exquisite Friend: Yes, I'le obey thee;
And thy kind dearest Lord shall see thee dye.
But ere thou goest, call all thy Friends below;
(For thou'rt too wicked, to have any yonder)
Command your black Infernal Vassals; bid 'em
Prepare to entertain the greatest Guest,
That ever lodged within their burning Walls.
Bid Lucifer resigne his Throne, and say, I've sent him
The only Head fit to be Crown'd in Hell.
Oh, that I could but make thee an Age in Dying!
And, Oh that thine were like Prometheus Heart,
And I th'Immortal Vulture to torment it!





How I disdain thy Rage! Do, shew thy Sting.
Kill me as Barbarously, as thou art base.
But when I dye, I'le send my last kind Looks,
Sighs, Pray'rs, and Life, into Philander's Eyes.
Nay, tho you scatter all my sprinkled Ashes
Around the World, each Atom of my Dust
Shall find a Soul, and flye into his Bosom.









If I can't live to love him,
I'le soar above, and shine from Heav'n upon him.
And Tyrant, If thy Rage won't let me mount
To th'Sky an entire Star, tear me to pieces,
And rend my mangled Limbs into a Comet:
Then know, when from my Glorious Constellation
I shall look down into that dark Abbyss,
Where thou makest Fuel for Eternal Fire,
I'le scorn thee then, as I defye thee now.




Hold Heart! Away, and house her in a Dungeon.



Touch her no more, than you would tread on Lightning.



Spare her no more, than you would save a Crocadile.



Have you no Pity?




Dogs! Have you no Ears?
Away with her.








Go, or you're Dead!



Stay, or you're Damn'd!





















Exeunt Philander and Panthea, forced out by the Villains.

Now my young Bride, I'le drein your Amorous Veins.
One Minnte, and the Charming Scene begins.







Oh Sir! as you would gain Immortal Honor▪
On Earth, and Everlasting Joyes in Heav'n;
As you would have your Glorious Actions fill
The Book of Fame, and like Ascending Incense,
Perfume the Skies, and Treat the Gods, recall
Your Banish't Peace, and save their Precious Lives





Ha! VVhat art thou, fair Fiend? One of her Imps?
Is she so great a VVitch, so rare an Artist,
To raise such Beauteous Devils, to defend her?





No, Sir, I'm one of that weak frighted Sex,
VVho could not hear your furious Threatning Out-rage,
Without a bleeding Heart, and melting Eyes.





Where have I Lived obscurely,
That I was never dazled till this Minute.





Oh Sir! if ever Pity touch't your Breast,
Save a young Stranger, and a wretched Lady.





Heav'ns! were she any thing but that Monster Woman▪
How I could Love her?






This black Doom recall:
Punish your self, not her. If she has done ill,
She owes it all to you. Had you perform'd
The Rites of a Kind Lord, I'm sure she would
Have made a Miracle of Love and Duty.
You should have moulded all her tender Thoughts,
And form'd her Soul in any Shape, to please you.
You might have lived an Age in envied Bliss▪
And if you've lost all this, it is because▪
In an unmanly Rage, you forfeited

  29The Right of your Creation, when you left
Her feeble Sex unguarded all alone.





Go on, gay talking Thing. I thought before,
The only Musick in the World had been
The cracking Heart-Strings, and the dying Groans
Of my Adult'rous Sorceress. But now,
My Rage can stop in all its full Cariere,
VVhil'st this soft tempting Syren Charms my Ear.





Will he then hear me? Oh, my blooming Hopes!
Dear Sir, indulge, improve these Sparks of Pity.
Mercy's the Glory of a Deity:
And it is God-like, to forgive. Subdue
Your wild Desires; and that Heroick Deed
Is Nobler than the Conquest of a Kingdom.
But if you stain your Hands with Guiltless Blood,
Think then what dismal Horrours wait on Murder:
Wolves, Raven, Scriech-Owles, then will be your Guests.
And her Pale Ghost will haunt your starting Sleeps,
Press your sad Thoughts with Lead, more heavy than
The Ponderous Marble, that entombs her Ashes.





Begone, take those enchanting Eyes away:
There's a bewitching Influence within
Those sparkling Circles, that un-man's my Soul.





Nay, if these Eyes have Pow'r to make you Good,
They shall pursue you wheresoer'e you go:
With their soft, humble, pleading, courting Tears,
I'le weep 'em blind, to quench your raging Fires.





Where am I going? Stay, my fleeting Glory.
I had design'd that great, that brave Revenge,
That should have rais'd my vast Immortal Fame
High as a Monumental-Pyramide,

And hid its tow'ring Head among the Clouds:
But this Young Sprite would shake my great Foundations.
Take thy Face hence.









I'le hear no more.
Vanish false Fire, bright Meteor disappear;
It is not safe for me to tarry here.

  30My mighty Mind would keep its sacred way;
And she strows Flow'rs, to lead my Soul astray.






Philander and Olizia appear in a Dungeon, Attended and Guarded by the former Villains.


THis, this Philander, is my Funeral-Scene.




And these the Fiends, to act the Hellish Deed:
They only wait for their Commanding Devil.





But when you see me Die, will you be kind,
And pitty my hard Fate? When you behold
My panting Breast laid open, and that Heart
Where my dear Lord once raign'd, all torn and mangled,
Will you look Pale, and with a trembling Sigh,
Let a kind Pearl fall trickling srom your Eye?
Say, Will you do all this for poor Olizia?






Not do all this for thee! When the dire Monster
Dares wreak his Barbarous Vengeance in thy Veins,
Thy sacred Veins; and the unthinking Gods

Dare see it done; Shall not I mourn for thee?
Doubt not that Pious Tribute of my Eyes.
Shall not my Dew fall at thy Setting-Sun?

Not weep to see thee Bleed! I'le make my Eyes
Start from their Sphears, to view that killing Object.
And when thy Sweetness
Draws near to Heav'n, my fainting bleeding Heart
Shall just keep Life enough to break with thine.





Then you'll be kind indeed. Now, Murderers welcom:
Bringing all your Torturing Racks. Thy gentle Pity

  31Will vanquish all the Pains of Execution.
Who would not dye, to be deplored by Thee?
To have thy Sighs, thy Tears, thy Love,
Like ministring-Angels, mount me to the Skyes?





Since, my best Saint, it is by Fate ordain'd,
That thou must dye for me; and for my sake,
Thy faithful fearless Love dares boldly set
With so much beauteous chearful Light about it,
Hear my last Vow.



Ye Gods, if in this little
Short Glass of Life, I breath one Sigh to ought
But fair Olizia; If my flaming Heart
Blow the least Spark to any other Breast,
Shut your Bright Gates against me. Banish me
From the blest Realms of her Immortal Day;
Expell'd for ever from her Heav'n, and Yours.

Panthea now, shall haunt my Thoughts no more:
Thee, and Thee only, I'le in Death adore.





My kindest Lord, now with full Tides of Joy
I can meet Death, since Death has made you mine.
My Soul's all Rapture, all Delight! Grim Death,
Whose Ghastly Visage frights the trembling VVorld,
And comes with hollow Eyes, and ratling Bones,
To me's all Gay; and with a Charming Smile,
Doe's with sweet VVreaths, and flow'ry Garlands come.
My Bridal-Pleasures blossom on my Tomb.





Now you transport my ravish't Sense too high▪
The worth of Ages, and thy Sexes Glory,
Is all sum'd up in Thee: And, Must you dye?
Must this Celestial Light fall like a Meteor?
And this blooming Spring fade like a wither'd Autumn?

Must this fair Book of Life, writ by the Hand of Heav'n,
The Legend of a God, be all defaced?
And must I see it done? Oh, dearest Madame!
I never was a Coward, till this minute.









I cannot, must not, dare not fee you dye.
Better th'whole Sex beside, were all extinguish't;
Their worthless Beauties shuffled in the Dust,

  32And thou the only God-like VVoman, left
T'uphold the VVorld. Oh Gentlemen! if Beauty
And Innocence can ever move Compassion,
Look on that Form; say, Shall that Bosom bleed?
Perform a Deed worthy a Chronicle:
Turn all your Swords against her Tyrants Heart.
But if Reward can only make you Good,
Propose a Ransom that may buy her Life;
I'le pay it at the Price of all my Fortunes,
Treasures, and Honors; all I have on Earth:
And if that ben't enough to pay the Sum,
I'le be your Slave; sell me to make it up.
Oh, save her! Nay, if you'd be Saints, Stars, Angels,
Save her, and you'll deserve to be 'em all.







That Glorious Task must be assign'd to me:
'Tis I that bring her Life and Liberty.







Those Eyes could never blast me till this Hour.





Gentlemen, let this Signet satisfy you, Shews a Ring to the Villains.

That I have wrought the angry Prioce to Mercy,
And have obtain'd your Prisoners Lives & Pardons.
With-draw; they're now my Charge.










By a long Seige of Tears l've calm'd his Fury,
And crusht the Snake that twin'd about his Heart-strings.





How can the study of that Life you've given me,
Requite my kind Protectress, generous Maid?





Ballance your Deeds with mine, and but remember
How you preserved my threaten'd Honor from
A Ravisher, and you've done more for me.





Now my dear Lord, raise your dejected Head.
I shall not Bleed; all the rough Storm is fled.
Why do you start, shake, and look pale? Is her
Kind News unwelcom? Can my rescued Life
Displease you? Sure it can't. But if it does,
Alas, Sir! let not that your Trouble give:
I will dye still, if you'd not have me live.






No, Madam, Live; and Live to be Adored.
Let the Converted Sex learn Love from thee:
Not place their gaudy Amorous Delights,
In loose Desires, gay Dayes, and wanton Nights.
Let 'em Perform thy Hymeneal Rites,
Stand the great Shock of Wracks, and Death unmoved,
Walk upon burning Irons, Tread on Graves,
And keep their Bridals on a Funeral-Pile▪
When they dare do all this for Love, they'll be
Fit Votaries, great Saint, to Kneel to Thee.





And would not I, your lost despised Panthea,

Have suffer'd all these Pains for you?






Art thou the Fatal, Fair, Belov'd Panthea?

And, Do's she Live? Have you deceived me thus?
Was all your Mighty Love, your Sighs and sears,
The Charming Rhetorick of your Tender Eyes,
A meer Delusion to undo the poor

Olizia? Oh, my Fall! I, that just now,
Wrapt in my blest Imagination, stood
Upon the Highest Pinacle of Heav'n,
Am, in one Minute, lower than the Grave.





I do confess, I told you, She was Dead;
Said any thing, to raise your drooping Spirits:
But that was all my Treason. Tho I knew

Panthea liv'd, and liv'd to call me Perjur'd,
In all the Passion I exprest for you,
By all that's Good, my Sighs and Love was True.




And, Would you Cheat me still!



By all the Powers  




Speak not one word in your Defence.
No, Sir, you cou'd not, did not, cannot Love me.
And, Does she Live?
You've doom'd a Wretched Soul to endless Torments;
And 'tis beyond the Pow'r of Fate, to save me.





Ah, Madam, if there's Faith on Earth, and Truth
Among the Gods, I swear  





Oh, Sir, no more.
And, Cruel Rival, was it not enough,

  34You'd seiz'd his Heart, and ravish't all my Right;
But in the Pleasantest, and Sweetest Dream,
When his dissembling Tears had made me think,
His Love was True; and the Fair Apparition
Presented to my Thoughts the gilded Walks,
And painted Scenes of Paradise, making
Me scorn the Drossie World; just when I came
To Dye, and be born upon Angels Wings,
You most Inhumanely have saved my Life,
And waked me from my Visionary Treasures,
To find my self a Beggar.






I had such base and mean Designs: No, Madam, 





Canst thou Dissemble too? No, 'tis too plain.
But do not vainly think, I'le poorly live,
To bow my Neck to thy Triumphant Chariot.
Let me but take one Look from those dear Eyes;
And now false World, Farewel.





Oh stay, dear Angel, stay!



No, my unkind, false Lord, Farewel for ever.




Stay but one Minute: Stay, mistaken Sweetness.
Do not forsake your Loyal Prostrate Slave.
To fly me thus, would be to leave me Damn'd:
To doubt my Love, you Stab me. By my Life,
My Oaths are True. The Gods can witness for me:
They see, They know my Heart, my Truth, my Soul.





Oh, false Philander, stop that Fatal Eloquence!
Such were the very Sounds, that first undid me.
Thou Love? No, cruel Man, speak it no more.
I will not hear the Name: It is a Sound,
That I will never, never hear again.
Go Perjur'd, Revel in her dearer Arms:
And whil'st your Love does your new Pleasures take,
My dying Groans your Bridal-Musick make.





Stay, Cruel Fair; Remorseless Tyrant, stay!




When I Preserved your Life,
I did not come to bring you half these Torments.






Did thy untimely Kindness bring me Life?






Is Life a Plague then, 'cause 'tis brought by me?
Ah, Cruel! Have these Eyes so much of Terrour,
That you had rather Dye, than meet their hated Sight?
Am I so much forgotten?






Shame, and Confusion overwhelms my Soul.
Thus low, a Blushing, Perjur'd Criminal falls;
And, Injur'd Fair, to thee for Mercy calls.
Such Shame, such Horrours from my Guilt arise▪
I dare not look on those offended Eyes.









But False and Perjur'd, as I am,
My Heart did not too basely play the Traytour:
I was not False▪ before I thought thee Dead.
But now, Fair Sweetness, thou Reviv'st too late.

Love, and Olizias Charms demand me all:
I've made those Vows, which I must ne'r Recall.





Is't not enough, I Live to see you Perjur'd;
But you must take the Pride to own it too?
Go, Faithless Man: But, Faithless as you are,
Glory and Crowns lye at your Feet, whil'st I
Go seek some Melancholy Cell, and Dye.






Strike home, dear Thunder!
End, end my Lingring Pains: Am I not Dead yet?
What Lover ever felt my Wounds, and Liv'd?
Was ever Man surrounded with my Glory?
Th'intire Possessor of the Hearts of Two
Majestick Beauties, so Divinely Fair?
And yet, I'm doom'd to Famish in Despair.
So the poor Naked Slave digs in the Mine,
And sees the Glitt'ring Ore around him shine:
Yet does with hopeless Eyes, that Wealth behold;
Wretched, and Starved, amidst a Mine of Gold.











What's Nature, and the Pow'r that Governs it!

Man is the Puppet of the Gods, and Moves
Backwards or Forwards, as they please to Dance him.
Now could I Laugh, to find my Self a Fool;
And yet be Mad, to think I can't be otherwise▪
Where's all my Blust'ring, Roaring Storm, against

Olizia? Hush't, and Calm'd; and all, because
A Foolish Girl had Power to stroak me Gentle.
My great Foundation's ▪laid in Sand: One Minute,
Fierce as encount'ring Lyons; and the next,
I'm Tamer than the meekest Beast they Prey on.



But here she comes.




After I had Redeem'd
The Lives of Innocents, I could not take
This mighty Blessing from your Hands, and not
Return to pay my Thanks upon my Knees.





Oh, Rise! What other Lives have you to Save?
What to Destroy? What New Commands to Execute?
What Tow'rs to Scale? What Rocks to Plow up? What
Mountains to Level? For I Love you so,
I could do all this in a Breath, to serve you.
Be free, dear Charming Witch, command thy Obedient Devil.









Oh, wond'rously! Try me like Hercules;


And when I had done, throw off my Lyon's Skin:
Then take his Distaff, and sit down and Spin.




What cruel Words are these?




If this be Cruel,
I'le try a kinder way of Love, to please you.






Ah, Sir! What do you mean?




To use you Lovingly;
To Revel in the Charms of this soft Breast,
And surfeit on Delights, on which a God might Feast.





Oh, Sir! If ever Virtue, Mercy, Pity
Dwelt in your Noble Breast, 






And warm Desire dwelt in my Boyling Veins,
I Love thee▪










No; tho this be not,
I'le shew thee what it is, before we part.






Can it be Love, to offer all that Violence,
For which you would both Hate your self and me?





By Heav'ns, 'tis like enough. I loved Olizia

That Morning that I Marryed her, above
The spangled Skyes, and all the Joys within 'em:
Yet before Night, I loath'd her worse than Hell.
Yet, now
I think on't, I ne'r tasted of her Charms:
But I'le be Kind and Riot in Thy Arms.
In these soft Chains for ever bind me thine.
They know the Treasure best, who search the Mine.





Oh, Sir! if you pursue these wicked Ends,
What Triumph will a Virgins Ruin be?
To make a poor lost Creature shun the Light;
And call on Rocks and Mountains, t'hide her Shame?





Talk not of Shame; but think of Love, dear Love;
The Business, and the Pride of your Creation.
Yield, yield or I must force your stubborn Pride.





Oh hold, Sir! I had a Virtuous Father;
Who taught me still, that where was such a word,
As Conjur'd Devils up, Eclips't the Sun,

Made Earthquakes, Blazing-Stars, and Blew Hell-Fire.





Why do you Treat me thus, like Cruel Judges▪
Who speak them Fairest, who they mean, shall Dye?
Without thy dear Embraces, I'm but Dead.





Ah, Sir! Consider what you ask me; which when

  38You've once obtain'd, you'll hate, and loath me for't;
Call your self Fool, for loving such a one
As had not such a poor Degree of Virtue,
To keep her Virgin Chastity unblemish't.
Pity your self; destroy not in one Act,
So many Deeds of VVorth, past, and to come.
Then pity me: Let not my guilty Soul
Make my own Shadow fearful, fill my Dreams
With Frights, and Startings, all my Life with Horrours;
Ashamed in Company, alone Unquiet;
Weary of Life, and yet afraid to Dye.





No more! no more! VVhat Sense can Virtue speak?
Th'hast Sacrificed my wicked Thoughts; and thence
The Spirit of Sacred Ones shall rise Extracted,
And Cleansed from all their Dross. Divinest Maid,
I never Loved thee half so well as now.
Lend me thy Hand. Kisses.



Nectar and Heav'n! Oh, my Transported Soul!

Gods! Could my Burning Lust (that Brand of Hell!)
Attempt to set this VVorld of Sweets on Fire,
And not Alarm all your Bright Starry Host,
Her Heavenly Guard, to Strike the Monster dead?





Name it no more. Your Noble Penitence
Has gain'd your Pardon, both from Heav'n and Me.





I thank ye Gods. Oh, Love, I am thy Convert!
Fair injur'd Innocence, I'm no more
Thy Impious Idolater: Thou'rt now
My Goddess, and my Vows are all Divine.
By Hymen's Holy Rites, I'le make thee Mine.




Oh, my hard Fate! Ah, Sir, What do you mean?




To make Attonement for the Blackest Guilt
The Furies e're Inspired. Thy Beauty dwells
Under too Low a Roof, and I must Raise it.
That Fore head wants a Princely Coronet.
Lustre and Honours should thy Vassals be:
Heav'n owes thee Greatness, and must pay't by Me.
Why do you shrink?






Ah, Sir! do not pursue
This mean Design, too poor and low for you,
A Deed so abject, so beneath your Greatness,
Mankind will blush to hear, and You to own.





Mistaken Sweetness, Don't I love thee? And,
Can I do less for that, which I Adore?
A Lover, were he Master of the World,
For such Bright Eyes, could do no less than lay
The Universal Scepter at thy Feet.
Nay, were I the Great Monarch of the Skies,
Would I not place my Thunder in thy Hand?
Make Nature, and her Laws, own thy Command?
Mount thee aloft on my proud Eagles Wings,
Whil'st all my lesser Gods, like Captive Kings,
And Fawning Courtiers, fill'd thy shining Train?
Thou o're thy Jove so Absolute should'st Reign;
To Kiss thy Feet, my Heav'ns should Homage pay,
And crowding Stars make a new Milky-Way.





Forbear, this Language I with Horrour hear.
Alas! I've made a strict and solemn Vow,  




To what? To whom? Oh, speak! 




To Death. There is
A Noble Youth  









 (I can't Dissemble.)
  For whose dear sake, I've vow'd to Mourn and Dye.
Make me not Perjur'd, take your Prodigal Kindness in:
For Love, and I, must never meet agen.





What murdering Sounds are these? And, Must this happy,
Blest Cursed Rival, have more Pow'r than I?





Oh, Pardon me, when I am bound to say,
And dye, to prove it True.
Not all that the Sun sees, must alter me;
Not Empires buy my Love, nor Fortunes force it.





What Furies rais'd this Fiend, t'usurp my Right?
Rival and Devils, I defie your Spight.
She must be mine, is mine, all mine.
My blood boiles high, and I must seize my Prey. Seizes her.

  40What Tempting Magick leads my Soul astray?
Fly, fly, fair Cruelty! Stay, dear Marble, stay!







Oh, the high Billows of my stormy Soul!



Sir, Let me calm that Tempest.



What canst thou do?




I can deplore her Fate, and pity Yours.
Hither I come, to tell my Erring Prince,
He has misplac'd his Heart, upon an Object,
Where he must never hope for a Return.





Had I not Snakes and Hags enough within me,
But thy bold Insolence dares play the Schrieth-Owle?






Oh, give my Zeal a gentler Name! I'm come
To wake you from your drowzy Lethargy.

Alas! Her Soul is gone, past all Retrieve▪
She Loves Philander, for Philander Dies.




Philander! say▪ What's that?




And her seal'd Heart's
Impenetrable to all Pow'r, but his.
Your Greatness, Sir, has the whole World to Range in;
And may command a more deserving Beauty.
Court not a deaf and sensless Idol: Fix
Your Thoughts more High. From this vain Seige retire:
Cure your wild Love, and quench this threatning Fire.






Philander! Was I not damn'd enough before?
But thou-must come to Preach me into Hell?





Yes, would I could.
Aside.





The very Villain has debauch't my VVife,
Ravish't my Peace, and loaded me with Shame;
Now, after all, must steal my Mistriss too:
And yet, this very Man, l've Saved and Pardon'd.
Oh, VVhither was my blinded Folly driven!

Mercy, VVhat art thou? Get thee back to Heav'n.

What has the Race of Man to do with Thee?

Leave Human Minds to Nobler Passions free.
Hence-forward Death and Ruin, Reign alone;
Make Hell your Vassal, and the World your Throne.










IN what a Labyrinth am I lost? The Prince,

My Master, turn'd my Rival? Hell and Furies!
And, Have I Bought & Purchas'd, Nurs'd & Cherish'd
That Beauteous Slave, to see her made my Princess?

If he subdues her, (as I'me sure, he will)
Beauty's an easie Fort, where Greatness storms.
And though she weeps for false Philander's Loss;
Those Drops in mourning Virgins Eyes, are but
That Dew, which Courting Glory soon exhales:
If he subdues her, Then my Fate's inevitable.
She knows, I am a Villain, have pursued her
with all the Rage of Lust; nay, even to Ravish her.
And when she lies within my Prince's Bosom,
Shall all my undetected Villanies
Forgotten, sleep and dye? No, I am lost:
Spurn'd from his Presence, and thrust out to Scorn,
Beggary and Misery are my last Reward.
What shall I do? Enter Artaban and Gobrias


 Yonder the Tyrant comes.
Wit and Despair, your utmost Skill perform;
And steer me Safe through all this Threat'ning Storm.






Cold as the North: By all that's Good, Impenetrable
As Rocks of Adamant. Oh, How she baffles me!
Disdains my Passion, Slights my proffer'd Glory!
Unmoved by all my Sighs, Pray'rs, Agonies.




Indeed, my Lord, this Scorn is wonderful.




Scorn! By this Light, she'd scorn the Courting Thund'rer,
Stand the Temptation of a Golden Show'r;
And Jove himself, in all his Shapes, unalter'd.






'Tis very strange, the great Prince Artaban,

With all his Prosperous Fortunes, cannot thaw her.





The Fatal Cause of all her Scorn's too plain.
This Fair Infatuated Fool,
Doats on the False Philander. 'Tis Philander,

Whose threat'ning Pow'r stands like a flaming Sword,
To stop my Entrance into Paradise:
But I will cut my Passage through his Heart.
The Ravisher of all my Hopes shall Bleed.
Say, Gobrias, Will he meet us?

























'Tis well: The Guardian-Dragon dies,
And then, th'Enchanted Beauty is my own.







Hither I come, my Lord, invited to
A Solemn▪ Feast of Blood.





Yes, and you're welcom.
And, Sir, to make you like your Entertainment,
Know 'tis a Sacred, Glorious Festival.
Next the First Mover,

'Tis Love and Honour Turn the Globe: 'Tis they,
That Rule Mankind, and Guide the Strokes of Fate.
And, Sir, those Mighty Names have both been wrong'd by you:
And 'tis your Blood must make an Expiation.
Call to your Conscious Soul, that 'tis Philander

Blocks up my Passage to Lysandra's Heart,
And makes it Inaccessibe.






If it be that, that calls me to the Field,
Why should we Fight for what I calmly Yield?
She's yours, all yours; and to secure that Title,
Know, Jealous Lord, I bear her kindest Love▪
With no less Pain, than you her greatest Hate.






If there's no Magick in Lysandra's Name,
To Rowze thy sluggish Soul, call to Remembrance

Olizia's Wrongs, her Wrongs, and my Dishonour.
For tho I've shook that Trifle from my Heart,
As little as she moves my Soul; yet still
Her Fame thou'st Tainted, and my Honour suffers:
And nothing but your▪ Death, can clear the Stain.






Olizia's Wrongs! And, Canst thou name that word?
Thou, whose degenerate, base, groundless Rage,
Could doubt her Virtues, blast her Sacred Fame?
Ye Gods! A Saint more Pure, a Soul more Spotless,
Did ne'r Adorn your World, or Grace your Heav'n.
But, Do I talk? That Name has rowz'd my Vengeance.





And fair Lysandra mine. Have at thy Heart:
For whil'st
Thou Liv'st, I'm worse than Damn'd. That cruel Fair,
Whil'st thou draw'st Breath, will ne'r, will ne'r be Mine.





Now, angry Sir, we meet on Equal Terms:
For whil'st thou Liv'st, I'm Damn'd as well as Thou.
Could my Olizia love me to that Height,
That 'tis not Rocks or Mountains, Seas or Desarts,
Should hold her from my Arms; yet, whil'st thou Liv'st,
By Honour's Cruel Laws, she never must be Mine.
Then let our Swords cut through our Knotty Fates:
And to Encourage us for the Brave Deed,
Know, 'tis a Cause as great as Alexander's.
Beauty's our Universe; which, to subdue,
Our Glory's summ'd in this one Chance alone:
Who cuts the Gordian, makes the World his own.

They Fight, and Philander's Second falls.



Now, for the World, How think you?



I come not here to Think, but Act.



Howe're, bold Sir, Does not this Odds look Ominous?




Prophetick Sir, if you would talk of Omens,
Pray make your Swords your Oracles.





Thou'rt BrÃ ve: And tho
VVith this Advantage I shall Blush to Kill thee,
I must not give thee Life.






Nor must I take it.
Come on.





VVell, Sir, the Turning VVeight is mine;
And the next Hoist, I mount thee up to Heav▪n.

They Fight, and Artaban's Second falls.



Hold your Scales right; for now the Weights are even.




VVhat Turn of Fate is here? VVell, Sir, I see,
Fortune, in taking of my Odds away,
Designs me Honour in thy Nobler Fall.
There's something tells my Soul, Thy Date is short.




Shorten your Speech, and make it so▪
They Fight, and Philander Disarms Artaban.




Curst be my Arm.




And doubly Curst be mine.
Must I then save his Life, to blast my own?
The VVorld's too Narrow for us both.
Here take your Sword again; I give it freely:
But on Condition, that you'll us't again.
Forget that e▪re 'twas mine; and Nobly aim it,
VVith all your Heat, once more against this Heart.





Hold, Sir! Thou art the Man, whose Death I'de buy,
Even at the Price of my Eternity.
Nay, I would give my Life and Heav'n, to Kill thee.
But forced by Honours dread Commanding Pow'r,
I must not lift a Hand against his Life.





Now I'm undone: Now, we're both truly Wretched.
'Tis to thy Life my tortur'd Soul must owe
More Pains, more Hells than wretched Man e're bore▪





Nor must my Soul less Torments feel than thine.
But since we ne'r can meet as Foes again,
Farewel thou Pestilential Comet;
Thou everlasting Bar to all my Hopes.





How dismally this Fatal Meeting ends?
We were kind Enemies, but mortal Friends.







Great Sir, Thus low I fall, t'implore your Pardon.




Pardon! For what? How fares your Charge, the Fair

Lysandra? Is she Safe?






Oh, my dread Lord!
Curst be that Tongue, that tells you she is lost.
I, like her sleeping Jaylor, thought her safe:
But by my false Security, I'm undone.
She through her Window, Sir, has made Escape;
And, I suppose, 'twas by Olizia's Aid.
For in the Princess Chariot she was hurried,
And Lodg'd within a Cloister.






Lightning and Earthquakes! Ruin and Despair!
Immured in those Impenetrable Walls,
For ever Ravish't from the VVorld, and Me.





And this, my Lord, is all she left behind her; Gives him a Letter.

To tell you, That the Fatal Name of Love,

Is that harsh Sound she now shall hear no more.





Not hear the Name! Not hear it! Yes, fair Murd'ress,
I'le thunder't in thy Ears, 'till I am Dead.
Nay, when thy Scorn has laid my Bones in Dust,
I'le burst my Marble Load, rattle the Chains
Of my Infernal Jaile, to tell thee, Tyrant,
That I was Damn'd by Thee! Yes, thou shalt hear
My murmuring Groans, thy murder'd Lover's Groans.
VVhil'st all that Flowing Gold, those Beauteous Tresses,
On thy Proud Fore-head, fixt with Horrour, stand,
Erected like the strutting Porcupine:
And the Bright Fires, in those bewitching Eyes,
VVane, and burn Pale, at my approaching Ghost.





Not all the Groans and Agonies of Love,
I fear, will move her now. Nought but the Language
Of Death and Heav'n, will now be understood.
Those Cloister'd Saints are Deaf to Flesh and Blood.





A Cloister! Curse on that Religious Cheat!
And, Must that shining Beauty lie Entomb'd,
Buried alive, and this to make a Saint?
Dull Priests, you Lie! To Saint that Beauteous Sex,
Teach 'em to Love, be Kind, Embrace, and Crown
Some happy Lovers Bed: Then live to see
Their warm Desires blest with a Numerous Race;

  46Born to inrich the World, and to increase the Stals.
Do this, and this and then they will be saints indeed:
This is the only way of Heav'ns Ordaining,
To Consecrate that Angel Creature, Woman.

This Blessing, Gods did with your World begin;
How e're the other Pious Curse crept in.








Slaves at an Oar have greater Ease than I:
Harden'd to Labours, they their Pains defie.
Despair in Love, 's the only true great Misery.
We with fresh Agonies our Souls torment;
Remember the bright Tracks, where th'adored Beauty went.
And with fresh Pains, our endless Plagues deplore,
To think our Setting-Sun will Rise no more.







Oh, Sir! live such a Story, as will scorch
Your boiling Veins into so hot a Fever,
Shall make your Heart-strings burst, and set a float
The burning Lake within 'em.






Expound these mystick Horrours.




Ah, Sir! the Prince, my Master, 








You know, he loves Lysandra; and but now
His Amorous Suit renew'd: He beg'd, sight, languish't;
But all in vain. His swelling Tears, his gasping Pangs,
And dying▪Groans, had all no Power to move her.
In short, Her haughty, merciless Disdain,
So stung his tortur'd Soul; till at the last,
Courting and Threatning, and as oft Repuls'd,
Her Scorn on Scorn, rais'd Rage on Rage; till all
His Reason, Sense, Religion, Conscience, Love,
Drown'd in the groaning Storm, he snatch't his Dagger,
And, at one Stroke, divorc'd her trembling Soul.




Horrour and Plagues! Gods, Does your Thunder sleep?





This is not all.
No sooner was that Beauteous Martyr fal'n,
But the dire monstrous Deed, a Deed enough
To force a Blush into an Ethiop's Face,
Touch't him so little, that grown flush't with Murder,
His Eyes erect tow'rds Heav'n, (but his black Thoughts
Were shap'd in Hell) these dismal Sounds he utter'd:
Philander! Shalt thou have Peace, whil'st I have none?

No, Ravisher; Thou'rt Damn'd, as well as I.
Then to the Fair Olizias Chamber rush't.




Olizia! Guard her, Gods!




And in a most
Inhumane Butchery, drag'd her from her Bed.
And the same Steel, bath'd in her floating Gore,
He left her grovelling on the reeking Floor.






Olizia Dead! and I Alive to hear it!
Fly, whil'st thou'rt safe; thou'st utter'd such a Deed,
Whose Repetition is enough to Damn thee. Exit Pyrgus.


Oh, Horrid, Bloody, Savage, Beast of Prey!
Think not to hide thy cursed, impious Head:
No, Tyger; through all the World I'le hunt thee Dead.
Nay, tho thy Devils make thee walk Invisible,
Through all thy Infernal Guards, I'le find thee out.
'Tis not the Center of the Earth shall hide
Thee, from my Rage. Like a new Hercules,

I'le Dive to Hell, but I will reach this Traytour.



Yonder he comes! Tryumphant Impudence!





The Fair Panthea is for ever lost.





Ravens and Scriech-Owls! The Insulting Monster
Owns th'Exacrable Deed.








Beset with all the Horrours of Despair,
Hither I come 




Yes, Infidel, to Dye!
Draws.



What do I see!





Now, ye Great Pow'rs, you're Kind.
Thou Limb of Vengeance, and thou Brand of Hell,
Take thy Reward.





Confusion! Hold, yet hold.
Why all this Fury?





Why this staggering Guilt!
Base Hell-Hound, Have thy Crimes made thee a Coward?




Coward, and Crimes! Death! Why all this to me!




To Thee▪ To Thee! Ask thy black Soul, and let
Thy startled Conscience tremble at this Arm




Why all this Fury? Sir, Explain this Riddle.







Sir, Do but hear me.



Yes, thy last Groans.



Yet hold, let me but speak.



When thou art Damn'd, Talk on.
Fights, and Kills Artaban.





As I am Dying, let me know, rash Murderer,
Why thou hast Kill'd the very Man that Lov'd thee?





Lov'd me! Can thy black Soul, thus doubly stain'd
With Fair Olizia, and Panthea's Blood,
Breath such a Word as Love?






I lift a Hand against Panthea's Life!
What Poisonous Traitour has abus'd your Ears?




What do I hear?




As you would give
Me Peace within the Grave▪ and Bliss in Heav'n,
Name me the Monster, that my Death may Blast him.




Has that false Devil, Pyrgus 




Did he tell you so!
What more than Hellish Rage, provok'd him to
This Blasphemy? By my last Hopes,

Olizia, and the Fair Panthea lives.





Oh, abhor'd Slave! Oh, most detested Villainy!
Has my mistaken, curst, infernal Fury,
Pull'd down such Ruins?  





Ah, Forbear this Grief!
My Life's not worth a Tear. The Cruel, Fair Panthea


  49Could ne'r be Mine: And, What is Life without Her.
Thou weep'st to see me Bleed: Dry up thy Tears,
And let me Kiss that dear, kind Hand, that Kill'd me.
Since that Bright Form do's in a Cloister lie,
What has her hopeless Slave to do, but Die?
But, Sir,
Tho my Hard-fated Love could ne'r be Blest,
Be Thine more Prosperous; in my Death, I make
Thy Passage free to thy Olizias Arms:
I give Her Thee. 'Tis the last Legacy
Of thy expiring Friend.




Oh, wond'rous setting Virtue!




But, Could the Fair Lysandra never Love me?
Could all my Sighs not light one Spark of Pity?
Beauty, thou Pageant of the Frantick World,
And Love (false Love) with all thy Cheats, Farewel.
When I am Dead, take me (ye Gods) and place me
Upon some Hollow Sounding Arch of Heav'n:
There lend me but a Voice as loud as Thunder,
And I'le Convert the doating World below me.






What have I done? What Guilt, what Shame, what Horrors
Surround my staggering Soul? Ye Gods, he gave me

Olizia! This Bright Miracle of Honour,
With his last Breath, could bless his Murderer.
Thou most unhappy, injured Prince, farewel.
Who would believe, this bloody, barbarous Deed,
That Savages would blush at, was th'Effect
Of Love? Great Lo•e, the brightest Spark of Heav'n,

Could blow into this Thunder! O, ye Gods!
What is your World? What's Life? What's Human Fate?
When if your Dooms our Ruines have Decreed,
The noblest Cause can Act the blackest Deed.







What do I see? 'Tis as my Soul could wish.
Dead by this Light! H'has done the Feat so sweetly.




Ha, Devil! Art thou here? Ye Gods, I ask no more!



Why that odd Face? Prethee, rough Sir, look calmly.





For, tho my aking Hand, and boyling Veins,
Hold back my Rage from thy accursed Heart,
With greater Pain than e're thy Mother bore thee;
Yet I would talk with thee, before thou'rt Damn'd!





Well, angry Sir, and, What is't you would say?




Thou black Incendiary, What strange Fury
Provoked thee to this Execrable Malice?





Dull Sir, I'le tell you. Know, I loved Panthea:

And that infatuated Lord, my Rival,
Rose, like a Planet, to destroy my Hopes.
I knew, at last, Time, and his Courting Glories,
Would melt a Passage to her frozen Heart.
And when she had Married him, my Villainies
Would be detected; and, at least, my Ruin,
If not my Throat, would make her an Atonement.
But know, my Soul's too Proud, to Live with Infamy:
To see my Slave my Princess, and to lose
That gay, proud, haughty Thing, I had Bought, and Paid for.
Thus, 'twixt Despair, and my defeated Lust,
I made thy sensless, foolish Love, my Property,
To cut my Safety through his Heart.





Damnation! Was there ever Dungeon, Jaile,
Or Gibbet, that could Match this harden'd Infidel▪
But I do Talk, and let the Villain live!








 Make not your self too large a Promise.
Stand off! I scorn the worst your Rage dares do.




What means this Baseness, Coward?





If you're for such a Bloody Game as Death,
I am a Rook, and play not on the Square.




Slave! Do'st thou think to Frigh• me? At thy Soul.




Are you so Brisk?  Shoots, and misses him.

Curse on my erring Hand! Draws.

Yet hold! Hear me one word.





Speak then, make hast:
Be quick, and short; for know, this Breath's your last.





Tho that dull wand'ring Fire has mist thy Life,
I've still the Odds: Know, this invenomed Steel,
With the least Touch, gives Death. Retire, rash Man;
There's Poison in this Sword.





And greater in thy Veins.
Go, tell thy Canker'd, Venomous Bloated Soul,
Thee, and thy Arts of Hell, I'le thus Confound.






Thou'st Kill'd me, and I fain would Curse thee for't!
But, Oh, my Breath grows Faint, my Eyes turn Giddy;

  51And, in a Mist, I'm lost!





The Villain has drawn Blood.
His Arm bloody.







I have those Contradictions in my Fate,
Those Bars betwixt my Joys, that nothing but
A Cloister, and a Grave, can Reconcile.
But, e're I take my Everlasting Leave
Both of the World, and Thee, I can't but come,
To breath my Last Farewel





Life of my Life!
My Dearest, Sweetest Heav'n, thou art too kind.





Oh, my Philander! Could I but believe,
Flatter my breaking Heart, Philander Loved me;
Then I in Peace could Die.






If all my Oaths in Life could not Convince thee,
As I am Dying, hear this one last Vow;
By all my Hopes above, I'm only Thine.




Dying! What words are these?




Look there, t'explain 'em.
That Impious, Black, Infernal Traitour, Pyrgus,

With a long Mask of Complicated Perjuries,
Told me, His Savage Lord had Murthered Thee▪
And by my violent, mistaken Rage,
In thy Revenge, that God-like Martyr fell.
That generous Prince, who with his Dying Breath,
Gave me Olizia, Perish't by this Hand.




Was ever such a dismal Scene of Horrour?





Was the Effect of Love, impetuous Love.
What Flesh and Blood, fill'd with a Soul like Mine,
Could hear thy Death, and not run Mad as I did?
But my hard Fate, the Gods have doubly punish't.
By my just Hand, that cursed Villain dyed;
And I am Murder'd by his Poison'd Sword.





Why was I Born, ye Gods, to see this Day?
Is there no Help, no Art, no Succouring Angels,
To save his Life?





VVere't in the Pow'r of Fate,
The precious Balm of thy kind Tears would do't▪
But 'tis too late.





VVas this the dismal VVeapon,

  52That has undone the World? Oh, fatal Steell!
Thou hast been cruel, but I'le make thee kind.

Falls on the Sword.



What have you done?




Nothing, but only paid
The Debts of dying Love. Tho cruel Fate
Divorced me from thy Arms, and Cancell'd all
Our Marriage-Joys; yet in the Grave▪ in that
Cold Bridal-Bed, I shall not be deny'd,
To lie a sleeping Virgin by thy Side.





Can then my Kind and generous Princess,
Leave all her Greatness, all her blooming Youth;
Let those dear Eyes, those sparkling Twins of Love,
And all that mighty Mass of Infinite Beauty,
Lie undistinguish'd in the Common Heap
Of mouldring Dust, ghastly as Death▪ and wither'd
As the naked▪ scraggy Roots▪ of unborn Flow'rs;
And all for her unhappy, worthless Slave?





Alas, Sir! What have I to do with Eyes,
Life, Youth, and Beauty? Are they not all Yours,
Created Yours, a Part of my dear Lord?
And, Should they dare Survive, when he is gone?
No, 'tis but Just, they in your Urn should lie:
When the Tree falls, the scatter'd Blossoms die.




Now, thou'rt too kind.




Could I do less, to shew I loved Philander?

The meanest of my Sex can Live and Love;
Each common Spark inspires that Noble Heat.
To Die for Love, is only truly Great.
Nor is this all the Glory of my Death;
Ye Gods, I bring my Innocence to Heav'n.
Free from Loves grosser and impurer Charms,
I die a Virgin in a Husband's Arms!






She's dead! She's dead! Meet her, ye Gods! Oh, meet her!
Throw open all the shining Gates of Heav'n,
And Sally out thick as the Beams of Day,
To her Immortal Praise new tune your Sphears:
At her dear Feet your brightest Diadems lay.
Ye Gods, 'tis Beauties Coronation-Day!
But, Oh! in all her Heavenly Pomp she wants
Her Loyal Slave! I come, bright Saint, I come,
To fill the State of thy Celestial Train.
Thus may I Kneel, and Thou for ever Reign!



