



BEliev't my Lords, they say the Prince does Wonders.



They say he kills a world of men indeed;
But 'faith I think the wonder had been greater
If he had made but half so many live.



Perchance, my Lord, you'd have him turn Physitian.



Rather than Butcher, 'tis the Nobler Trade.



But they are his Enemies he kills,
Men that offend, and do deserve to die.



O! then I think you'l praise the Hangman next,
You give a definition of his Trade.



If I do not mistake your humour Sir,
You were never taken with this dying,
It is a thing does marr a Courtier much.



'Thank Heav'n, I am not yet so mad to wish for't;
Let Broken-Merchants, and the busie Rout
That durt the Streets, when their designs miscarry,
Cry that there's nothing Certain in this World,
I think there's less in that which is to come:
Here I'm sure of something, I'm a Lord,
And live with men: But to be turn'd a grazing
In the Elizian-Fields (that men do talk of)
Among Philosophers, n'ere could make a Legg.



Fie, fie, Neander! this is too prophane,
And relisheth far more of Beast than Man.
〈2 pages missing〉
  4Arcadia shall Command those Provinces,
Who lately thought our long and happy peace
Had soften'd so our Minds, that now we were
Fit to be Lo•ded over by their Wills:
But strange it is, to see the King so little
Joy'd with the news, that still he bears a Face
More troubled than Sicilian Seas in storms.



'Tis for the Love of that poor Shepherdess,
The Prince not Ten months since took from a Cottage
As he was a hunting, and gave the fair

Cleantha for a Present.




Alas! my poor Urania! how doth
Thy harder Fortune vindicate my Choice?
Who now dares say Endymion loves to low,
When he loves her that can make Princes die;
No more, no more, we must scorn Cottages
Those are the Rocks from whence our Jewels come.
Gold breeds in barren Hills, the brightest Stars
Shine o're the poorer Regions of the North.





Here comes the King▪ Endymion, pray retire,
It is not fit you should be privy to his Thoughts.



I'le try if I can hear what resolution
The Kings enrag'd Passion makes him take.
He retires.





Pyrrhus! how thrives my Love? I have
Intrusted you with all I am, and all I wish for.



Sir, I have already done,
What Language and Rewards have power to do



And what return am I to hope for then?



There's little hope: This Ermin will not be
Perswaded from the whiteness she so Loves.



Poor Country Girl, where can she find Words
Or Resolution when you do assault her?




Mention'd the business to her, all alone,
Poor soul she blush'd, as if already she
Had done some harm by hearing of me speak.

  5Whilst from her pretty Eyes two Fountains run
(So true, so Native) down her fairest Cheeks,
As if she thought her self oblig'd to weep
That all the World was not as good as she.



Heaven! how does this Carriage please me!



This Modesty of hers inflames me more.
As springs are hottest in the coldest weather.



Her Tears so innocently begg'd my pity,
That I was straight turn'd over to her side,
And had forgot the Cause for which I strove▪
Till rallying agen, I once more gave
A new assault, and urg'd her to answer:
All her reply was no: then humbly pray'd me,
Not to be Cruel to a poor weak Maid,
Who had not any thing, in all the World,
To give her value but her Innocence;
With such Success as this I often have
Assail'd her Vertue.



Ah Pyrrhus! where will this Tyrant end? shall I
Still be Priest, and Sacrifice, and Altar too,
Unto a Passion, I can satisfie,
But never Conquer? What poor things are Kings?
What poorer things are Nations to obey
Him whom a petty Passion does Command?
Heav'n! why was man made so ridiculous?



Your Majesty sayes that of your self,
Which were Impiety in any else,
But once to think.



Men but Flatter me.
Oh Fate! why were not Kings made more than men?
Or why will people have us to be more?
Alas! we govern others, but our selves
We cannot rule, like to our Eyes, that see
All other things, but Cannot see themseves.



Sir, do not discompose your self; you may
Soon Queench this mighty Flame, and where your Prayers
Have not prevail'd, your Power may Command:
Who in Arcadia dares resist your Will?



My Lord 'tis true, Let's to the Queen 







How does this Minute transport my soul with Joy, to have the blessed priviledge to be with fair Evadne?



I a• glad it makes some body happy.



With her who has my Heart. 



Have I it? pray my Lord take it agen.
I would not be troubled with keeping such a Bawble for the World.



She whom great Nature (now grown wanton) made to look upon, and scorn her other Works.



My Lord Neander! I see you are resolv'd not to study to no purpose, you will have out your Complement, let me say what I please: but I must take liberty to leave you in the middle of it.



Nay, Madam, I beseech you be not so unkind.



Nay now I have put you out of your Complement; I care not if I stay a little longer.



Madam! you are Cruel! how do you Kill?



Kill Neander? No sure then you would not be so near me.



I ne're could fear death from so fair a hand as yours.



I believe indeed, my Lord, you fear death least from the hands of a Woman, which is the Reason you chuse to stay here at Court among the Ladies, rather than go to War with the Prince.



Madam! You Ladies have a Priviledge.



Yes, my Lord, •it's sometimes a priviledge to speak Truth.



'Faith Madam, you may say what you please.



Pardon me, my Lord, it would please me much better if I could s•y you were in the War in Thessaly.



T•u•y Madam, I could give you very good reasons why I went not to the War with the Prince.



I believe you can, and so can every body else that knows your Lordship: The first and Chiefest reason was a certain tender∣ness you have for the prese•vation of your Person, some scandalous people stick 〈◊〉 to call it fear.



Do not judge so Madam; I can assure you it was for very different reasons.



You will give very much satisfaction to the World, if you say what they are.



Why then, to tell you the truth, Madam, I am somewhat troubled with Corns that I cannot without pain wear a riding Boot▪ and then I am strangely subject to the Tooth-ach, which makes me very unsit to lie in the Field, which indeed were the two main Rea∣sons made me refuse the War.



What pity 'tis so brave a Mind should be so unluckily hin∣dred from shewing it self.



I perceive you railly, Madam.



I see Sir, you are a man of a quick apprehension.




How now Daughter? what do you here? my Lord I do not desire your Lordship should make any address•s to my Daughter, her Fortune is too humble for your thoughts.






Pox on this Formal Priest.  
Exit.




Well now Evadne, my dear Child, thou art
Come forth upon the Worlds great Stage, and it
Must be my care first to advise thee, then
To pray for thee: Yet thou art innocent,
(Oh maist thou still be so my Child) yet know'st not
Ought but the holy practices of cells,
Where vertuous Matrons have instructed thee.



But now the Scene is chang'd, the Queens Commands
Have brought me to the Court to wait on he•;
The employment truly noble: and I have
In her the brightest pattern of true vertue
That all the world can boast of.




Few more besides whose wandr•ng paths are safe:
Those of thy Sex thou't find so strangely vain,
That they think they have wash'd, and patch'd, and cutl'd
Themselves ev'n into little Deities:
They do believe that wanton men speak truth,
When to consume those hours, they care not fo•,



Ay, Madam, is it not? would you be willing to be us'd so? Besides, Madam, no man in the Court offers to speak to me, but he thinks 'tis Love.



He thinks you are so handsome, perhaps, that it is impos∣sible fo• any man to look upon you without being smitten.



That may be something, as you say, Madam, but I will never put up this Injury: Marry me to keep me honest, quoth 'a? I'le never endure it, while I ha' breath:   See Madam where he comes do but observe him.





I have brought my self into a sweet condition, like an old fool as I am, why could not I remember how many I had Cuckolded my self, and to think I should not be serv'd in the same kind, were to suppose neither Wickedness, nor Justice in the World.



Look, Madam upon this Mischievous Count'nance.
Geron to himself

How could I imagine that any of these sort of Women would keep themselves honest three minutes, when they fear'd neither the danger of taking Savin, nor a great Belly? Hea∣ven! what a Condition am I in! now do I plainly perceive the pain that poor Children indure at the coming of their Teeth, by the coming of my Horns Oh Phronesia! are you there?



Yes! you old Fumbling Sot I am here. 








O wicked Phronesia! how have you us'd me? whom have you appointed now to do me the Courtesie? my Lord Pirrhus he is of a black Complexion, and that never fails; My Lord Endymion's a Poet forsooth, and prevails with Sonnets;  and for my Lord Neander, the Priest convinc'd him the other day, that Adultery was a very great Sin, and that's reason enough for him to lie at Rack and Manger; I am sure my head must ake for't.



Let it ake on, you old Fop, you marry'd me to keep me honest, did you? I'le honest you; I will go instantly and meet 'em all three▪
Exit.



But I'le follow you close at the heels, and prevent your recreation!  

If any Man be weary of his life,
Let him at Threescore marry such a Wife.











COme fair Urania, think upon the honour
To be a Mistress to a King, sounds it not Well?



It is an Honour I should not envy her
That sought my ruine! I will ne're forsake
My Vertue, for a little outward splendor.



Is Love a Vice Urania? why did Nature
Make us all Vicious, when she did immerse
Love in the very beings of all Creatures:
Go search the Universe, and shew me there
What but affrighted man is not as free
To satisfie his Love as Thirst or Hunger;
Beasts ne're dispute the Lawfulness of what is Natural.



'Tis well, my Lord, when you intend
Unlawful Loves to instance not in men
But Beasts but let me ever be
Of that affrighted Number tha• follow vertue.



Come, come, Urania! Love, like men, was free,
E'•e ••w'r and Laws had taught 'em both the use
Of Chains, and Fetters: Nature ne're Confin'd
Her No lest Creature to the Narrow'st Prison,
Nor gave him Inclinations to torment him,
〈2 pages missing〉
  16And with a holy Flame, my Sighs and Tears
Have been as pure, as are those Gales and Springs
which in Elizium do refresh the blest:
And yet thou hast not pitty'd him that loves thee,
Even though thou be'st as gentle, and as soft
As morning dew just melting into Ayre.



What shall I serve you in my Lord?




Me to enjoy the Title of your servant,
And pay my fire with equal flames again.



My Lord, I were ingrateful if I should not.



Then be not so, but (to be short) I fear
The Kings approach, and therefore if thou'lt promise
This night to sleep within my armes (being first
Authoriz'd by Hymens Priest)
I'le free thee from the Kings unlawful Love.



What's to be done in this sad Exigence?  
aside.



My Lord, I will, but satisfie me, how?



You must appoint the King to meet you there,
In yonder Grotto, and oblige him to
The Language, and the time of Love, soft Whispers,
And the Night; and I'le prepare
So•e other Woman to supply your place;
This will gain time till to morrow, when
I'le own you to the King to be my Wife:
Then the respect to all my Loyal services
Will make him quench his now Unruly Passion.



Ah, who will be so wicked as to meet him?



Enow, ne're fear it.




What Woman would consent to such an Act?







But they shall not for me,
I'le rather chuse a Thousand times to die,
Then own a wretched Life, sav'd at the rate
Of so much •nfamy.




Chaste Soul; I'le do what you shall well approve;

  17My dear, I must retire, I fear the King:
Now act thy part, and then confide in me;
Be happy fair Urania, I am blest
That my employment is to do thee service.
Ex. Endymion.




Ah, dear Endymion! how could I weep
If tears were able but to wash away
The blackness of my Crime? now thou hast thought
To lead me from the Labyrinth of my Woes,
The next thing I must think must be to cheat
All thy Innocent expectations, which

〈…〉 to my self,







〈…〉 Showres allay you thus your Beams?

〈…〉 and more are due to my Misfortunes.

〈…〉 this, Pyrrhus told me you had consented.



With what Face can I say yes to the King?
Tho' I but feign consent, and mean to cheat him,  
Aside.

It is Immodest sure it cannot fit
A Womans Mouth.



Are you not yet resolv'd?
What means this doubt? Consent to my desires,
And you shall live ador'd and fear'd by all;
The Kingdom shall rejoyce at all your smiles,
And tremble at your frowns: But if you do not  



Is there no other way to save my life?



Come, do not trifle thus to tempt my rage.



Good Sir, be not angry; I will.



My dear Urania! now be happy, let's withdraw
This place is much too publick for our Love.  



Let me not lose all Modesty at once,
But let Sin take possession by degrees,
I have some sparks of Vertue yet remaining
Which will require some time to quench.



I am impatient of delays, in this



A death from your fair hand, I wou'd embrace.



Ay, th•s kind of dying put's a man to no pain, but to be run through the Lungs, or shot through the Body is mighty incon∣venient.



Ay, 'faith is it.  







For my part, I cannot possibly find what honour there is in having Oylet-holes made in a mans body: 'Slife a Mans body is not made to see through, is it? and yet I know some Duelling Coxcombs so often run through, as if their bodies were intended Through-fares for Swords.  



But I hope you have more prudence then to venture that danger.



If I be run through, may I be pickl'd up when I am dead like a Sturgeon, & be seru'd up to the Table of an old 〈…〉surer.



I will say this in your Commendations, 〈…〉 presents it self, I believe there is not a man in 〈…〉 as your self, I mean so swift of Foot.



Not so, Madam, indifferent, indifferen•〈…〉



But suppose Sir I should stand in need of a •••mpion.



O Madam! your Eyes will revenge your Quarrels.



Or they must be unreveng'd for you!



Nay, Madam, in a Lady's Cause I can be a Lyon.



When you meet with a Lamb.



Nay, Madam! I have Courage, but I must confess,
'Tis a thing a man may better spare then any of his
Goods and Ghattels.



Yes, yes, you have Courage, witness the going to The War when you were commanded!



It was not want of that; But who the Devil, that had a plentifull Estate, like me, and might live among these pretty La∣dies at the Court, would go to lie withou• Sheets, with Stones and Blocks, for Pillows, and be most honourably Lowsie, and damnably n•••l'd, for a company of ungrateful Fellows, that live Luxuriously at home, and laugh at the Honourable Affairs abroad? and when they have done, they value these Mighty men of War, just as a man doe• a Credito• that Duns him for Money lent, which he never in∣tended to pay.





What would this old jealous Fop have?



Nay, now I will not hang my self yet: I'le be reveng'd on this Lord first   My Lord 



Pox o' this Rogue, how I scorn any one that's below me, What say you Geron?







How does your Lordship?



Very well! how does your Lady?



'Tis he has done it, a Curse on him.
Aside.



Why how now? what do you Conjure? what's the matter?



I need not Conjure, I know the Father now.
To himself.



Why what do'st thou mutter man?



My Lord! why shou'd you ask for my Wife?



Because I am Civil.



Because I am a Cuckold.
Aside.



Pox on thee, why do'st not speak out?



Your Servant, my Lord, suppose by this time my Lord Endymion has left the Queen.



I beseech you let me wait on your Ladyship
Exeunt.



This is the man! 'tis he; Why should he ask for my Wife? Suppose I have a Wife, what's that to him, must he needs be asking for her presently? This Rascal Neander, this Villain that I dare not say any thing to; not because he's Valiant, for then it would not grieve me, but because he's a Lord, which he could no more help, then I can that I am a Cuckold: Here's another Lord too.





O Geron! how is't with you?



Your Servant, my Lord.







Here's another, what Two Lords to make one Cuckold?



What, are you mute? has any Misfortune befaln your Wife?



Too much has befaln me I am sure: 'Sdeath I am Cuckold∣ed and laught at too; you do not well my Lord to use me thus.
〈2 pages missing〉
  24And her great Titles reckon'd up, whilst she,
Does in her Closet, weep she is not less,
Poor Endymion! how little dar'st thou think
My Thoughts; or I dare say them to thee?




You then would hate him for his Confidence,
A Crime of which he never can be guilty.



Nay, should he speak, in that he would forfeit
The very thing I love him for, that rest
He finds in the Elizium of his thoughts,
And those true satisfactions which he takes
In being all the World unto himself.






Sir, I beseech you 〈…〉,
It would incense my Father 〈…〉 against me
If he shou'd see you.




What old Gray people in their Wisdom talk of,
They'd Cross us out of Envy to our youth;
For when the Wine of Love is drawn out of 'em,
Th•y live some years by its Vinegar, spight.



Poor Lady, how she's pester'd with yon gaudy Nothing.





O Madam! we shall have a Ball to night, The Queen will entertain his Majesty, and desires your Highness to be ready.



I attend her pleasure.



Hell take that Clogg of mine; how overjoy'd she is to have an opportunity to show her self, and lay baits for young Gudge∣ons?



Let me Consider how I may look
He puls out of his Pocket a Looking-glass.
amiably in the sight of the Ladies; let me see, a Pa•ch or two here, and a little more red here   very well; this Face of mine cannot chuse but charm them!



Well Minion, there's a Ball; but let me but see you dare to look upon any man but my self there, and by all the villanies of thy Sex, I'le tear thy flesh from thy bones, and hang thy Skeleton up in a Physick School.
She shrinks from him.



How now Geron, what in passion with your Wife?



O no: and 'please your Highness I cannot be angry with any one I love so well.



Ah, Madam! he threatens to tear my flesh from my bones, and't please your Highness.



Geron! do you know before whom you do this?



Certainly, my dear, thou art distracted, how com'st thou to mistake thy self so; Madam, I have a great Tenderness for her as I have for my own eyes, Heaven knows.



They deserve much alike; his Eyes are Blood-shot, Rhu∣matick and Blind, and his Wife Ugly, Insolent and Froward.



If thou knew'st, my dear Phronesia, how great a value I have for thee, thou would'st not thus have injur'd me.



So, this is well; but Urania and Evadne let us go wait upon the Queen: Neander, stay you here.

Ex. Clean. Uran. Evad.


I like not that so well, I love this Evadne most abomi∣nably.



Prithee! my Dear, harbour not so ill thoughts of thy lo∣ving Husband till death; Geron   you Strumpet, I'le make you know what 'tis to use me thus.



My Lord Neander help, or this old Wizard will murder me; Avant Belzebub.





Here's a Fellow I may show my Valour on;
Aside.

He is old, and Cowardly: Oh, that all Hectors had the
Same discretion in the Choice of their men that I have,
They would not be so often beaten as they are; Now
Will I prove as good a Knight Errant as the best of 'em,
And rescue this distress'd Lady.



Huswife, to morrow will come.  



My Lord! 'Pray take my part against this wicked old Jealous, Toothless, Impotent fellow.



Do you hear Sir! do but dare to think of injuring this Lady,



Alas! dear Sir! you injure me to think that that same E∣vening that gives pain to you; Can give me pleasure.



My dear! I am not sick.
I onely am a little indispos'd,
I'le beg your pardon to retire this night,
But pray stay you, and take no further Care,
Till at your own appartment I see you
To morrow morning.



Sir! your will is still my Law.



Once more good Night  
Ex.




Poor Prince! now little do'st thou think
How soon thou art to meet with her thou fly'st,
That wife that still has been so constant!
Oh! how ridiculous
Just Heaven does make the wayes of men,
When they forsake the wayes of Vertue.
This brave Prince,
(At whose Victorious Armies Greece now trembles)
When he contrives inglorious actions, shall
At the same time, be pity'd by his servants,
And a poor Girl shall up-braid him, in
Contriving to preserve him vertuous:
How do men ravel back to Child-hood, when
They cease to be thy Children, sacred Vertue!
And need the Care of every little person,
That what they call for may not do 'em harm.



Not to be subject to temptation is
A priviledge onely had in th' other world,
And yet I hope, Madam, what you design
Will him from his intended Crime defend,
Use you the means, and Heaven will crown the End.










GOod morrow, my Lord.



A good day to your Majesty.
A day as pleasant as your night has been.



Ah Pyrrhus! I wish it indeed.



I hope your Majesty has been well enough diverted
This night.  



Yes, my Lord, tho' not as you suppose,
I've been diverted from those wild desires
That made me first injure my self, and then
Unlord my Confident, but I have ask'd pardon
Of Heaven, and my own Majesty, and now
I beg it too from you, my Loyal Pyrrhus;
Forgive me that I have profan'd thy faith,
By such Commands, that thou art bound to ask
Blest Heav'n forgiveness for thy Loyalty.



Your Majesty I hope will give me leave
To wonder at this Change, and understand it,
When you shall please to think me fit for't.



I'le tell thee all   when now the Night
Grew blak enough to hide a sculking action,
I softly stole
To yonder Grotto, through the upper Walks,
And there found my Urania; but I found her,
I found her Pyrrhus, not a Mistress, but
A Goddess rather, which made me to be,
No more her Lover, but her Worshipper:
She onely whisper'd to me as she promis'd,
Yet never heard I any voice so loud,
And tho' her Words were gentler far than those
That holy Priests do speak to dying Saints;



Heaven bless you  
Ex King.

 when Ev'ry thing is green
Must poor Cleantha onely wither, and never
Know a Spring? Was I made onely high
Like Rhodope, and Haemus, or the Alps,
To dwell with everlasting Winter? to wear Snow,
When every Valley is adorn'd with Roses?
Well I must die, then I may also be
Happy as other Folks; the Grave looks Wistly,
Like my Fortune, there I shall not see
Poor Villagers more blest in Love then I,
And there I shall be able to make appear

Cleantha and Endymion Equall are;
Then possibly some of Cleantha's Earth
May prove a little Flower, and look fresher
Then when it was a part of a great Princess.





Madam! the Queen expects your Highness.



I'le wait on her.  
Ex. Cleantha.





Endymion is return'd! what shall I do?
To be at once both Just and Civil too.
If I could satisfie Endymion's Love,
I shou'd unjust to great Theander prove;
That Prince who to so mean a thing as I,
(Bred in a little Cottage) did bestow
His Noble Heart, which is a Present fit
For any Princess fruitful Greece can boast of:
From whom if I could give my Love, I would not.
Why did I give my Promise then last night?
And yet the Generous Endymion

Will sure forgive me when he knows the Cause:
He's here; Heaven forgive me, what I'm forc'd to.





Madam! I come upon my Knees to beg your pardon.



My Lord, it is not well to mock me further,
You have deluded me enough already:

  33Thus we that are so easie to bestow
Our Love, the greatest Treasure we possess,
Are still neglected by ungrateful men;
But I had thought to have found more truth in you.



Madam! 'twas my allegiance forc'd me from you.



Those men, who dare offer such injuries,
Never want bolduess to excuse their Crimes.



Had I refus'd t'obey my Kings Command,
You could not think me Worthy of your Love.





He speaks a Truth, I ought, but dare not own,
What a fond Fool was I to be so forward
In trusting a Court Lord, to believe
You e're would marry one of my mean Fortune.



Dear Vrania, I appeal to'th' Gods
Who are honour'd when they'r witnesses to truth.



Make no more Vows, I am not to be deceiv'd agen,
I was too foolish to believe your last: Farewell, my Lord.


The Powers above forgive me.  
Ex. Vran.




How much unlike Vrania is this Passion?
Who us'd to be all Calm, and gentle still:
And sure would be so, did not my unlucky
Stars, that never meant me good, incline
Her to this Anger.  
Ex. Neander.




Your servant, my Lord!



'Curse on this vain, Fop. 
Ex. Endym.




Are you so stout; Farewell.   Well! I wonder whom the Devil intends I shall marry with? I have been a servant, as they call't; that is, I have Ly'd, and Sworn, and spent Money upon every Lady about the Court, and still am as far from having one of them as the very'st Evnuch is; nay more, for they say Evnuchs have a Trick now a-dayes to please the Ladies Exceedingly:   I was in most hopes of Evadne, and love her best: but the old Priest forbids her to see me, or speak with me; Here she comes! I will force her to hear me 



Dear Apple of my Eye! why this haste? thou hast wounded me, and then thou •ly'st me.



There is a sufficient reason for't.



Must then Neander die?





Here our own proper Flocks of Sheep
We may in pleasant safety keep.


Here a perpetual Spring does cloath the Earth,
And makes it fruitful with each seasons birth.
In this fair Climate every day
Is fresh and green as May,

And here no beauty can decay.




Thus, thus live we,
As the Elements free
Each day and each night
Is Crown'd with delight
Without either Envy or Strife
This is the Iolly Shepherds life.

2.Free from all Cares in pleasant Shades,
And fragrant Bowres, we spend the day;
(Bowers which no Heat, nor Cold invades;
Which all the year are fresh and gay)
Each does his Loving Mate imbrace,
And in soft pleasures melts the Hours away,
So Innocently that no Face,
Of Nimph or Shepherd can a guilt betray:
And having Ease, the Nurse of Poetry,
We sing the stories of our Loves,
As Chaste as Turtle-Doves,
Free from all Fear and Iealousie
From every Envious Eye:
For every Man possesses but his own,
No Shepherd sighs, nor Shepherdess does frown:
No Ambition here is found,
But to be Crown'd
Lord or Lady of the May;
And on that solemn day,
For Singing to have praise
Or f•r ind•ting to deserve the Bayes,
Thus, thus, live we, &c.



  373.In the Cool Evening, on the Lawns we play,
And merrily pass our time away.
We dance, and run, and pipe, and sing,
And Wrastle in a Ring.
For some gawdy Wreaths of Flowers,
Cropt from the fruitful Fields, and Bowers.
By some pretty Nymps compos'd,
By their fair hands to be dispos'd,
To those ambitious Shepherds, who
With Vertuous Emulation strive to do
What may deserve the Garlands, and (obtain'd)
Are prouder far than Princes that have gain'd
In fight their Valours prize,
Or ever stubborn Nation's Victories;
Whilst in the adjoyning Grove the Nightingale
Does tell her mournful Tale,
And does our Pleasures greet,
With each Note,
So sweet, so sweet, so sweet
From her pret•y jugging, jugging throat.
It does each Breast inspire
With loving heat and with Poetick Fire.
Thus, thus live we, &c.


4.We live aloof from Destiny,
(That onely quarrells with the Great)
And in this Calm Rretreat,
(Content with Nature uncorrupted) we
From splendid miseries of Courts are free;
From pomp, and noise, from pride, and fear,
From Factions, from divisions Cleer,
F•ee from brave beggery, smiling strife.
This is indeed a Life:



O Gods! banish Endymion: desire Evadne to come
To me.



I will  
Ex. Vrania.




Wretched Cleantha! is thy Love a Crime,
A Crime to him thou lov'st? must it be ruine
To a person, if thou but affect'st him?
Have I some Plague that I must thus destroy,
Whom I embrace? or is my Destiny
G•own Paradoxical, and proves my Love
To be true Hatred?  
O Death! thou art not half so Cruel yet,
In thy destructions of the Prosp'rous,
As in not killing Wretches that would die.






Vrania does not well to treat me thus:
I took no leave of her, but I have told her
The reasons why my Love forbad it me,
Yet she persists in Cruelty.




His Count'nance betokens grief.



To be thus angry and accuse me of
Slighting a poor deluded Maid
In spight of all my Vows of Love to her  
The Princess still is Gracious to me:
I had best intreat her to perswade my now
Provok'd Vrania She's here;
But she's alone, I dare not interrupt her Thoughts.



Good morrow, my Lord.



Your pardon, Madam, if unthought of, I
Have rush•d on your Retirement.



Your Presence will better it.
'Pray what News f•om Argos?



Madam, the Repo•t was brought last night to Cortu
Had nothing •n't of Truth: I found all quiet,
But onely for the disturbance which we made
Our selves by our Arrival in the Night.



I am glad my Lord your danger was no more.



You oblige me Madam to undergo
Much greater danger for your Highness then
This could have prov'd.



My Lord! you have already
Serv'd me beyond what I can recompence.



Madam! t'has been your Highness's pleasure still
To honour with two great respects the little
Merits of your mean Servant, who's advanc'd
When numbred in the lowest rank of those
That have been Fortunate to do you service.



You add still to my debts, my Lord, yet are
No way injurious, since you make me rich
In having such a Noble Creditor:
But pray, my Lord, tell me, (as one concern'd
Much in your Fortunes) what's the Cause
Your Lordship has not worn of late that rest
Upon your looks which heretofore appear'd.



Madam, it is for you to wear that rest who are
Plac'd in that upper Region where there is
No Wind, but a little Bark, i'th midst
Of a great Sea, subject to every Wave,
And every gust of Wind, can ne're pretend
To this blest 'State.



My Lord; you have som griefs that are particular.



For my troubles, Madam,
Alas; their objects would appear so small
To your great Eye, you'd think I did affront you
Shou'd I dare say them to you. Could the Lyon
In his Midnight-walks hear some poor Worms
Complain for want of little drops of dew,
What pity could that noble Creature have,
Who never wanted small things, for those poor
Ambitions? yet these are their concernments,
And but for want of these they pine and die.



I hope my Lord what is your Trouble may
Not be augmented by my knowing it,
Else I shall never think ought small that can
〈2 pages missing〉
  44Thus to instruct you in Astronomy.



I am lost in wonder:  
Aside.

Madam, 'tis not strange,
If I'm proud of what you blush at, but
I am sure your unbounded wit to morrow
Will with much greater reason quite deny it.



My Lord, you think no woman can be constant
To what she sayes a day, but your Vrania:
But till you have try'd, pray have more Charity,
You'l after have more Faith: my Lord Farewell:
The Gods forgive my breach of Modesty  
Aside.




What have I heard!
Was't not enough to lose my dear Urania,

Unless I also did adore the hand
That snatch'd her from me, Cleantha Loves Endymion

But Fool it cannot be; ne're may I know
Her Noble breast harbour a thought so low. 
Exeunt.











I Was (at least in my own conceit) in probability of winning the sweet Evadne; and now, that not onely her ugly Father, but the Queen too should forbid her to see me or speak to me; it is what I cannot, will not bear: Though Fate it self say, I shall do it, I am resolv'd that old grey Priest and his Mi∣stress the Queen, shall be the subjects of my Revenge: and yet I am not ambitious to show my Valour so far, as to be hang'd for't neither  I think I ha't; If I can do this, 'twill be the sweetest part of my Revenge, to live, and tread, and spit upon their Graves: I have sent for Geron, a Rogue sit for my purpose, for he is Cove∣t•us to Extremity, and I have Gold to bribe him, and which is
  45
lucky above my Wishes, the Priest and Queen have chec'kd him lately, and countenanc'd his Wife against him, which torments him so, that I believe he would be glad to be hang'd on any terms.  Here he is.





Consume him he's here  



Dear Geron, let him embrace thee that
Perhaps is thy best Friend.



Perhaps, with a Curse to him 
Aside.

No, my Lord, you are a Friend to my Wife.




Geron! give me your hand.



Wou'd I had your Heart's blood. 
Aside.




Give me your Hand, Geron.




My Good Lord! you do me too much honour.



I beg your pardon heartily that I presum'd to
Count'nance your ugly, impertinent, ill-natur'd, vain
Wife against you, you that are so worthy an honest Knight;
It was Ignorance of her, and you made me do it. I protest it was.



What the Devil does he mean by this?  
Aside.



Upon my Honour Geron it was; had I not been a stranger to her ill Qualities.



I am afraid you know 'em too well.  
Aside.



I should never have encourag'd her in her Insolence to you.



What does all this tend to?  
Aside.



For I am well satisfy'd, a Man, especially an old Man that has had experience of the vanity of the World, ought to have an absolute Dominion over his Wife.



My Lord, this is a Truth! I would you had acknowledg'd sooner; for my abominable Wife, instead of being humbled, is •ncourg'd by the Court.



I know though too late now, your Wife is froward, Foolish, petulant, wanton, proud, expensive, disobedient, Ungrateful.  



'Tis too true; but a Plague on him, I am afraid he has
〈2 pages missing〉  48Night resum'd his desires, and that Vrania has promis'd it in ear∣nest.



But Vrania will contradict that  



No; she ask'd the Princess liberty to leave the Court a day or two for some private business or other, and is now absent.



Excellent Geron! but how shall we carry this story?



My Wife; who shall still be ignorant of the matter.



Admirably invented: thou shal't have the Talents; be∣sides if thy Wife shou'd discover thee or me, if she be question'd, we'l face her down in't and she shall hang for't.



That Argument prevails with me more then the Talents: whether she betrays us or no, we'l do that my Lord.



With all my heart, Excellent Geron: for the Priest, thou shalt go to him, and subtilly perswade him that the Queen has made an appointment to meet me in the Grotto, and that I to avoid suspi∣tion am to be in Womans Cloaths.



My Lord, he'll ne're believe it.



Do thou confirm it by ten thousand Oaths.



That will be dang'rous.



Not at all: But think on the Talents, and the death of thy Wi•e man: Thou maist perswade the Priest to meet her to pre∣vent it in a Womans loose habit, and then bring the King to see them.



But the Priest will soon undeceive the King.



No, no, fear not that, the King will be so inrag'd: 'tis ten to one he kills 'em both without Examination; if not, you and I, who will be the first Accusers will swear 'em both down in't; think upon Revenge and Profit.



My Lord I'le do't about the time of this Even'ng Sacri∣fice for the Victory of Theander.











And this Guard is to convey him out of the
Kings Dominions; let him be hang'd and
He will.   let us about our business  
Ex. Geron and Nean.





May I not see the Princess for
Whom I am banish'd before I go?



No, no, along Sir.




Pray Sir, go a little faster.




Prethee, let the Gentleman alone, soft
And •air goes far, and the Gentleman
Considers he has far to go.



Farewell than brave Cleantha, may'st thou never
Once think Endymion suffers for thy sake:
And farewell dear Vrania, I will love thee
On those hard Rocks I now must dwell upon.



What's this muttering? Along Sir.




Good Gentleman! he's loath to leave the Princess
I warrant him.











The Princess!   Great Princess pardon
My glorious sufferings; forgive me that
Kneels.

I ever saw the Light, or liv'd a Minute:
That you are injur'd thus by him whose being
Is not worth your meanest thought.



Ah, my Lord, affront me not:
Rise brave Endymion! 'Tis my misfortune:
Thou art too low already.



Fortune made me low to be advanc'd by a hand
More Worthy than her own.
Rises.





I have undone you! what can I give you now
In recompence of Liberty, and all
The pleasures you must loose
In a sad banishment, for her who onely
Can be afflicted at your sufferings.



Madam, you have Enough to give to pay
So mean a debt, if you will call it one
A thousand times.



Name it, and take it, dear

Endymion, though it be my life.




Then grant me this request: use every art
To make your Hours as blest as I shall pray
They may be many; and never let a •hought
〈2 pages missing〉
  52My impatience to be troublesome to others.



You grieve for Endymion, when all Arcadia

Rejoyces at the Victory of

Theander, which this Evening we shall Celebrate
With Sacrifices, and with other Rites, for whom
We will prepare a publick Triumph:
Compose your self, and let not others see
Your shame.



My Shame they ne're
Aside.

Shall see; Call it •y Glory, so it is.





Sir, the Sacrifice is ready for the
Altar, and the Priests wait your Royal presence
For the Execution.



Niece! think on what I've said, and follow us.


Ex. King and Pyrr.


Come, dear Cleantha, prithee be not sad,
The Prince of Macedon will be fitter for
Your noble Blood which is deriv'd from Kings.



And some other will b• fitter for him
Then I, unless he likes a broken heart.
Besides the Prince is Contracted already to
The Queen of Thrace's eldest Daughter.



She is long since dead.



Who can tell that, Madam; I am apt to believe
If she had her Kingdom yet the Prince would find
Her out.





What News with you?



News that does import your Majesty. 
Whisper.






Madam! the Queen and your Highness are expected at the Temple▪ this will be a night of Joy.



That brings me nought but sorrow; the name of joy
Is odious to me, since Endymion's gone.



Art thou sure of this Phronesia?



Yes, Madam, doubt it not.



The Gods amend all once more, I'le prevent it:
But first I'le to the Temple; Come Cleantha.




What have you told the Queen
What I enjoyn'd you?



I h•ve, and she is resolv'd to Circumvent him: Come to the Temple, haste.  
Ex. Phron.



Thus far it goes well; I have with many Oaths and P•ote∣stations confirm'd the Priest in the belief that Neander in Womans Cloaths is this night to meet the Queen: it takes admirably  The Talents are my own, and this wife of mine is dead already.


After the Sacrifice, there is a Consort of Martial Musick, and two or three of the Salii or Priests of Mars sing as follows.

1.ALL Praises to the God of War,
Who in our Battels gives Success,
By whom we now Victorious are,
Who does not onely us with Conquests bless,
But 'tis his Pow'r that gives us Peace.

Arcadia now may safely that enjoy,

Thessalians cannot that destroy:
For brave Theander has our Foes opprest,
And by his Noble Toyls procur'd our Rest.

2.In vain they did their Heedless Force oppose,
Against such Courage, and such Conduct too,
Such as requir'd more strong and numerous Foes▪
Fit for his Noble fury to subdue.
Oh how he thunder'd in the Van,
Godlike he threaten'd, and did more than man•.




Heaven bless you Madam. 
to her   Exit. Queen.



And make you see your Crime
In it's own horrid shape e're you attempt it,
And yet she bears it with so much assurance
I could believe her Innocent, yet why
Should Geron dare to invoke all the Gods
To testifie it; if it be false, what can
Provoke him to this Villany? If true,
She never will acknowledge it to me
What ere it be; 'tis worth my venturing
To be undeceiv'd. 
Ex.









Is't possible? my Queen an Adultress?
It cannot be: Be sure Sir, if you accuse her
Falsly, ye shall not onely die, but
Linger out a wretched life in Torments.



Sir! if I lye, let me have what death
The witty'st Cruelty can invent.



I am amaz'd! the Queen and Priest
In Womans Cloathes? strange Circumstance
To meet in Grotto, this Night? Sure 'tis
Impossible.



Sir, I am content to dye fort, if you see not your self all this to Night.



In the mean time, you'l be content to be secur'd?



Sir with all my heart.



Guard! take Geron, and secure him till further order.




Sir! this dreadful news amazes me!



Ah Pyrrhus? in this very Grotto
I met Urania, and forgot the Queen,
Tho' then I thought her faithful.
And as free from any Carnal thoughts
At 〈◊〉 departed Souls in th' other world.



The Gods grant this meeting prove no worse
Than that did.



O Heav'n! methinks I see 'em already in their Lust, yet sure it cannot be; if I find this Accusation false, it had been better for this fellow he never had been born.



Sir, you may yet prevent it.



I may for this time, but I will not harbour
That Devil Jealousie within my breast
For all this World can give me: I am resolv'd
To see the certainty my self; and if
It prove untrue, my Queen shall live with freedom,
As she has ever done, in all my Thoughts,
And her Accuser fall her Sacrifice:
But if she can forget her former Vertue,
I can take as much pleasure to see her blood
Drop from the fatal S•ord, as e're I did
To see it blushing on her Cheek, when first
I thought her modest▪
Look! where they come  
Enter Queen and Priest.

Let us withdraw; it may be we shall
Discover something.



And nothing is more Common
Then this, which is not thought a sin, because
It seems an Impulse of Nature.



Hear'st thou Pyrrhus? I am distracted!







All happiness attend your Majesty.



I must contain! how do you Madam?



Always happy whilst your Majesty is so.



And what are you discoursing of?



Nothing! but good with this good person sure.



What•s that you talk of which is not Sin
Because an impulse of Nature?  



What do you mean Sir?



I know not how we came by Chance to speak
How little wantonness is thought a sin
Because it seemeth an Impulse of Nature.
Whereas the Vertuous still fix their Eyes
〈2 pages missing〉
  60It has been very long, two hours at least:
Enter a Lord of the Councel.

It's bad enough for certain: here it comes!
My Lord, you have been long; but I expect
No good; and therefore care not if you had
Been longer.



Sir, before I can satisfie your Expectations,
I must humbly pray you will be pleas'd to pardon
The intreating your Answer to a Question
On which all we have done depends.







I may seem too insolent: but the whole Truth
Of all the Examination does depend
Upon't; that is, Whether your Majesty
Did not one night Command a little Lady,
That waits on the Princess, one Vrania,

To attend you in that Grotto, where
The Queen and Priest were seiz'd on▪







And she was there?







Is your Majesty assur'd it was she, or might it be the Queen?



Ha! her Whispers were like the Queens: Pyrrhus knows I told him so.



Be happy then great Prince;
Your Queen is Innocent; your Priest is holy,
And Geron and Neander onely are
T•e Criminals.



Are you assur'd of this?



Yes Sir; it was the Hellish contrivance of

Geron and Neander brought them both together.



Why did not the Queen reveal this?



She rather would have dy'd then have disclos'd
Your S•mmo•• to Vrania, which with your Majesties
Pa••on, she's pleas'd to call your dishonour.



My Lord it was; but pray relieve my Wonder
And tell me the whole Story.



Sir, in this Confession of Geron and Neander, and Phro∣nesia,  61
which we, (having found them Tripping in some part of the Story) by threatning Tortures, have extorted from 'em: Your Ma∣jesty may fully read the Story of the Innocence of the Queen and Priest, and of the guilt of these Barbarous Wretches.



Blest' Heaven! how are thy wayes just like thy Orbes,
Involv'd within each other: yet still we find
Thy Judgements are like Comets that do blaze,
And fright, but die withall, whilst all thy Mercies
Are like the Stars which ofttimes are obscur'd,
But still remain the same behind the Clouds.



May all your Doubts and Fears thus terminate▪



Thus are you shaken to be more confirm'd.



Send for Vrania, Pyrrhus! she shall wear
This day the just rewards of Virtue; I
Will visit my brave Queen, who rather chose
To die unjustly as a Criminal
Then I should justly be so term'd,
For which I will proclaim my Fault since she
Will have the Glory of concealing it.





The King seems pleas'd, as he has reason.



My Lord! let the Councel remove
Into the Hall, where before all the Court
I'le bring my Queen in Triumph there to hear
Her base Accusers sentenc'd.  

Ex. all but Evadne▪




I was told I should find Cleantha here  
Why did I beg to leave my Cell?
(Where I did never injure any one)
To see this place, and in so little time
To do more mischief than whole Generations
Can parallel? how much
Had it been better I had ever dwelt
In those Retirements, where small Sins seem great▪
And great Devotions small, then to be here
Where the blood of Queens and Priests had like
To have been sacrific'd to the Malice of
Wicked men? (had not the Gods taken the Cause












Those Cheeks that lately Beauty wore, now pale
With guilt.







She is with Child.



It is impossible; she cannot dissem••e so much Vertue,
I'le engage my Life she's Innocent.



How know you this?



Sir, being sent in haste by my Lord Pyrrhus,

To bring her to your Majesty, by chance
I learn't of one o'th' Servants of the Princess
Near to what place he thought she was:
I made Enquiry there, at a small house
I was acquainted at; The Woman told me,
She thought she I enquir'd for was in the house:
And asking of me many Circumstances,
She told me it was surely she: but told me too,
As a great Secret, That she was with Child,
But that she said she was Marry'd;
As did her Mother who this morning left her,
At this I went to Vrania, who confes't it,
But would not tell me who her Husband was,
And was very loth to come with me, though
I told her, your Majesty had sent for her.



And is this truth Urania?




Speak to the King.







And who's your Husband?




•e not: sham'd to name your Husband, Madam,
'Twill be your shame if you name none.



I am not •sham'd to name him, but affraid 









〈…〉 not disobey, and by my Lord
Am autho•〈…〉 him, when

〈…〉 qu•stion'd, who's more tender










It is the Great Theander.








What are you marry'd to the Prince!
Marry'd to Theander?  
Rises in a Fury.




O pardon me, Great King,
That I refus'd not to be taken from
A Cottage, to the bosome of a Prince,
On such Conditions as we dar'd to call
The Gods to Witness.



Whether she be his Wife,
Or onely dares affirm it, though she were
More to me then my Eyes, she should
Die e're I sleep.



Upon my Knees I beg,
Great Sir, you will recall this hasty Sentence;
It is the Princes fault, not hers.




No Intercessions   by the Honour of a King,
I swear it. The Prince in some few hours
Will be in Town;   if what she sayes be false,
This news shall be his welcome: but if true,
'Tis fit his coming be too late to save her.



Ah, Great Prince, pity the distress'd who has
No friend to plead her Cause; all I affirm
Is truth; Theander is my Witness, see
Takes a Let•er ou• of her bosome.

That Noble Name; this I receiv'd from him
Not three dayes since.

King reads it and gives it to the Queen.


'Tis so; but know Vrania!
My Crown would prove too heavy for your off-spring,
Fit onely for •ottages; it will behove you to
Prepare •or death this day within Two hours.







I beseech your Majesty  



I charge you on your Loyalty to hold;
I swear again this day within •wo hours
I'le see her head off▪ Marshall take her hence,







O vile Woman! 'tis you that have brought me to this! must I be cut in pieces?



Truly loving Husband you must, and be given to Doggs too, but they'l have but ill Commons of you; you will be mighty tough; besides you have so many diseases, that if you were divided into as many pieces as there are hairs in your Beard, each Morsel would own a several Malady: for my part I would not advise any Dog that I have a kindness for to taste of you, for fear of endanger∣ing his health.



O thou abominable filthy Hag, if thou wert to be serv'd so first, it would not trouble me.



O Sir, you would have drawn me in, but I shall live to tread upon your Grave! you know it were ill manners for me to be hang'd before my Husband! but how does your Lordship? will you have some Greek-wine to comfort your cold stomack, you'l die with the fear on't else before to morrow morning; but I be∣seech you, my Lord, do not forget, if you do live till then, to have a Nose-gay, and a pair of white Gloves, with clean Linnen too, for the Execution! Men of quality are always very cleanly when they go to be hang'd.



O! what will become of me? I shall never be able to in∣dure it. Oh! you old cowardly Sot! this comes of your confes∣sing; Rogue.



This may thank your villanous design, with a Curse to you, I was onely drawn in.



You deserve to be hang'd Rascal, and will be so.



'Twill be some comfort to me to have a Lord suffer with me, but 'twould be more honour to me, if that Lord were a wiser man.



O! you old Dog! that I could come at you.



That I could poyson you with my breath, but that 'twould put you out of your pain, which is your immoderate fear.








You come as seasonably as can be, for the Traytors are at Civil War.



Away, woman, and interrupt 'em not.



I will not take my leave on you, for I intend to see my dear Husband again, at least before you be cut into Messes, Fare∣well. 
Ex. Phron.



I am now come to speak to you as dying men.



Ay, ay, you old Rascal Geron, whom may that thank?



A villanous Lord that corrupted a poor innocent man as I was: a Curse on him for drawing me in.



A Curse upon an old Cowardly Rogue, to let his fear be∣tray us.



Come, 'tis not now a season to quarrel with one another, but to make peace with the Gods: I am come to prepare you for your deaths, and first Neander I begin with you.



'Pray Sir begin with him, he needs it most! he has al∣wayes been the most perfidious, impious Wretch.



I need it most? I scorn to be prepar'd any more then your self, if you go to that, with that ugly, pocky Who•e-masters face of your own.



Sir, it's no matter what he sayes; he has as much malice to good men, as Whores have to honest Women



I must first begin with you my Lord.



Look there, he knows who has most need on't.



Peace Wisard, peace! do you say this to me?



Peace stupid Wretches, I command you: and confess, and repent of your most horrid Crimes.



Well Sir, I have done; and I do confess from the bot∣tom of my heart   O you old dry, raw-bon'd, wretched, de∣crepit-Cuckold you, to bring me to this.



Heav'n! what impiety is this?



Ay Sir! you see his Devotion? O! Villainous wicked man.



Sir! hold your Tongue! my Lord, 'tis time now to be sensible of your sad condition.



Ay Sir! so it is, if you knew as much as I do of his wicked∣ness, you'd say so.



Well Sir! I do confess, I'le torment the Rogue
Asid•.
I have many Sins to repent of First I have been naught w•th that old fellow's Wife.



If pitty poor Urania could do thee good,
Thou hast enough on't.



I do confess I'm marry'd to the Prince;
But he will witness for me 'twas th' effect
Of his own Choice: I never presum'd
To think i• till he told me it should be so;
Since when how faithful I have been to him
Witness! Oh! Heaven! and all those Pow'rs that dare
Acquit whom Kings condemn; and tho' for this
I now must suffer death, I cannot wish
I had not don't, since 'twas the Prince's pleasure,
Whom to contradict, to me were worse then death.



Alas! I pity her, her Case is too severe.



And yet I feel
That death is bitter, 'tis an Enemy
Looks cruelly on those who have no friends:
'Tis hard to undergo the greatest Task alone;
But 'tis my Fate, and Heaven must be obey'd 
 'Tis a long hazard that we run in death,
And a short warn•ng rather does disturb
Then sit us for it; were't not for this,
I could be well content to close these Eyes
That have of late beheld so little pleasure.



She draws Tears from my Eyes; I was not wont
To be so soft.



But I too long
Detain you with Complaints, whose business is
To see me die: Live happy brave Theander,

May all thy Sorrows die with thy Vrania,

And all those Joyes live with thee which she took

〈◊〉 thy •ontents▪   May'st thou be happy in
A Princess, great as thy own Merits, bright
As thy own •yes, and vertuous as
Are all thy Thoughts; and may she honour thee
As ••uly as thy poor Vrania did.



Are you ready, Madam?







Madam, 'tis your Destiny.



O, it is he
Sir, you can instruct me what I am to do;
I never yet saw any body die.



Madam, you must kneel.



How will he strike?



With all the mercy that he can.



When you have ended all you have to say,
Pray kneel with your Face that way, and give
Some sign when I shall strike.







I cannot stay to see't; Farewell, dear Vrania.
Exit. Evad.




When I am dead, pray Sirs suffer none
But my Mother to fit me for my Grave;
She will be careful of me, she will pay
Holy devotions for me, and bedew
With pious Tears that face she still has lov'd:
And may the Gods give comforts in her sorrows,
And all those Stars which have been hard to me
Be merciful to her May my misfortune
Work in her onely a more true content
In the low Sphere she so securely moves in▪



I think she'l ne're a done prating, they all keep such a coile when they come to die: Wou'd the King wou'd please to for∣bid all Speeches upon Scaffolds.



Sirs! Farewel, pray present
My humble Service to my Noble Princess,
With thanks for all her Favours, in my life,
And Charity in death   bless'd Gods assist me. 
Kneels.

Pray expect the Sign.









Stay stay the fatal Blow.







A miserable Mother come to save her onely Child.



Executioner do your Office.
One of the Gent. layes hold of the Executioner.


  76To dawn upon me, and instruct me, those
Are neerer it, who kneel in humble Cells,
Then such as stand on Tiptoe on high Towers.
For now Theander makes Urania more
A Princess, then a Kingdom could, by courting
Her as a Shepherdess, and shews the World,
That more then Chance conduc'd to her Greatness.



Why did you not tell Theander the whole truth?



Sir, he marry'd her at Court, and I knew not of it
Till he we was gone to the War in Thessaly:
For witness of all this, I do invoke
Those Pow'rs, who never testifie untruths;
And here produce those small Remains of Greatness
Misfortune yet hath left me; See, Sir, here
She shews several rich Iewels.

That so fam'd Jewel which so many Kings
Of Thrace have worn, and with such veneration
Have still preserv'd on an old Prophesie, that
This should preserve the Thracian Family.




Pyrrhus! 'tis all true! Go tell the Queen and Princess this:
Ex. Pyrr.
I need no Testimony but those words,
All Queens might blush to hear from Cottagers,
But is it possible so mean a place
So long should hold great Cleopatra?



Know, great Prince (and know it too
From one who has experimented Greatness)
When I had satisfy'd my self in my
Endeavours of regaining my lost Rights,
And saw 'em all unprosperous, (as if
Heaven long enough had given one Family
The priviledge to govern others)
I was as well content to be the first
Must learn to act with common people,
As he who first was call'd from them to rule.




The Prophesie is now fulfill'd, That Jewel
Will serve to satisfie the World as much

  77Of all you say, as your own Words have me:
And thus preserves the Thracian Family,  



Dear Daughter! still be happy and forgive
Our ignorance; I cannot love thee better
Then at that very time I did condemn thee,
I could as well have sentenc'd my two Eyes;
And pardon me, dear Sister, if I first  



Ask'd pardon where I most did need it.
Call the Queen, and tell Cleantha Vrania is alive.



Now, my dear Daughter thou art safe within my Armes.



Madam, it onely did belong to you
Who gave me life, thus to preserve it too. 
Trumpets within.








The Prince is come.



What will Theander say to see his dear Vrania

Thus attir'd at his return?



He'l say you'r mercifull.





Madam, see here great Cleopatra

And call her Sister; take Cleantha!
Her thou hast wept for: Pyrrhus has told you all.


My Son! never more welcome! never

The Prince fixes his Eyes on Urania.

Did more Joy spring from more Sorrow.



Bless me dread Sir!
What Scene does entertain me? Are your Joyes
Exprest by Sacrifice?





Take thy Vrania, and wonder not
At any thing but her.



My Triumphs are more dreadful than my Conquests.



My Son be happy
In thy best Choice; let not thy wonder make
〈2 pages missing〉
  80'Twill be but gratitude in me to do
Some of their business for them, and reward
So brave a Vertue as Endymion owns,
And make him great for his Cleantha too.



Is Endymion return'd? O happy hour!



The War in Thessaly has found an happy end,
And there I've left
Those hands that made that Scepter stoop, who, now,
Want but a Scene to do new wonders in,
And this may prove rebellious Thrace, if you
Sir, think fit I wear that Crown Vrania gives me;
In this Conquest, the brave Endymion

Shall be my second; what shall I not expect from
Such vertue and such valour when they meet?



I have of late receiv'd such mercies, that
I cannot think of any thing which looks
Like Cruelty. Therefore wonder not
All that you ask so soon is granted you,

Cleantha; Take then your Endymion; be
More blest in him than Greatness e're could make you.



And now you'r doing works of mercy Sir,
I beg for the sake of this glorious day
Which is a day of mercy to us all,
That Geron and Neander may not die
But suffer Banishment for life.



What you propose has much of Piety;
I'le not deny't: and now I've one request
To you my honour'd Priest, your leave
That Pyrrhus my best Confident may serve
The fair Evadne




You oblige me Sir to make me see
My poor Evadne is so much your care,
It shall •e mine; she still shall think that best
Your Majesty is pleas'd to chuse •or her.






Endymion! why so slowly to thy Joyes?

Kneels and kisses Cleantha's hand.


Re•p here the fruits of Gratitude and Mercy.







My Lord, you'r welcome from your Banishment.



You've onely now this Ladies leave to ask
For any thing you'd have.



I am happy in your Royal mercy Sir,
And hope in time to be so too in hers.
Madam, I hope your Highness has the Charity
To pardon your poor Servant, who was the
Unwilling occasion of so much injury
To so Noble a Princess.



You need not fear
Your Sentence when Cleantha is your Judge.



Let us all away, and satisfie our selves with what
We have so long travail'd with, and let the World
Learn from this story, Those that are vertuous
Cannot be long in Clouds; Innocence conceal'd is the
Stoln pleasure of the Gods, which never ends
In shame as that of Men does oft times, but
Like the Sun breaks forth, when he has
Gratify'd another World, and to our Eyes appears
More Glorious through his late obscurity.



The Impious here a while may find some Rest,
But in the End the good are onely blest.




