

Mr. and Mrs. DANGLE at Breakfast, and
reading Newspapers.


BRUTUS to LORD NORTH. Letter
the second, on the STATE OF THE
ARMY. Pshaw! To the first L dash
D of the A dash Y. Genuine Extract
of a Letter from ST. KITT's. COXHEATH
INTELLIGENCE. It is now confidently
asserted that SIR CHARLES HARDY. Pshaw! Nothing
but about the fleet, and the
nation! and I hate all politics but theatrical
politics. Where's the MORNING CHRONICLE?



Yes, that's your gazette.



So, here we have it. 
"Theatrical intelligence extraordinary," We
hear there is a new tragedy in rehearsal at
Drury-Lane Theatre, call'd the SPANISH ARMADA,
said to be written by Mr. PUFF, a
gentleman well known in the theatrical
world; if we may allow ourselves to give
credit to the report of the performers, who,
truth to say, are in general but indifferent
judges, this piece abounds with the most
striking and received beauties of modern
composition So! I am very glad my friend
PUFF's tragedy is in such forwardness. Mrs.
Dangle, my dear, you will be very glad to
hear that PUFF's tragedy 



Lord, Mr. Dangle, why will you plague me
about such nonsense? Now the plays are begun
I shall have no peace. Isn't it sufficient to
make yourself ridiculous by your passion for the
theatre, without continually teazing me to join
you? Why can't you ride your hobby-horse
without desiring to place me on a pillion behind
you, Mr. Dangle?



Nay, my dear, I was only going to read 



No, no; you never will read any thing that's
worth listening to: you hate to hear about your
country; there are letters every day with Roman
signatures, demonstrating the certainty of
an invasion, and proving that the nation is utterly
undone But you never will read any
thing to entertain one.



What has a woman to do with politics, Mrs.
Dangle?



And what have you to do with the theatre,
Mr. Dangle? Why should you affect the character
of a Critic? I have no patience with you!
 haven't you made yourself the jest of all your
acquaintance by your interference in matters
where you have no business? Are not you call'd
a theatrical Quidnunc, and a mock Maecenas to
second-hand authors?



True; my power with the Managers is pretty
notorious; but is it no credit to have applications
from all quarters for my interest? From
lords to recommend fidlers, from ladies to get
  4
boxes, from authors to get answers, and from
actors to get engagements.



Yes, truly; you have contrived to get a
share in all the plague and trouble of theatrical
property, without the profit, or even the credit
of the abuse that attends it.



I am sure, Mrs. Dangle, you are no loser by
it, however; you have all the advantages of it:
 mightn't you, last winter, have had the reading
of the new Pantomime a fortnight previous
to its performance? And doesn't Mr. Fosbrook
let you take places for a play before it is
advertis'd, and set you down for a Box for
every new piece through the season? And didn't
my friend, Mr. Smatter, dedicate his last Farce
to you at my particular request, Mrs. Dangle?



Yes; but wasn't the Farce damn'd, Mr.
Dangle? And to be sure it is extremely pleasant
to have one's house made the motley rendezvous
of all the lackeys of literature! The very high
change of trading authors and jobbing critics! Yes,
my drawing-room is an absolute register-office
for candidate actors, and poets without
character; then to be continually alarmed with
Misses and Ma'ams piping histeric changes on
  5
JULIETS and DORINDAS, POLLYS and OPHELIAS;
and the very furniture trembling at the probationary
starts and unprovok'd rants of would-be
RICHARDS and HAMLETS! And what is worse
than all, now that the Manager has monopoliz'd
the Opera-House, haven't we the Signors and
Signioras calling here, sliding their smooth semibreves,
and gargling glib divisions in their
outlandish throats with foreign emissaries and
French spies, for ought I know, disguised like
fidlers and figure dancers!







And to employ yourself so idly at such an
alarming crisis as this too when, if you had the
least spirit, you would have been at the head of
one of the Westminster associations or trailing
a volunteer pike in the Artillery Ground! But
you o'my conscience, I believe if the French
were landed to-morrow, your first enquiry
would be, whether they had brought a theatrical
troop with them.



Mrs. Dangle, it does not signify I say the
stage is "the Mirror of Nature," and the actors
are "the Abstract, and brief Chronicles of
the Time:" and pray what can a man of sense
  6
study better? Besides, you will not easily persuade
me that there is no credit or importance
in being at the head of a band of critics, who
take upon them to decide for the whole town,
whose opinion and patronage all writers solicit,
and whose recommendation no manager dares
refuse!



Ridiculous! Both managers and authors of
the least merit, laugh at your pretensions. The
PUBLIC is their CRITIC without whose
fair approbation they know no play can rest on
the stage, and with whose applause they welcome
such attacks as yours, and laugh at the malice
of them, where they can't at the wit.



Very well, Madam very well.





Mr. Sneer, Sir, to wait on you.



O, shew Mr. Sneer up.

Plague on't, now we must appear loving and
affectionate, or Sneer will hitch us into a story.



With all my heart; you can't be more ridiculous
than you are.



Your are enough to provoke 




 Hah! my dear Sneer, I am vastly glad to see
you. My dear, here's Mr. Sneer.



Good morning to you, Sir.



Mrs. Dangle and I have been diverting ourselves
with the papers. Pray, Sneer, won't you
go to Drury-lane theatre the first night of
Puff's tragedy?



Yes; but I suppose one shan't be able to get
in, for on the first night of a new piece they
always fill the house with orders to support it.
But here, Dangle, I have brought you two
pieces, one of which you must exert yourself
to make the Managers accept, I can tell
you that, for 'tis written by a person of consequence.



So! now my plagues are beginning!



Aye, I am glad of it, for now you'll be
happy. Why, my dear Dangle, it is a pleasure
  8
to see how you enjoy your volunteer fatigue,
and your solicited solicitations.



It's a great trouble yet, egad, its pleasant
too. Why, sometimes of a morning, I have a
dozen people call on me at breakfast time,
whose faces I never saw before, nor ever desire
to see again.



That must be very pleasant indeed!



And not a week but I receive fifty letters,
and not a line in them about any business of my
own.







"Bursts into tears, and exit." What, is
this a tragedy?



No, that's a genteel comedy, not a translation only
taken from the French; it is written
in a stile which they have lately tried to run
down; the true sentimental, and nothing ridiculous
in it from the beginning to the end.



Well, if they had kept to that, I should
not have been such an enemy to the stage, there
was some edification to be got from those pieces,
Mr. Sneer!



I am quite of your opinion, Mrs. Dangle;
the theatre, in proper hands, might certainly
be made the school of morality; but now, I am
sorry to say it, people seem to go there principally
for their entertainment!



It would have been more to the credit of the
Managers to have kept it in the other line.



Undoubtedly, Madam, and hereafter perhaps
to have had it recorded, that in the midst of a
luxurious and dissipated age, they preserv'd two
houses in the capital, where the conversation
was always moral at least, if not entertaining!



Now, egad, I think the worst alteration is in
the nicety of the audience. No double entendre,
no smart inuendo admitted; even Vanburgh
and Congreve oblig'd to undergo a
bungling reformation!



Yes, and our prudery in this respect is just on
a par with the artificial bashfulness of a courtezan,
who encreases the blush upon her cheek in
an exact proportion to the diminution of her
modesty.



Sneer can't even give the Public a good
word! But what have we here? This seems a
very odd 



O, that's a comedy, on a very new plan;
replete with wit and mirth, yet of a most serious
moral! You see it is call'd "THE REFORMED
HOUSEBREAKER;" where, by the mere
force of humour, HOUSEBREAKING is put into so
ridiculous a light, that if the piece has its proper
run, I have no doubt but that bolts and bars will
be entirely useless by the end of the season.



Egad, this is new indeed!



Yes; it is written by a particular friend of
mine, who has discovered that the follies and foibles
of society, are subjects unworthy the notice
of the Comic Muse, who should be taught to stoop
only at the greater vices and blacker crimes of
humanity gibbeting capital offences in five acts,
and pillorying petty larcenies in two. In short,
  11
his idea is to dramatize the penal laws, and
make the Stage a court of ease to the Old Bailey.



It is truly moral.



Sir Fretful Plagiary, Sir.



Beg him to walk up.  Now,
Mrs. Dangle, Sir Fretful Plagiary is an author
to your own taste.



I confess he is a favourite of mine, because
every body else abuses him.



 Very much to the credit of your charity,
Madam, if not of your judgment.



But, egad, he allows no merit to any author
but himself, that's the truth on't tho' he's my
friend.



Never. He is as envious as an old maid
verging on the desperation of six-and-thirty:
and then the insiduous humility with which he
seduces you to give a free opinion on any of his
  12
works, can be exceeded only by the petulant
arrogance with which he is sure to reject your
observations.



Very true, egad tho' he's my friend.



Then his affected contempt of all newspaper
strictures; tho', at the same time, he is the
sorest man alive, and shrinks like scorch'd parchment
from the fiery ordeal of true criticism:
yet is he so covetous of popularity, that he
had rather be abused than not mentioned at
all.



There's no denying it tho' he is my friend.



You have read the tragedy he has just finished,
haven't you?



O yes; he sent it to me yesterday.



Well, and you think it execrable, don't you?



Why between ourselves, egad I must own tho'
he's my friend that it is one of the most
  13
 He's here  finished and most admirable
perform 
 Mr. Sneer with him,
did you say?




Ah, my dear friend! Egad, we were just speaking
of your Tragedy. Admirable, Sir Fretful,
admirable!



You never did any thing beyond it, Sir Fretful
 never in your life.



You make me extremely happy; for without
a compliment, my dear Sneer, there isn't a
man in the world whose judgment I value as I
do yours. And Mr. Dangle's.



They are only laughing at you, Sir Fretful;
for it was but just now that 



Mrs. Dangle! Ah, Sir Fretful, you know
Mrs. Dangle. My friend Sneer was rallying
just now He knows how she admires you,
and 



O Lord I am sure Mr. Sneer has more taste
and sincerity than to A damn'd double-faced
fellow!



Yes, yes, Sneer will jest but a better humour'd 



O, I know 



He has a ready turn for ridicule his wit
costs him nothing. 



No, egad or I should wonder how he came
by it.




Because his jest is always at the expence of
his friend.



But, Sir Fretful, have you sent your play to
the managers yet? or can I be of any service to
you?



No, No, I thank you; I believe the piece
had sufficient recommendation with it. I thank
you tho'. I sent it to the manager of COVENTGARDEN
THEATRE this morning.



I should have thought now, that it might
have been cast (as the actors call it) better at
DRURY-LANE



O lud! no never send a play there while
I live harkee! 



Writes himself! I know he does 



I say nothing I take away from no man's
merit am hurt at no man's good fortune I say
nothing. But this I will say through all my
knowledge of life, I have observ'd that there
is not a passion so strongly rooted in the human
heart as envy!



I believe you have reason for what you say,
indeed.



Besides I can tell you it is not always so
safe to leave a play in the hands of those who
write themselves.



What, they may steal from them, hey, my
dear Plagiary?



Steal! to besure they may; and, egad, serve
your best thoughts as gypsies do stolen children,
disfigure them to make 'em pass for their own.



But your present work is a sacrifice to Melpomene,
and HE, you know, never 



That's no security. A dext'rous plagiarist
may do any thing. Why, Sir, for ought I
know, he might take out some of the best things
in my tragedy, and put them into his own comedy.



That might be done, I dare be sworn.



And then, if such a person gives you the
least hint or assistance, he is devilish apt to take
the merit of the whole. 







Aye but with regard to this piece, I think
I can hit that gentleman, for I can safely swear
he never read it.



I'll tell you how you may hurt him more 







Swear he wrote it.



Plague on't now, Sneer, I shall take it ill. I
believe you want to take away my character as
an author!



Then I am sure you ought to be very much
oblig'd to me.







O you know, he never means what he says.



Sincerely then you do like the piece?







But come now, there must be something that
you think might be mended, hey? Mr. Dangle,
has nothing struck you?



Why faith, it is but an ungracious thing for
the most part to 



 With most authors it is just so indeed;
they are in general strangely tenacious! But, for
  18
my part, I am never so well pleased as when a
judicious critic points out any defect to me; for
what is the purpose of shewing a work to a
friend, if you don't mean to profit by his opinion?



Very true. Why then, tho' I seriously admire
the piece upon the whole, yet there is one
small objection; which, if you'll give me leave,
I'll mention.



SIR, you can't oblige me more.



I think it wants incident.



Good God! you surprize me! wants incident! 



Yes; I own I think the incidents are too
few.



Good God! Believe me, Mr. Sneer, there
is no person for whose judgment I have a more
implicit deference. But I protest to you, Mr.
Sneer, I am only apprehensive that the incidents
are too crowded. My dear Dangle,
how does it strike you?



Really I can't agree with my friend Sneer. I
  19
think the plot quite sufficient; and the four first acts
by many degrees the best I ever read or saw in my
life. If I might venture to suggest any thing,
it is that the interest rather falls off in the fifth. 



 Rises; I believe you mean, Sir.



No; I don't upon my word.



Yes, yes, you do upon my soul it certainly
don't fall off, I assure you No, no, it don't
fall off.



Now, Mrs. Dangle, didn't you say it struck
you in the same light?



No, indeed, I did not I did not see a fault in
any part of the play from the beginning to the
end.



Upon my soul the women are the best judges
after all!



Or if I made any objection, I am sure it
was to nothing in the piece; but that I was afraid
it was, on the whole, a little too long.



Pray, Madam, do you speak as to duration of
  20
time; or do you mean that the story is tediously
spun out?



O Lud! no. I speak only with reference to
the usual length of acting plays.



Then I am very happy very happy indeed, because
the play is a short play, a remarkably
short play: I should not venture to differ with a
lady on a point of taste; but, on these occasions,
the watch, you know, is the critic.



Then, I suppose, it must have been Mr. Dangle's
drawling manner of reading it to me.



O, if Mr. Dangle read it! that's quite another
affair! But I assure you, Mrs. Dangle, the
first evening you can spare me three hours and
an half, I'll undertake to read you the whole
from beginning to end, with the Prologue and
