



WHat! shall the Providence of our Fate be vain,
In being sprung fro' th' blood of Charle∣main?

Shall those rich streams (like Iordan's sil∣ver floud)
Be lost i'th' dull Sea of Hugh Capets blood?
Shall th' Name of Valois flourish o'r Lorrain?

Our Golden Lillies wither with disdain?
No! tho in azure Field so long they stood,
I'l drown their splendors first in fields of blood.



This resolution's brave, and nobly flies
Unto a pitch, worthy the Name of Guise.

Nor does our Princely House derive its fame
(As this was all) from Charlemains great name:
No, we have other boasts as just and fair;
Since from great Clovis we descended are.

Clovis! the first of all our ancient Kings,
Who made the Roman Eagles droop their wings.
He, who the Monarchy of Gaul did found,

  2And with the sacred Cross the Lillies crown'd.



Eleven of 'em, Kings from Charlemain;

Of whom five did the Western Empire gain.

Charles of Lorrain; the last of that great Race,
Outed by Capet, who usurpt the place.



Yet Heav'n reveng'd our wrongs: as witness bear
The English Lions; who so oft did tear
Our Lillies from their stems; and did advance
Their Ensigns on our Walls, and conquer'd France.




Look but how judgement prosecutes them still!
What England once has done, again she will.
That British Harpy, who robs all the gain,
And watches o'r the golden Mines of Spain;

Whose Canvas wings about the World have flown,
As by that charm she'd circle in her own.
A Virgin! Who her neighb'ring Kings outbraves,
Scorning to match with her intended Slaves.
This Heretick, this Woman, dares combine
Against our League, and with Navar does joyn.
She flatters him; and fools the King t' advance
Her swelling hopes, in captivating France.




Yet see how Heav'n our great designments mind
In this rare Providence, just now design'd.

Th' invincible Armada for us waits,
And domineers now in the British Streights.

To conquer that small Island will be more,
Than the new World the Spaniard gain'd before.



And conquer'd it must be.   This Navy vast.
Seven dayes ago near unto Calais past.
When it was first presented to my eyes,
As up the briny Convex it did rise;
Methought it seem'd just as the World did peep,
When first it rose fro' th' bottom of the Deep.
The Waves o'r burden'd with the Ships they bore,
Fled from the weight, and panted on the shore.



When this Elizabeth's no more a Queen;

Navar has not one hope to step between
Him and his ruin: for when Heav'n's so just

  3To make the Valois fall, (as fall he must)
The Hollander dares onely for him stand;
And Porpoises can little do by land.



Since Orenge dy'd their baffled Sp'rits retreat;
Whose blood did only that crude Body heat.
Those phlegmatick dull States can never own
A sanguine temper, now his brave One's gone.
But, Sir, his sudden death may caution you
T' avoid delayes; since you are mortal too.



I know it well.



Then, Sir, I needs must fear,


Will be within three leagues of Blois to night.



Let him; so Mayn but keep him in his sight.
Were he but here, he were as good as ta'ne
'Twixt Paris and the Army of Du Mayn.

When opportunities are fitted so,
Neither in vain to frown, nor make a blow,
I'l charge through light'ning to attaque my Foe.
Has Pericart yet humour'd my desire,
In making tryal of the conj'ring Fry'r.




Yes, Sir, and him above reports did find.



Reports to Lies and Miracles are kind.



Desist; for you Philosophers are all
In your opinions too pragmatical.
How did you find him?



Sir, above the rate
Of Mortals; like the Favourite of Fate.

For how can he be less? who can controul
The num'rous Spirits, that swarm 'twixt either Pole?
None of 'em but will come at his command
More swift than Faulcons to a wonted hand.
Leaving the Chrystal Regions of the Skie,
Like shooting Stars, to his desires they flie.
He, more to gain my credit, did prepare
To show he could command the Prince o'th' Air.
He from the Earth thick Vapours made to rise,
Which by his Art turn'd Nitre in the Skies;

  4Then ram'd into a Cloud, he stretcht his hand,
Making a Lynstock of his Magick wand.
The aëry Cannon flam'd at his desire,
Disgorging both its thunder and its fire.







So strange it is, that I  
Think Pericart is one that scorns to lye,
Yet must be satisfi'd from my own Eye.



That he has promis'd, Sir. Within a Wood,
A league from Blois, where once a Temple stood
Of mighty Oaks, roof'd o'r with woven boughs,
Where Druids formerly did pay their vows,
He has a Cave: wherein he does relate
His Oracles, and future hints of fate.
This Evening is appointed for the Scene.



Told he what those Nativities did mean?



He'l do his best, and if in that he fail,
By ways more sacred he'l your fates reveal.
He'l wait for you before an hour be past.








Now, Sir, at last;
You'l hear some words about your proper fate.



Let's talk of Love   we've talkt enough of State.
Now Pericart, what news from Orleans?




My way was shorten'd by a happy chance.
Sir, at the Fryers, I Madam Gabriel met.



How, Madam Gabriel, thrice happy fate!



And with her one of my acquaintance too,





How! Meet your Mistriss too?
I hope this good portends.



And so hop'd I.
Then did I soon my self to them apply;
And told 'em there was none or little choice
Of Lodgings, since the great resort to Blois.

But mine they might command; Gabriel reply'd,
It was a favour not to be deni'd.



Dear Pericart! Altho before possest,

  5Thou hast a greater share now in my breast.
As great as that Usurper Love will spare;
And yet for greater room thou struglest there.



My Services cannot deserve that boast,
Since in my Duty they are all ingrost.
The Fry'r, Sir, her Nativity just cast;
The fate she's born to, he declares is vast.


Your Beauty shall gain much renown.
In being destin'd for a Crown.
Yet He that shall your State advance,
Is not, but must be King of France.




If our Designments now successful be,
This Fry'r (for ought I know) may point at me.
Our greatest dilligence this needs must move,
Concern'd in Glory now, as well as Love.
Whilst we are with the Fry'r, direct thy care
To bring her to my Lodgings, when we're there
A farther secret I'le to thee impart,











MY Lords, the King will instantly be here.



'Tis strange the Guises will not yet appear.



'Tis like their Acts. All must attend their State.









Larchant, attend without. How are you all?



We want the Duke, Sir, and the Cardinal.



They drove me from the Lovure th' other day,
And now keep others and themselves away.





Your sleeps are long, or else your motions slow.



We both our duty and neglect, Sir, know.



A setled mind, that no vain thoughts o'rcome,
Can sleep without the aids of Opium.




A plain and honest heart, without disguise,
Is more serene than are Egyptian skies;
Where neither clouds of discontent  
Nor storms of passion rise.



For my own part, I publickly declare,  
Passion and Interest both secluded are
From my desires; which altogether joyn
T' establish firm the Laws and Church divine.



There needs not this. It is already done
By the late League agre'd on at Peron.




'Tis odd, methinks, into extreams to fly
Gain'st others, 'cause they think not so as I.
I full as justly may my hate declare
To those that differ in their cloaths and hair.



The League made at Peron is too severe;
The Paris Edicts too indulgent are.
I'l choose the mean, and 'twixt both these will run,
Endeavouring (as I can) an Union.
But to the fairest means I'l have recourse
And if those will not do, I'l then use force.



For sometime to this tryal we may yield,
But let no Heretick upon it build.



Tho to the Romish faith I must agree,
Yet I would also a true French-man be.
Let's lay by all effects of violence,
Let Churchmen only Consciences convince:
They may perswade, whom we cannot constrain;
As Lyons may be stroak'd into a Chain.



Who are those Lyons? I will make them fall,
Or bring a Bull from Rome t' outroar 'em all.
If you would make 'em truckle to your Laws,
Or knock their teeth out, Sir, or break their claws,
Then let 'em grin their worst.  



The Duke of Guise,

As is his spirit, so is his advice,

  7Noble and fierce. But, Sir, the time's not fit
For War, nor is there cause to mannage it.



We know Navar to be a Soldier born,
Whose conduct at Coutras we yet do mourn.



I soon cry'd quit at the Battle of Arnean;

Where I the German Army did o'rthrow.



'Tis very true, that Action was most brave:
But strong Confederates Navar must have.



Sir, he is certain of the English Queen,

The King of Scotland, and the Palatine,

Wirtenberg, Saxony, Pomerania, Hess,
The Holland forces and the warlike Swise.




Well let 'em, let 'em all their forces bring,
Those Dukes, that English Queen, and Scotish King.

Tho other Frenchmen •o such lowness fall,
And suffer it, I will confront 'em all.
I'l not degenerate from the House of Guise!

My Father sell Religion's sacrifice;
And tho I dye, a double Crown will come,
Lawrels for War, Roses for Martyrdome.



These Hugonot's presumptions are forgot;
Our Father, Sir, was murder'd by Pultrot;

Th' indanger'd both your Brothers Life and Crown;
Fav'ring 'em, seems as we their Crimes did own.
What th' Admiral then suffer'd by your vow,
Others there are, as much deserve it now.



We ventur'd then on Men as brave, and great
As France has any now. If some forget
What they escap'd, and what they promis'd then,
When it comes to't, they shall not 'scape again.



Who would believe that murder and sur prize
Could be reminded by the Duke of Guise?


Which Grillon thinks below himself to do.



Am I to be control'd by you, Sir? Know,
It has not been the wont, nor shall be so.



Death! What a huffing's here? were I allow'd
The liberty you take   I'd  




In your command; and happy these are by.



More happy far, if only you and I.



Hold, Grillon, I command, or go.




But first would have these Lorrainers to know,
One word from you





His boist'rous Soul to ev'ry one is known.



May be e're long it will be calmer grown.



Sir, to be plain, such Fellows as these are,
Favour'd by you, almost proclaim a War.
They rob the greatest treasure you can have;
I mean the hearts of all men great and brave,



Let us leave trifles, and the main advance;
We're here assembled for the good of France.




'Tis true; and, Sir, your Royal word is gone,
No Heretick should sit upon the Throne.
Iudge but what contradictions it would bring,
An Heretick, and the Most Christian King!

And since illustrious Anjou hence is gone,

Navar is one step nearer to the Throne.
For we in Herauldry are so well read,
To know the House of Bourbon must succeed,
If you die without Heirs, which Heav'n forbid



'Tis odd discourse, a King to entertain,
Young and in health, with whom must after reign.
It is but little less than to degrade
The very pow'r of Heav'n it does invade.



I wonder whence this boldness is deriv'd.



Fro'th'King my Master: when I here arriv'd,
I my Credentials gave.








Commands, Sir, from Navar?




I, Sir, has not a King a Title good?
And is not he besides first Prince o'th' Blood?

Deliver up your Message.



Sir, I bring  
In the first place defiance from my King
To any one in France, that dares relate
He's in the least, a Troubler of the State.
He only arms against rebellious foes,
Wh'attempt your Crown under religious shows.
He then defies  
And challenges by me the Duke of Guise.




I answer not the challenge rash and vain;
'Tis known I've fought, and I dare fight again.
If he turn Catholick it is not fit;
And if he do not, tell him we shall meet.
I'l reach his Head tho it were ten times higher,
And meet him! Tho, as Powder meets with fire.



From that Perswasion whereto he was bred
He faithfully ingages to recede  
When by a lawful Council he is shown
A better faith, then what he yet has known.



We ask but his conversion; that's our aim;

France then may keep her safety and her fame.
Since this is promis'd; Sir, we beg of you  
That You the Oath of Union would renew.



Withdraw and soon assemble all the States

To sign the Edict. I at any rates
Would purchase Peace, the greatest blessing given,


King and Grillon returns.




His Army and Du Mayn's are very near,
And watch each other with a jealous fear.



Yet, Sir, my Scouts now bring me word last night
Some Horse of Mayns, about the parting light,
Marcht this way from their Camp; doubtless to make
Discov'ries from such Pris'ners they can take;
And knowing, Sir, your weakness ('till Navar

Ioyn with you) will presume to venture far.
But if you please I will a Party head,
And them into the neighb'ring Wood will lead;
So the surprizers selves may be surpriz'd.




Grillon, perform what you have well advis'd.
But first I'd have you to declare the proof
Of your address, to beauteous Chateneuf.




It little did avail; Tho I did try
All means; but you can better do't than I.
In any bus'ness belongs that to War,
I could far stronger Arguments prepare.
She said, she could not Love as you requir'd;
Neither would you, Sir, Love as she desir'd.



I understand her not.



Her meaning is  
She'd have a Husband, and you'd have a Miss.




Grillon, too oft' we Kings in Passions prove
Like common men, and are inslav'd in Love.
But then in Marri'ges we are confin'd  
And must our State consult and int'rest mind.



That's very much! Love, State and Int'rest too!
I'm only bound to Love (that's kiss and woo)
And one of these is full enough to do.





Here's Bonneval, and now you may make proof.



So, Sir, may you, for here is Chateauneuf.




Pardon, Sir, our Intrusion; we are rude.



Fair Chateauneuf can never here intrude.



We may disturb you tho.



Not in the least:
I no disturbance find but in my breast:
And, Madam, there you take but little care. Bonnev. and Grillon aside.





I must presume to say unjust you are:
For if I could, Sir, your disturbance free,
You need not long expect a remedy.



O Chateauneuf no happiness I want,
If what you promise you'l vouchsafe to grant.
But such unkind distinctions find you will,
Iust in their birth my strugling hopes you kill.



Sir, your Prerogative in words is known;
Your words and my thoughts too are both our own.



But, Madam, why can no perswasions move.

  11That all I speak are pure effects of Love?



Love should find equal objects, Worth and State;
Which are (you know) deni'd to me by fate.



I can bring State, and You can merit bring;
Be you the Queen of Love I'l be the King.



O, Sir, suppress this too injurious flame,
Least what you mean my honour, turn your shame!
Let me my self in my own shadow hide,
And never tempt me with so vain a pride.



Such Rhetorick as this you vainly move,
Which seems meer slightings of the God of Love.
And tho I grant most pow'rful you be,
There's no contesting with that Deity.



If, Sir, his pow'r be such, he scorns a slight,
To save his credit let him shew his might.
And when I find my Honour has a share
With your desires, and both united are;
There needs no argument my heart to move
And without Cupid's pow'r I then may Love.



A faint content like unto theirs who lye
Languishing without hopes, but must not dye.
But Time and Truth may remedies reveal.
And what has wounded now, at last may heal.








And this discourse requires a Summers day.



This you indiff'rency enough does prove;
We're seldome weary of the things we Love.



'Tis true, when one has nothing else to do;
But who can mannage Love and bus'ness too?



Love claims the present hour; the next you may
Bestow on our bus'ness,




I'l tyre you out with Love, and making moan
Ev'n from the rising to the setting Sun,
Nay if you please, we will talk down the Moon.






















I Now find true what I have often read,
A Crown brings trouble to the owners Head,
For Since you only were for one design'd,
Your sleeps have been as restless as your mind.




Armida, yet thou knowst not Gabriel right,
Content I value, and a Crown can slight.
I'm only fearful least such dreams advance
Ambitious Guise to seek the Crown of France.

Fierce are the working Passions of his mind,
His Soul's, tho to Ambition most inclin'd.

Venus, without a Crown, he would disdain,
And love, or hate, or any thing, to reign.



This should not you disturb. He must succeed
In his desires, if by the Stars decreed.



Yet if I now should to his Love incline,
His Treason and Ambition would be mine.
And if a Crown should chance to be my lot
By Love-designs it only shall be got.



Well, Madam, we shall make a better choice
Of observations, when we come to Blois.




Your Pericart by promise comes to day,
And from the Fry'rs will thither us convey.
Under the shady Trees let's walk a while








Into our Ambush some must fall. Ly close; 
To Soldiers going.


All ways are lawful to entrap our Foes.





Upon the Hill 'twixt this and Orleans,

Right-hand the Road, I 'spy some Horse advance.



How many may they be?



Some three, or four.



Why did you stir, unless they had been more?



Methought they more and more begant' appear.



Some dreadful Troop of Thistles!




I saw 'em move.



Some Troop of horn'd Beasts,
Or Trees with waving Plumes upon their Crests.
Dost think they were not Clouds.



I know not well;







Two Ladies, Sir, are fall'n into our snare.



Dost think I came with Women to make War.



When seen, you'l think it much the safer choice
To charge the strongest Regiment in Blois.




Are they so beautiful?




Than you, or all the World e'r saw before.





I'm cold, and they may serve to make me warm.



Gad, beautiful! Fair Lady, I'm for you;
The other you may share betwixt you two 
They hand her, Arm. runs out.





Heav'n lend me Wings!




There after thee I'l flye,
















What do you mean to do?



I am in Love.



'Tis now no time to woo.
Bless me! Your looks are strange.



I mean to prove
All ways, to quench my raging flames of Love.








How! Deny me such a bliss.
Which when I have obtaind, you cannot miss.



Not miss mine Honour?



No, 'tis very right,

  14No more then miss your shadow in the night.





Iust Heav'n vouchsafe your aid, Cries loudly as she's dragg'd forth.








How gone! I was afraid to come again






This way I heard the cry. He pursues, after clashing Swords brings in Gabriel.





Upon my knee  
I pay my thanks, thou true Divinity!
Thou canst be nothing less; since thou hast shown
Both help and pity, when all hopes were gone.



You Guardian-Angels! I must tax your care
For suff'ring this: to what end shine you there?
That one as fair as you, and as divine,
Should need, alass, a mortals help like mine?



O, Sir, disparage not those heav'nly pow'rs!
Their vigilance is far more quick than ours.
By what is past we only guide our sense,
Then rule our actions by the consequence.
But they foresee what never yet was done,
And so prevent a fate that's hurrying on;
As by your blest assistance here was shown.
Those Guardian-Angels, do not then condemn;
They brought you here, or you are one of them.



My inclinations yield unto the charms
O'th' God of War, and I was born to Arms;
But never knew before a Cause so just,
I've resku'd Chastity and routed Lust.
The Grecian Hero did the World subdue;
I've gain'd more glory in protecting you.



I hope the action, Sir, is your reward,
At least if these my Virgins pray'rs be heard.
May all the blessings that attend the prayers
Of Virgin Saints, when they are fre'd from tears;
May all the Crowns and glorious recompence

  15Of Martyrs, Chastity, and Innocence
Be your reward, I cannot you requite.



Madam, you've more than done it by your sight.



Your favour vies with Heaven's; for Heav'n but gave
My sense of Honour; My Honour you did save.





To horse, to horse, fresh Squadrons, Sir, are nigh.



Madam, I'le make your safety good or die.





Fresh Parties rise from all parts of the Wood,
As Cadmus it with Dragons teeth had sow'd.



Vouchsafe your hand. By this blest touch inspir'd,
My Courage and my Resolution's fir'd.
Thus, Madam, will I charge, and all must flie. draws his sword with her in the other hand.

By my sword conquer'd, or your brighter Eye.
Let 'em be ne'r so strong and brave, they shall,






Command the Ambush all to rise with haste:







Whilst there's a Providence, I need not fear;
His worth and vertue have oblig'd Heaven's care.
The Guards He set o'r me are kill'd, and I






Death! I am come too short! 'T was briskly fought,
But will make large amends, when I come to't.




Let's beat this party out; they'l quickly run,
And then the Plunder and the Fields our own,





Dog! seest thou in my face  
The least point of a line that looks so base?
Were't thou now Iove himself in that disguise,
In thy Arms Thunder, Lightning in thy Eyes,
Thus would I charge, and to thy ruin prove:













And lose the fame by Grillon's hands to die?
I'le be more kind, and here the favour's shewn,
Consulting thus thy glory and my own. Kills him and beats his Party off.





Ha! Who art thou that looks so like a Man?
A thing I met not here, since I began.










Death, Sir, what made you venture out so far?
Your Valour's great, and great should be your care.



This Party of Du Mayns, I have pursu'd,
Until I lodg'd them here within the Wood.
Being resolv'd to see the Coast was clear


What makes thy haste? The news?



Your Scoutes, Sir, 'spy
Two Squadrons of Du Mayn's that hover nigh.













My Arms and duty to his aid I'le bring








I shall too many be altho alone.






The King is near,
Hearing the fight.



I shall attend him here.







This Woman, Sir, we took; she swiftly fled.
Her fear speaks guilt.



Ha! What art thou I see?
Sure, thou art either Fame or Victory,

  17I could not love thee else! Whate'r thou art,
Thou art the first e'r conquer'd Grillons heart.



Talk not of conqu'ring, Sir, I beg your aid,





Were all the World thy Foes, let Grillon be
Thy Champion, they should be as dead as he.

Souldiers leading in Armida.



We found this other, Sir, in the same case.





Art thou in safety, Dear Armida tell?



O dearest Madam, that you were as well.










Death, Madam! know I love you more than she.



Let your requests then, Sir, declare that love.



How! Daunted! I can neither speak or move. Stands amaz'd.




The place of our abode is very near.











What Apparition's that, that walketh there?



'Tis Grillon or his Ghost, Sir.








Who would believe, a Woman could obtain
A Conquest here, ne'r purchast yet by Man?
My Spirit's flat, their former vigours cease;
Trumpets sound harsh, and now no longer please:
My humour's chang'd, I can no more delight.
To whet my Sword, or keep my Armour bright.



who e'r rob'd Grillon of his former mind Discovering himself.

Was much to me, but more to France unkind
Who is the Thief?



A Woman, Sir. I lie!
An Angel! Some Court Lady of the Skie.
O, Sir, Your Grillon's lost, your Grillon's gone;
Ne'r more expect to see his Armour on.
Perfum'd and curl'd in Silks, he'l dance all day,

  18All night his limbs on downy Quilts he'l lay,
And sing his threats, and smile his frowns away.



Whence is this change?



Beauty, Sir, is the cause;
Beauty! that conquers Kings, and tramples Laws.







Farewell War and Fame.
My breast must cherish now another flame.



What is this Beauty! she ev'n makes thee mad.



O, Sir, she's something more than can be said.
Fancy a Sword drawn at a trembling Foe,
Brighter than mine, brighter than Cherubs know,
Her Beauty shines at once, and conquers so.
Her Brows are ready bent, like English Bowes,

And can as easily conquer France, as those.
Her Eyes two bullets shot with swifter flame,
Than ever yet from murd'ring engine came.



How he describes her in his Martial phrase,
And acts a Souldier in a Ladies praise?
Where is she Grillon?




Sir, I know not well.



Who is she Man?



Death, Sir, I cannot tell,



Thy Iuno must not be to us allow'd,
And thou art jealous, tho she's in a cloud.



Had I the pow'r to reach the Sun (that Eye
Of Heav'n it self) I'd pluck it from the Skie,
Least it should look and love as much as I.



There are not Arguments enough to prove

Grillon's high Soul can stoop so low as Love.

Cupid but vainly aims his slender dart
Against the breast-plate of a vig'rous heart.
To that weak Passion only they're inclin'd,
Who have the deep Consumption of the mind.



You cannot blame him, if the Lady be
But half so fair, as he describ'd to me.



Remember how I prais'd her, Sir, to you:
'Twas very much, and yet far less than true.

  19Gather those praises all into one Store,
Add thousands, and she merits thousands more.



Well here's some comfort left, altho she's fled,
We have the Souldier, tho we've lost the Maid.



No prize at all! you had as good have none;
For what's a Souldier when his heart is gone?



To bring thee succour I did hither move;
Expecting War, but am surpriz'd with Love.



What War! 'Sdeath, Sir, what had I more to do?
When Cowards flie, let other men pursue.

Grillon below himself can never move.
I conquer'd first, and then had time to love.
The King, Sir, of Navar was here and fought;
To Blois his Army will be quickly brought.



The stubborn Leaguers then confront we shall,
And make them either yield to us, or fall.
Order our march to Blois.




Pray leave me here.
She said the place of her abode was near.



In thy attempts may'st thou successful prove;






Tho from their trouble I my self have sav'd,
I'm Pris'ner still, to my own thoughts enslav'd,
There's no confinement like that of the mind;
All other Bondage may releasements find.
Those eyes that fetter'd me, must set me free;
No other help for my captivity.
With what despair my strongest hopes are crost?







Sir, she's within and did but lately 'scape
From some rude Souldiers a most horrid Rape,
Which makes her far more earnest to be gone.



Thou must away my Quality's not known?



No, Sir, for there I follow'd your advice.
Your Brother's there already in disguise.



When at my Lodgings, as thou hast design'd,












NOw, Friend, art thou that Confident of Fate,
Who canst her deepest mysteries relate?



Son, I am one, who can as much impart
As any other, by the help of art.
By Art, I say, not by a horrid spell;
Like those, who bloody compacts make with Hell.
Poor gloomy Souls! O'r whom the Fiend presumes,
Fudling their brains with melancholick fumes,
Old Dotards, silly Hags! Whose wants, or hate
Contrive with him some feigned Scenes of fate.



May we presume, tho to enquire of you,
How you perform what Devils cannot do?



There is a Magick which has hapt to some,
And lawful as Traditions are to Rome.

What those Magicians found (tho known to few)
I'm by the second hand impow'r'd to do.
Whilst I still practise them, and thus proceed
By Nature's rules, must do as those men did.
When Passives are dispos'd that Actives may
Fitly conjoyn, we then have found the way.



Believe it, Father, you may shew your skill
To Persons, that will not requite you ill.
These three Nativities have you yet cast,
And brought their figures?



Son; the thing's too vast,
And their Concern's too great, for me to frame,
Or circumscribe i'th' limits of a Scheme.
Far greater mysteries must that impart;
Their fates exceed the vulgar rules of art.
Those I have throughly try'd, but try'd in vain.
Unless the Planets selves I can obtain,
Your aim and my indeavour's lost.




Our friends be satisfi'd?



I've one way still.
Thrice fifty years ago, one Gyles-de-Raiz.

(Marshal of France) my great Grand-father was.
'T was he who first, with Necromantick art,
Taught Ioan of Orleans to act her Part.
Whose pow'rful charms made th' English quit the Field;
No mortal force else could have made 'em yield.
'T was he (as by my bloody Roll appears)
Who hir'd two Spirits for two Hundred years.
One is an Astral Spirit mild and fair,
Imbody'd in our shape with thicken'd air.
His vesture cut out of a morning Cloud,
When with the peeping Sun-beams first it glow'd.
He only good foretels, and prosp'rous things,
The fate of Heroes and renowned Kings.
The other Earthy, and resides below,
Deep in the Center; yet my call does know;
Then rises like a Damp, till th' Air it meet.
Which to a gloomy form condenses it.
This only blood foretels, and wicked things,
The fate of Rebels and unprosp'rous Kings.
But what I can do, You shall quickly try
  What ever you espy  
Stir not, nor speak, nor fear, whilst I am by.
He muses and mutters.
Last night I did my thoughts intentive keep
'Till midnight; when Heav'ns Eyes were all asleep.
The World was husht in slumbers: In deep Caves
No breath of Winds, nor murmur from the Waves.
Iust then when Ghosts their dismal haunt pursue,
And Oberon invites his Fairy Crew,

(Like Cleopatra) to sip Pearls in Dew.
I at that time Musick aloft did hear,
Which made me know my Astral Spirit near.
It in few minutes at my Call appear'd;
And soon as my Commands were heard 
O'th' Errand swiftly flyes,  
  And sooner reacht the skyes,  

  22Then Prayers of Saints, or darts shot from the Eyes.
My earthy Spirit too (moregiv'n to sloath)
  By Nature dull and heavy, both  
Rouz'd at my Call, and my Commands to keep  
Shot down to search the Caverns of the Deep.
And now   if Heav'n or Hell these secrets hide,



 A Table brought, a Censor of burning Coals, a Cabi∣net, &c. He returns, a Cap on, a Wand, and book in's hands; taking out of the Cabinet a piece of Chalk.
This Piece of Chalk a sacred Cave did own;
Long since digg'd in the Mountains of the Moon;

Where oft' she met her, lov'd Endymion.

This Powder mixt well with a certain Flower, Scrapes it, and mixes it.

That shaded both the Lovers in the Bower,
And crittically got i' th' happy hour.
With three thin shavings of her waxing horn  


Iust then when April dy'd, and May was born.
Three leaves of Moonshade dry'd, and after put


With three small pieces of a Mandrake root.
These seven Ingredients mixt make a Perfume Burns and strews.

Whose vapours mount and Ashes strew the Room;


Within this Circle y'are secure,
As brazen Walls did you immure:
Security is not more sure.
Reads and waves his Wand.
Descend! Descend! Descend! Thou from the Skyes!
Thou from the Earth, Arise! Arise! Arise.
Come quickly from the Cloud, and say
How thou didst my Commands obey.
Musick far off. Spirit descending leasurely. Sings this, viz.  23SPIRIT SINGS.
AFter I had your Orders last night,
I met with a path all paved with light,
And yet with my passing I made it more bright.
Then through the lowest Region I flew,
Sousing through falling Bogs of Dew,
By the Moon's Orb then swiftly I past,
No lightening nor thought made ever such haste;
Nor did I stay, till Venus I found
All cover'd with Roses, and with Mirtles Crown'd.
Each Rose did in native Scarlet appear;
Yet every Rose was outblush'd by her,
Because I found Mars in the midst of her Sphear.
Your Summons she read, and obey'd with a Nod,
I had ne'r gain'd else that stubborn God.
Then I flew to an Orb, that was much more than bright;
With Diamonds studded and roof'd o'r with light.
I knew't could be none
But Iupiter's Throne;
My Summons he read, and obey'd with a frown.
And now all the three are there coming down.
No fate ne'r so dark escape can their sense,
Since each of 'em is an intelligence.







That Voice which strikes the World with awful fear,




The God of War approaches mortal ground.
Those charming strains that sweetly strike the Ear,



The Planets descend with Musick, th' Astral Spirit crosses the Stage, follow'd by th' Apparitions of Henry the Third crown'd, holding a Cypress branch: Navar Crown'd holding a Lawrel one. Guise a Ducal Crown, a Sword drawn. Soon as they have past the Stage, the Sphears ascend with Musick.


Let me my Furlo now obtain
All's done, an Astral Spirit can.



Thou hast thy liberty; be gone



I fly  





This from above is all we know,
Let us now try our power below.
The Fry'r Waves his Wand. Reads, then Loud Musick, th' Earthy Spirit ascends with this SONG.

I Come from the Deeps below,
Where Coral branches bud.
From where the Rubies grow
From the Rocks richest blood.
Altho in the Deeps, little darkness we know;
The Diamond's our Sun,
The Pearl is our Moon,
And the rest of our Iewels are stars there below.

The Earthy Spirit then clear rises, with Rebellion and Murder on each side, three Spirits on one side of the stage, and three on the other. They dance. Then the Earthy Spirit beckens, and there cross the stage these apparitions, 1. Henry the Third pale, a bloody Dagger in's hand. 2. Navar Crown'd with Lawrels, a bloody Dagger in's hands. 3. Guise holding a Sword drawn, when half o'r the stage, he returns   the Spirits dance again and descend, as th'Earthy Spirit is descending-(stops at the Fryar's words) and Murder and Rebel.




  What's he who does behind remain?



One of the Princes of Lorrain.




Say, Spirit, must he wear the Crown?








This Gold I give to thee, Fryar.



And this give I.
Now for Lorrain!













ACT. III. SCENE. I. Guises Apartment.





HAve you not soften'd yet her stubborn mind?



In her each day I stranger humour's find:
Peevish as Children wak'd, or Matrons craz'd;
Scornful as Upstarts, that are newly rais'd.



The thought, Sir, of her fate sure does you wrong.



If so, I will remove the cause e'r long.
Then your Armida hinders too my Love.



I can with ease that obstacle remove;
For she has beg'd, and partly gain'd to be
Convey'd to one, she thinks no friend to me;
But is deceiv'd, For I'm by him assur'd,
During my will, she shall be there secur'd.



I like it well, and now resolve to try,
If talk of Crowns, can dazle Gabriel's Eye.
And if I find those Arguments will move,







I'm glad thy speed and fortune were so good,
Faster to fly those Rogues, than be pursu'd.
But the chief Villain soon had me betray'd,
If Heav'n had not been pleas'd to send me aid.
Iust in my need, an Hero set me free;
His Sword at once reveng'd and aided me.
I kneel'd him thanks. He scarce three words had spoke,
When clashing Swords our conversation broke.
Yet as he fought, he still look'd back at me;
Which for some time delay'd his victory.



That Hero, Madam, if a blush speak true,
At once both fre'd and captivated you.



I must confess, he look'd me to the heart;
And tho my Life lay on't; I could not part.
Rather then my Deliv'rer should be slain,

  26I wisht my self in danger once again.
Each man that fell my fear and grief did move;
I thought it fear, but oh! I find it love.



But, Dearest Madam, what of him became?



He fought and vanisht like the Thunderer's flame;
When Fates (as my late wounds they would requite)
Did bring me to the gallant Grillons sight.
He proffer'd love! had not my heart been lost,
He'd been a prize becoming Queens to boast.
But all in vain I am betraid to Guise;

Lost where I love, and lov'd where I despise!



I promise freedom if you'l take advice.



My dear Armida, I'le be rul'd by you;





Madam, the Duke of Guise has sent to know,
If you'l vouchsafe him to attend on you?





What shall I do Armida?





It will advance the Plot I have design'd.





Stil, fairest Lady, you create your pain. Armida and Peric. go aside,


Your Brow frowns clouds, or else your eyes weep rain.
'Tis against Nature Storms should have a place
In the highest Region of that heavenly face.
O, Madam, imitate the Heav'ns above,
Where only is serenity and love!



Your words are good, your actions are not so;
Like Trees that onely fruitless blossoms show.
If my small Beauty's heav'nly, as you say.
You like a Lucifer, would it betray.
By his sad fate you may your own proclaim;
For you both lose your glory and your aim.



My sufferings you a Prophetess declare?
I'm scorch'd with flames, and damn'd into despair.



You 've time, Sir, to repent of your offence,
And to regain your pristine Innocence.
Give me my freedome and you leave your crime,

  27And we may both be happy at one time.



Make your words good, oblige your self and me;
And at one time too, we may both be free.



The first attemp, Sir, unto you belong;
Since you are only he that offers wrong:
Or, if in honour, you'l not yield to me,
I'l lead the way, and here I set you free.



Madam, if you will make your promise true,
You must both make me free, and happy too.



Your happiness and freedome both belong
Unto your self, and I have all the wrong.
For with what justice can you keep me here?
Or what's your pow 'r o'r me?



Ah! None I fear.
Iustice and Pow'r, with all things you can move,
Must yield to th' pleasing violence of Love.
My mind is bent your motions to fulfil,
But something stronger contradicts my will,
My Soul (above constraint) does oversway
All those desires, and makes me disobey.



Remember, Sir, It is a glorious boast
To wheel about and gain a Field that's lost.
Relieve your self before you be o'rcome;
Knock at your breast; may be you're not at home.



You prophecy again: my Heart is gone;
Here is the Aery, but the Falkons flown.
The Haggard Sous'd, soon as it 'spy'd its Prey,
But Cupid had laid Lime-twigs in the way.



Sir, to be plain, your Passions strangely move;
You practice force, and yet pretend to Love.
Love by restriction does its vertue want:
As happiness was lost first by Restraint.
Consult but sense, It should not be confin'd;
Love is the Free-born Subject of the mind;
And when that priviledge it cannot have,
It turns a Rebel, or is made a slave.



To all your Argument I'm not inclin'd;
My heart was free, but now, alass, confin'd!

  28Its Birth-right's lost, yet never will rebel.



I'm glad you know your duty, Sir, so well.
This doctrine fitter for the League may be,
And you may do more good on it, than me.



It is below you to upbraid me so;
For I to you will only duty owe.



The King claims share,



And he shall have his due.
It seems by this you're most to Kings inclin'd,
Because your Stars have one for you design'd.
But if such charms the very name does bring,
Think what's the honour then to make a King.



I'm now a Slave such thoughts become not me.



If you will love a King you shall be free.



I love none else, and that is but his due.



You love a King then?



Yes, tho it be you.







Next day by this time I will set you free;








Thy help Armida; for the storm grows high.



I heard him, and my counter Plots will try.
I have gain'd Pericart, and am to go
This hour unto a Friend, whose faith I know.
We must shift cloaths, and you depart in mine;
And so you may escape his bad design.



You have all thanks, that gratitude can give,
And to requite you I must only live.
But when the Duke returns, and misses me,

Armida, what will then become of thee?



I know his Spirits fierce, but brave and true,
And he'l respect me for regarding you.
I'l no excuses frame, as for a crime;
Since in his need, I'd do as much for him.



But, dearest Friend, why should thy love for me
Be more advent'rous, than my love for thee?



Madam, his Passion's like a furious wind;
And Love's the raging tempest of the mind:
If a fair stately Cedar stand i' th' way,
Scorning the Winds rough courtship to obey;
Its blustring rage will more and more abound,
In hopes to lay the Cedar on the ground.
But if, when he returns, the Cedar's gone,
And he no object have to blow upon;
He'l rage a while, but soon his fury lay,
And he himself will blow his Storm away.



Thy wit has Empire in't; I'l not contest,











Altho my Fortune's bad, it is not strange,
Since the Kings heart is so inclin'd to change.
His thoughts can ne'r be fixt; you may as soon
Cut out and fit a Vesture for the Moon.

Inconstant winds to fewer points will vere;
Than he to Ladies if he think 'em fair.



You have too tender and too quick a sense,
Which catches at the shadows of offence.
And yet this jealousie does plainly prove,
You claim no small share in great Henry's love.



I'l either have no share, or I'l have all,
They who love right can never lower fall.
True Lovers all, like greatest Gamesters set,
And will not let By-standers have a Bet.



Like Men both great and rich, you have such store,
Scarce with conveniency you can manage more;
Yet still like them you are so greedy found,
Envying the poor to look but on your Ground.



Desist my Friend; it would ev'n patience vex;
Custome and Nature both against our Sex!
Nature's a Bungler not to make us strong,

  30As th' other Sex to vindicate a wrong.
To seek amends for any great abuse
In them is Honour, impudence in us.






Madam, I'm told by Grillon, you're severe
In your discourse, as I inconstant were
Of what you tax me, you may guilty prove,
And injure Truth that Confident of Love.



Whereshall we seek for Truth, (that injur'd Maid)
Despis'd on Earth is to Astraea fled.
In Cottages despis'd she may remain,
For I, alas, have searcht the Court in vain.



You wrong your self, such doubtings to pursue;
Why should not I persist in loving you?



Believe it, Sir, I now can plainly see,
You share not any part of love with me.
Else you'd the causes of my doubts perceive,
As well as I the causes you do give.
With what content and pride, your love I'd own?
But I have lost it, and for one unknown.



That Iealousie is rash, I daily see't;
But ne'r before knew it so indiscreet.
Can you believe I should my love withdraw
From your fair eyes, for those I never saw?
As I should leave the Sun and its known light,
To search for greater in the womb of night.



Yet Fancy most inclines to what is new;
And knowledge cannot please as hopes can do.
When Grillon's frantick praises speaks his Prize,
O Heav'ns! what joy, what love shoots from your eys!
Your loose Imaginations are surpriz'd,
And I forfond Chymera's am despis'd.



There is no hope to alter such a doubt,
When I have made my Love so fairly out.
Has not my Kingdome taxt me of the Crime
Of slighting other Beauties of the Time.
Great Criminals justly condemn'd to death,
Begg'd a new life, and gain'd it in your breath.

  31Honour and Riches (which the World beguile
From Heav'n it self) were purchas'd with your smile.
What then can more be said, My Love t' advance?
You, Madam, govern him, who governs France.




To what we wish how eas'ly we incline?
My doubts disperse, and joys begin to shine.
I am content; so you'l a Promise make  
You'l not my Love, for this Unknown, forsake.
And when she's found (tho you must her prefer)
Yet you will look on me as much as her.
And tho you cannot Love me half so well,
I'l not believe it, so you do not tell.  
I'd rather have you Murder me this Night,
Then let me live to morrow for a slight.



Thy merit and thy beauty thou maist trust,






Larchant to wait me here.



I'm now unchain'd. 
Gets from Bonneval. She followes and said.





You vow'd to talk a day with me.












Larchant how hast thou sped!




No sooner come; for Grillon she inquir'd;
My proffer'd service took, and thankt me for't;
By which pretence I got her to the Court.




How is her Beauty?



O, Sir, so refind
It dazles th' Eye and strikes the ravisht mind.
All o'r warm Christal, Sir, with Sun beams lin'd
Strugling for ease th' imprison'd splendor lyes,
And breaks the Iayl thro' th' Windows of her Eyes.



I long to see this Wonder. Now hold proof,











THis divelish Fry'r with his strange Scenes of fate
Has much confus'd my thoughts and present State.
Of Blood and Honour, who would hazard run,
To do what must now in few days be done?
Let us lye close upon our Guard aud wait
The timely ripening of approaching fate.
I know I'm not by Heav'n design'd to do't,





Rather 'tis your ill Genius, makes you shun
That glory, which by others may be won.
As some brave Man that stands upon the Shore,
By Crowns and Honour doubly tempted o'r,
Leaps boldly in; not fearful in the least,
And cuts the Billows with exalted breast;
Should he turn back and his attempt give o'r,
When he had almost reach't the wisht-for Shore,
He'd sink unpitti'd.  



The King's late promises to us are great.



But to stop now, is worse then to retreat.
Why came you hither, if you meant to stay?
The Crown's at th' end, not in the midst o'th' way.
When Subjects once by Kings suspected are,
There is not any thing but they may fear.
What Pepin (our great Ancestor) did do
To Chilperick, do you to Harry so.
Who'd not observe a President so fair,
To shave his Head, both of his Crown and Hair?
Delay not.  



Why? Delays pull on their fate;

Navar by Rome is excommunicate;
All his Estates are to the Conqu'rour given
By th' Pope, whose pow'r (they say) is deriv'd from Heav'n.



If so, or no; let's leave it to the Schools.

  33Or to the tender Consciences of Fools.
Derive it whence he will, it has my Vote,
If it the ends of our designs promote



Now you are made, Sir, General of France.

And Duke de Mayn, your Brother, can advance
That Army, which for Dauphin was design'd;
And Paris with your interest is combin'd,
Sixteen Great Cities more your Party own;
And you, Sir, Legat of Avignion:

Whilst thus secur'd, what need you doubt or fear?



I am resolv'd the Assembly now to dare,
And make 'em utterly exclude Navar.




Yield not in your demands, nor reason shew?
For any thing, but that you'l have it so.
Shew now your strength, and carry such a hand,
That tho you be not King, you may command.



I have enough, were I to rest inclin'd;
Great is my fortune, greater is my mind.
My place in France, nay in the World is great,
Yet despicable in my own conceit.
To rise still higher seems but as a fall,
'Till I be gaz'd on, at the Top of all.
There could I sit with a contented brow,
And nod down life and death to all below.



All but the Minions and Court-party sign'd
Our League as soon as offer'd.




Most of the Guards.



This very night let's seize upon the Court,
And then as things appear, our selves deport.
We'l take the King as easily from hence
To Paris, as of late we drove him thence.



The Pope this flaming Sword to me has given;


The Ghost of Heresie before it flies,
As shadows vanish at the morning's rise;











In the Broad-Street, that on the Northside lies
Of the Great Church, I met the Duke of Guise.

He look'd upon me with a fierce disdain,
His Guards were num'rous, numerous his Train.
I thought h'had gone to Church, but he past by;
It seems his bus'ness does not that way lie.



Most part o' th'night until the rising Sun,
The Cardinal from house to house has gone;
The leading persons they have made their own.



You look on Kings, as Gods, who can bestow
Happiness on themselves, and others too.
Cares and suspitions but disturb our breast,
We're unacquainted with the sweets of rest.
'Tis true we shine in glory, and dispence
Too oft' t' unthankful men our influence;
Who like ingrateful Fogs infest those Skies,
And cloud that Sun to whom they owe their rise.



Dispel those Fogs, and you will find all fair;
But thunder, Sir, and it will clear the air.




Iove in his hottest fury never throws
His Thunderbolts at once amongst his Foes.
He stayes his time, but then he layes on load:
Rage, to no purpose, ill beseems a God.
When Men are fit for judgement then's the time;
And Punishment is best when't meets the crime.



Letters from Paris say they idolize,
As Demy-Gods, all of the House of Guise.

The Pulpits are State-Beacons, wherein Flame
No other Boutefeus, than Guise's name.




France, like a Feverish body, may be said,
Wasting with heats, which in it self are bred.



'Tis sent me here the Guises still prepare
Pernicious Plots, which now in hatching are.
The Actors and contrivance are set down,

  35Their aim is high, both at my Life and Crown.



Twenty o'th' Guards last night corrupted were
To sieze, Sir, you, and all your Servants here.



Is it then so? we must prevention try;
All the means left for our security.
I have been slow and staid so long a time,
To see if they'd repent 'em of their Crime.
And may be had staid longer yet to try,
If France was not concern'd as much as I:
But France and I must fall, or they must die.



All gen'rous Frenchmen must conclude the same,
Who either love their Country, or their fame.
The Members, by the rule of Nature led,
Fence ev'ry blow, that's offer'd at the Head.



Sick States, like sickly Bodies, must be freed
From those ill humours which Distempers breed.
Purging and blooding must be us'd, 'tis best
To bleed some ounces, to preserve the rest.



What a strange change now in my self I find.
My raging storm is laid, calm is my mind.
  Before  
Whilst Guise's greatness did so dreadful seem,
O Heavens! How did I long to cope with him.
But now that he must fall, I've chang'd my heart,
And would give Millions I could take his part.
His ru'nous fate (altho most just) does move
Me unto pity, almost unto Love.
O! that a Man so brave, so nobly born,
should now become the Vulgar prate and scorn!
I at his punishment cannot repine;
  But that his foul design
Should doom him to another sword than mine.




Grillon, thou art deceiv'd, his Head's too high
To stoop t'a Block: we have no time to try
The forms of Iustice: Death is in delay;

Grillon, thy King or Guise must die to day.
Mine and thy Countries fafety's in thy hand;
Thy Faith and Courage needs no more command.



May that blunt honesty to which I'm born
Hope pardon?








Then, Sir, I scorn
To do but what a Man of Honour shou'd:
In Battles I have lost and drawn some blood;
But that was for my Countries honour done;
And then in Duels I consult my own.
But here, Sir, to be plain, I scorn, I hate
To be an Executioner of State:

For whilst I kill a Man condemn'd to die,
I obey, but am a Hangman by the by.







Sir, if I obey
My Kings Commands in an ignoble way,
I am a Traytor to his Fame.




But who's the Iudge of Honour, I or you?



You are its Fountain, Sir, it is confest,
But the true Iudge is ev'ry Brave man's breast.
Let me give warning and denounce the War,
Mid'st all his Guards, I'l mine own Challenge bear;
And when that's done, I'le fight, I'le kill him there.



Well I shall find some help; or Heav'n will own,
My Quarrel, and send aids of Thunder down.
My Brother of Navar by this does know
From Plessis, what is fit for him to do.
My Scoutes have brought me word he is in view;
Were he but here, I had no need of you.



You have no Subject dares to more than I,
In Courage, Honour, or in Loyalty:
But yet of Virtue I have such a sense,
In baseness he may have preheminence.
And yet, I think, his soul is so sublime,
That he would scorn the shadow of a crime;
And if he scorn'd not this, I should scorn him.
But when your Grillon, Sir, for you or France,

Dares not as far as Man did e'r advance.

  37When on Command, Sir, he denies to run
And clap his breast against a teeming Gun.
Or in your service, when he does decline
To venture boldly on a springing Mine:
Then think his Honour master'd by his fear,
And call him Coward in the bus' ness here.



Thou hast a boist'rous, but a gallant Soul,
Which neither fear nor flatt'ry can controul.
Go, head the Guards till I new Orders send.






As Grillon is going, Guise and Cardinal meet him.




Grillon, in honour thou canst not deny
My fair request; Art thou my Enemy?
I hear there's 'gainst my life a combin'd Vow.



I was your Enemy, but am not now.
I scorn advantage, and a weaker Foe
Cannot be safer, than because he's so.



I must believe it and thy Friendship prize;
Thou 'rt brave and honest.



Take then my advice:
If you have any crime own it betimes;
Great Men need fear no Enemies but Crimes.



From any Crimes, that have offended Heaven,
I need its Mercy to have them forgiven.
But as for any unto others done,




My Lords, where is the King?












You must not enter here.







No, Sir, not till the King have done
Sending dispatches, which he will have soon.



Most brave! When Hereticks and Minions may
Enter the Cabinet and we two stay.





The King, Sir, did not your attendance know,
Please to walk in.












Not this way, Sir, but that you may;
These Lords will wait on you.






Clashing of weapons within: Then enter Guise and six armed Guards, fighting.


Perfidious Dogs! my Courage tho assures,

Guise cannot fall by such base hands as yours.
Two Rascal lives makes not the purchase good Two fall. Guise bleeds.

For one small drop of Charlemain's rich blood.
These Cowards, like the Hydra's Heads increase; Enter more and fight Gu. he bleeds

And I Stand yet the Gallic Hercules.

Stand whilst I geet some breath, ye Murderers stand,



That Crown'd Assassin tell, who set you on,
This Act has but perform'd what I'dhave done;
It has unking'd him, and the Crime's his own.


Lawrels not Cypress must o'r spread my Tomb,
Ten of his armed Guards were not enow;
Had I been arm'd, you all had been too few.



Bid Valois boast the acts of all his Race,
To whet his Courage; yet to his disgrace





Those angry groans, he at his farewel sends,
Are like fierce blasts just when a Tempest ends,
His blood his restless Spirits now has laid;
As blust'ring Storms by falling Show'rs are laid:
So Lyon's when their raging fury's gone,
Fly to the darkest shades and there lie down.








  39Here is your Order what you are to do:
All else be gone. The Cardinal of Guise

Instead of begging Pardon, does despise.
Speaks dang'rous words against both King and State,








What come you for?



To tell you, you must dye.



And so must you. Nay (what is more) be damn'd,
If you perform what you have tak'n in hand.



It is not our Profession to dispute:
The King commands us, Sir, and we must do't.



What pow'r has he o'r me? Or whence does't come?
We're free from Kings when we depend on Rome.

When Kings presume to do what is not fit,

Popes Subjects can from their Allegiance quit.
Should he command, you should your faith deny?
Or bid you spit defiance at the sky,
Would you obey?

Lucifer struck at Heav'n, your Crime's the same;
And you'l be damn'd to full as hot a flame.



I will not do't.  



A gracious pardon, thou shalt have from Rome,



Friend, what say'st thou?



Troth, Sir, I'd lend an Ear,
If for your self, you could find Pardon here.
But such fantastick hopes I dare not try;
Besides I'm hyr'd to do't.  



Then I must dye  
A mercinary Soul is fit to do
All crimes the Devil ever tempted to.
'Tis known that Pow'r which Heav'n and Earth obey,









ACT.IV. SCENE.I. Camp at St. Clou before Paris.





HEre at St. Clou we'l streiten so the Town,
'T will either famisht be, or yielded soon.
Our forces joyn'd, we will not wait the time,
But let our fury loose to meet their crime.



Sir, I was much amaz'd, and well might be,
To hear their insolence and treachery.



There's nothing can more stubbornness reveal
Than foul Rebellion, varnisht o'r with zeal.



Who'd think that Paris should be thus suborn'd
By Traytors, with your Trophies so adorn'd?



Perhaps they will obedient prove and wise,
And take the favour, Sir, of your advice.



To hope a Remedy must needs be vain,
Whilst her ill humours are kept up by Mayn.

Seditions, like great Torrents, rise and fall
According to the Brooks, they're fed withal
Enter a Commander hastily.
What news with thee? What brings thee from thy Post?




We're beaten from it, Sir, and all is lost.
I kept the Guard against Saint Michel's gate,
The most suspitious place to sally at:
When soon Aumale made that suspition good,
And sally'd briskly which whilst we withstood,

Du Mayns whole Army fell into our Reer,
Routs us and now puts all the Camp in fear.



We are betray'd! The Scouts else had not fail'd.






All draw, as going out met with Officers.



Fresh Squadrons compass us, and we are lost




A chosen Troop comes to attack this Post.



Then we are dead!



But we will bravely dye.
O that I had an equal Enemy!
My Sword then would not blush in such base Stains,
But boast the Scarlet of a Duke of Mayns.


All marching out. Grillon meets 'em with Guards.


All dangers past. The Enemy is beat:
Who into Paris tho made his retreat.



Success attends thy Sword, and all must flye
When Grillon fights.



Death, Sir, It was not I!
O'r pow'r'd by Numbers, which I scorn'd to shun,
I vainly strove, when by a hand unknown
They routed were, and Grillon quite outdone.
I would have sooner dy'd, nay rather fled,
Then once have seem'd, as tho I stood in need.




This Signal of my Service, as my due
To Majesty, I here, Sir, offer you,





I owe my Life to thee.



And so do I.
I would not say't, but Grillon cannot lye.







You and my joyes at once from me were torn,
As now with you, I hope, they will return.
When they first gain'd that mast'ry by their art,
They banisht you the Court, themselves my Heart.



These gracious words, Sir, all my deeds outdo,
Altho I can perform as much as you.
For their own sakes, I wish they had been free
From those offences, they impos'd on me.



You heard their Plots then?



Sir, I all declar'd
Both what I had in charge, and what I heard.



I heard it all, Sir, and in doubts am lost.
Which was your danger, or your patience most.

  42So long to stay, seem'd Heav'n to tempt, or dare;
And yet if you had sooner been severe,
That had seem'd cruelty, which was but care.
But tho the Guise's fall secure the State;
I yet regret their loss and mourn their fate.
For had they grateful been, as Heav'n was kind,
And not deprav'd th' indowments of the mind;
They had deserv'd whatever they desir'd,
Altho their haughty Souls to Crowns aspir'd.



Sir, their Ambition, on a false pretence,
Deluded both their reason, and their sense.
As oft' we see Heav'n's self is pleas'd to blind
Their judgements, who to ruin are design'd.
Like Conjurers deceiv'd, they stood amaz'd,
And perisht by that storm themselves had rais'd.



Those Comets, tho they blaz'd away their flame,
Left Plagues t'infest the place from whence they came.



Their Treason like Infection flyes about,
And where an object's fit, soon finds it out.








And must be, till I give
A greater favour, than I did receive.
I have a Courage, that disdains to be
Conquer'd, altho it be with Courtesie.



Dost thou my Duty and success disdain?



Thy humour is ingrateful now, as vain.



No greater joy can e're possess my mind,
Then to see you, Sir, and my Master joyn'd.

France now like ancient Rome may boast her fate,
Since Fabius and Marcellus guard her State.



Slow are the English aids that we expect.



Necessity's the cause, and not neglect.




Th' invincible Armada makes 'em slow.



Farewel the Navy, and the Title too.



Speak what you heard.



The very night before


of Calais, brought account of all was done.



I long to hear't.








The Navy Neptunes shoulders did oppresse,
As much too bulky for those narrow Seas.
This monster vast (with hundred wings supply'd,
Whose stretcht-out Horns were more than two leagues wide.)
Sail'd to the English with a motion slow,
For its great weight opprest Old AEclus so,
He and his winds had scarcely breath to blow.
When th' English (valianter perchance than wise)
Bravely defi'd 'em scorning a surprise.
But a Defiance that their rage became;
Whose words were Bullets, and whose breath was flame.
Sev'n days thus bravely they the Spaniard dar'd;
Nothing but Lightning seen, and Thunder heard.
It seem'd the end o'th' World, for all was fire;
And in that faith the Spaniard did expire.



The brav'ry of these English are so great,
It is no shame that us so oft they beat.
The Gallic brav'ry and Spanish pride
Being conquer'd, they may conquer all beside.



That British Heroine, without controul,
Asserts the truth, no Sex is in the soul.
Valiant and wise as Pallas does appear;
A Goddess arm'd with beauty and a Spear.



Declare the last fate of the Spanish Fleet.




Near to your Calais, Sir, it made retreat;
But 'scap'd not so, just in the dead of night
The Spaniards saw a strange and dreadful sight:
Eight moving Fires upon the sea did glide,
And came upon 'em both with wind and Tyde.
Some thought 'em Fire-Drakes, for one Drake they knew,
And by him guest what eight such Drakes might do.
Others suppos'd the Fates, t' attend their fall,
Had lighted Torches for their Funeral.
Tumult and fear in each ship did begin;
Great danger! Whilst the Tempest was within.
Each ship endeavouring not to stay behind,

  44Fled on the Wings of fear and of the Wind.
The shatter'd Fleet like moulting Eagles fled,
And lost some Feathers at each flight she made.
France, Scotland, Ireland, Flanders, Holland boasts

The sev'ral Ships surpriz'd upon their Coasts.
The Brittish Lyons glutted, took their rests,
Vouchsasing Offals to the lesser Beasts.



Thus in a word th' effects of seven years cost,
By English valour in seven days were lost.



The World shall never, nor has ever seen
A braver Nation, or a braver Queen.
Her Neighbours justly may receive her Law.
Since she rules those who keep the World in awe.
But let us leave the noise of these Alarms;
'Tis fit ev'n sometimes to repose from Arms.
Within the Walks we may releasements find.



But where, O where, Sir, for a Captiv'd mind?



If Beauty can avail, Il show you those
Shall do't.



But they may prove more dang'rous foes.
Yet guided, Sir, by you; I Venus dare,
Tho in her threatning Beauties she appear,











ALl mankind's false; there's none can keep a vow.
The King is full as false as Grillon now:
I am unwilling to disturb your rest 
But, Madam, he's unworthy of your breast.



That's no news Bonneval. But whence this change?



Dear Chateauneuf his Soul is still so strange,
He does 
Like wanton Boys after vain shadows range.



His empty hopes of shadows will not last;
When he pursues 'em, they will flye as fast.



But first the substance may create a fear,
And she this very hour is to be here.
Her by some chance the Duke of Guise did gain;
Wh' escap'd that fatal day, when he was slain.
Betray'd to Larchant, he the King possest
With such vain thoughts, that kept him since from rest.
This is the Beauty, that has wrong'd us so.




Bonneval, from these walks we will not go;







Now, Larchant, now my thoughts have room to move:
Streiten'd with bus'ness, now I turn to Love.
Hast thou with thy great beauty so prevail'd
To come from Blois?




I could not do't. But, Sir,
I have presum'd to send a Guard for her.



Thou hast done well.



But what does most surprize;
That Pericart (late Secretary to Guise)
Tels me the Lady, sent for now by me,
Is that rare Beauty Gabriel de Estree:

Ten times more beautiful than this we have;
And how 'tis her that Grillon did enslave.



More beautiful than her thou prais'd to me.



She's more than any Angel, if she be.



Her I'le see first. Wait 'til she do appear.











Grillon, thy Clouds yet on thy Brows do dwell.



I want my Sun that else would them dispel.
I wish a tempest do not threaten France,

Since clouds appear in ev'ry countenance;
Mistrustful whispers and suspitious Eyes:
So storms oft' follow husht and gloomy skys.



I knew a time when court and Courtiers vy'd
With pleasant May in all her checker'd, pride.
An universal joy then fill'd each place,
And blest content did smile in ev'ry face.

  46Each bosome then like Chrystal did appear,
And all our very thoughts transparent were.
Friendship and love enjoy'd a happy reign;
Friends banisht doubts, as Ladies did disdain.



But now, as they some battle would decide,
They into Parties severally divide:
A certain sign of Faction and of hate,
Those growing Cankers of a falling State.
But better things, I hope, Sir, from your fate.



Let State alone, and let us talk of Love.







Thy constancy I'le prove.
Thy Mistress, Grillon, was to Guise betray'd,
And ever since at his apartment staid.

Larchant is sent for her.




Death, I will kill him if he look at her.
She is not safe with him, nor fit to be
Under his Guard.



And yet he serves for me.



True, Sir, for Kings are arm'd with sacred awe;
Besides they are guarded by that Giant Law.

And tho you all keep Guards, yet Wisemen grant
You have 'em more for Pomp than any want.



Well Grillon, go, you're in Commission joyn'd;


He waits without. How Chateauneuf!







Would be no Present if you give but part.
That little share I had, I here resign,
But ah, no part of it was ever mine!



Say not so, Chateneuf, it is all thine,



It may be so till Larchant brings his Prize,
But then it soon, Sir, to another flyes,
Like wanton Children taken with new toyes,
You have left certain for uncertain joyes.






If I was bold because for you I sent;
Madam, I hope, you'l pardon the intent:
I was uneasie til I set you free.



I must esteem, Sir, my Captivity,
Which has obtain'd the glory of your aid.



Kings may be proud to serve so fair a Maid.
Did you meet Grillon, Larchant?





I wonder what's the cause he seeks for me.
H' inquires of every one that passes by,
Hast's in his steps, and fury in his Eye.




What e're I seek of late I cannot find.
I or my Fortune, one o' th' two is blind.




How like you, Sir, my choice? you'l take my Word to the King

Henceforth about a Face, as 'bout a Sword.




Grillon, she looks as tho she knew you not.








What mean you Sir?



Death, Madam, who are you?
You are a Stranger.



So are you, Sir, too.
You'r all mistaken in the Duke of Guise;

I was not aim'd at 'twas a Nobler Prize.
Sir, if you please, the Secret I'le impart, To the King. They aside.

And tell you where that Duke bestow'd his heart.



Madam, the clouds from both our hearts are clear'd



The Foe's not half so dreadful as we fear'd.



You need no more be jealous, than the Sun
When some pert Star intrudes its self at Noon.

King leaves Armida and sends Larchant to her they discourse.


Madam I neither have, nor will give proof Here Gril. also & Bon. aside. he soon leaves.

Of jealousie to Beauteous Chateauneus.




Great beauties only Iealousie should raise,
Such beauties as our very Sex must praise.

  48But when false Lovers to inferiours fly;
Disdain's more proper far than Iealousie.




Larchant thy hand again, thou hast my heart.


With the revengeful World in this I'm even,
I seldome Pardons ask, as they are given.




Grillon since this Lady you declare
You've no concern at all, Pray leave us here.

Larchant with speed let me my mind obtain. 
Exeunt Grillon and Larchant.

For I'l stay here, until you come again.
Madam, this Lady merits her advance 
Shows Chateauneuf to Armida.

To my esteem as unto those of France.








Madam, if that be true,
There more justly own them as your due.



Dear Chateneuf, may I a Song obtain.
It is a favour that I beg to gain.



You may command, and best of all can tell,
That I sing true, altho I sing not well.



WIth amourous wiles and perjur'd eyes
False Damon did me move,
Like Charming Winds his kindling sighs
First fann'd me into Love.
Mythriving Passion he did feed,
Whilst it was young and slight,
But ah! when there was greatest need,
Alas he starves it quite!


Was ever more injustice known,
O Damon, prithee say;
To fit my heart for thee alone,
And cast it now away.
Henceforth my Passion I shall hate.
'Cause it gain'd none for me;
Yet love it too (such is my fate)
Because it was for thee.


  49Thy Heart I never will upbraid,
Altho it mine did kill,
Ah! Think upon an injur'd Maid
That's forc'd to Love thee still.
But Iustice may the Tables turn
In vindicating me;
And thou with equal torments burn
For one who Loves net Thee.







Behold, Sir, more than all your France can boast.



A Beauty wherein Nature spar'd no cost.
No Mortal sure!



Sir, your poor subject born.





Has France such treasures in't? Let haughty Spain

Ne'r boast her Quarries, nor her Mines again.



Great Princes, Sir, sometimes low subjects raise;
As you are pleas'd to lift me up with praise.
It speaks your pow'r, and humours your great mind,
To show what you can do, when you're inclin'd.



Let not my sudden Love make it seem less,
Because the greatest things have their increase.
Perfection, Madam (and that's only you)
Can free a heart at first, and keep it true.



Loves at first sight, like inflam'd follies are;
Seem like to Stars i'th' Sky, but fix not there.



If in this cruelty you still proceed,
You'l make my Love a Meteor then indeed:
They threaten misery to all beneath,
And seldome blaze, but 'gainst a Prince's death.
O Chateauneuf, thy goodness I must try;
I either must inconstant prove, or dy.



Your change instead of blame has my applause,
Since now inconstant for so good a Cause.
Your pardon, Sir, I am inconstant too,
And now will change my Love, as well as you.

  50Heav'n is my choice, who would for Lovers care,
When Kings inconstant, or else mortal are?
Come, Bonneval, associate of my Vow.



Madam, I never thought of this 'till now.
I'l wait upon you tho, till I be fit;
When that will be, Heav'n knows, but 'tis not yet.



Come, Bonneval, let's from the Court retire,
Where satisfaction never meets desire;
Where raging Passions all our Souls distress,
Searching for pleasures that can never please;
Where one of those great Torments always move,





Your pardon, Sir, have I my freedome here?



Free as your thoughts.



Then, Sir, I must declare  
My Love is tender conscienc'd, as I am,
And ne'r will enter on anothers claim.
Whilst there are Free-Estates enow to buy,
I'l ne'r a controverted Title try;
Nor build on others ruines.



yet 'tis known,  

Rome (that the Empire of the World did own)
From others less Estates its own did raise.



But must success legitimate our praise?
Then Caesar, Sir, may be accounted just,
Wh' inslav'd that Rome to Tyranny and Lust.



Madam, that way my Love shall ne'r proceed:
Rather than raise your blush, my heart shall bleed.



I see my safety through your vertue shine;
Your honour is security for mine.



Madam, to gain the honour of your Love,
By services and Pray'rs I'l only move:










Our miseries, I hope, are well near pass'd.
Thoughts of your fate (methinks) a doubt does bring,
Whether your Stars or beauty gain'd the King.



You have forgot. He must my State advance,
Who is not now, but shall be King of France.

But this crown'd Man, or that shall never move
My faithful Passion, from my unknown Love.
He has left one here so lawfully possest,
Will grant admittance to no other Guest.
I'm all inflam'd and scorch'd so with desire,
I have not fuel for another fire.



Madam, some happy turn you now must have;
For when Heav'n did you from that Ruine save,
It vouch'd a future blessing: Thus when night
Is past, we may expect the morning light.



Come, let us walk, and some close Arbour find
And thou shalt hear some workings of my mind;







Thy Conquest, Love, how far wilt thou pursue?
What wilt thou triumph o'r my ruines too;
Is't not enough to stormand take the Town,
Nay plunder too, but thou wilt burn it down?

Cupid before ne'r show'd such pow'rful charms,
To fix his Trophies in the midst of Arms.
Courage and Glory claim'd in me a part,
Yet He out-rival'd both and won my heart.
'Midst Swords and Death he at his Prey did fly,
And seiz'd on't in the face of Victory.
But tho I may be of my Conqu'rour proud,
Yet I, Ixion like, still court a Cloud.



I Love I know not whom; my Love is blind,
And seeks about for one it cannot find.



We'r both betwitch'd then, for 'tis my fate too;
And I am, Sir, as much to seek as you.



I'th' Wood at Blois, where thou didst take my part,
I got the Victory, but lost my heart



Death, Sir, and so did I.





  52Deserv'd all admiration.







Her beauty did above all others shine;
She was some Angel.



So I doubt was mine.
For she is flown from Earth.



So is mine too.  
Let's make strict search.  



Sir, I will wait on you.
'T would be a plaguy Spite tho, when all's known,
If both these beauties, Sir, should prove but one.
They hear the tuning of a voice, and Essays at a Tune. Navar steals out towards the Arbour. Gril. steps and lissens to this   SONG by Gabril unseen.


LOve shot himself into my breast like flame;
And soon as ever there he came,
My heart was all in fire:
Nothing so scorching as Desire!
Yet in those flames I fry:
And tho I ev'ry minute try,
I cannot, cannot, oh! I cannot dy!


Like Love I'm blind, stark blind, although I see;
No object fits my Eyes but He.
I had him once in view;
When like departing breath he flew.
Each night I wishing lie,
Wasting my soul in every Sigh;
Yet cannot, cannot, oh! I cannot dy!


My Soul can never from my Body part,
'Til I find him who has my heart.
When I that blessing spy,
O I betwixt his Arms could dy!
But 'till I be possest
Of joys that now are only guest,
I cannot, cannot, oh! I cannot rest!




My Ears are now bewitch'd as were my Eyes;
And I must love that beauty, and this voice.

  53Suppose they should be parted! I'd be loath







O! Madam, I upon my knees implore,
That you would let me look a little more;
I ne'r to any purpose look'd before





Your Eyes were ill imploy'd then.




This is the Voice, and this the Beauty too.
Where have those Eys been hid, or where have mi••

That all this time I could not see 'em shine?



You love her voice, you lov'd her Eys before.



I love her voice, her Eyes, I love all o'r.
Was not my Iudgment right, Sir, this is she!



I, Grillon, nay the world must rival thee.
Madam I've seen you.



Bless me! who are you. She fairts in Armid. `sa ms.

I am not wel   Methinks I've seen you too.



O for some Cordials! Grillon, run, nay fly.



You're younger, Sir, and nimbler far than I:
I'm slow; and e'r I come, Sir, she may dy.



Madam look up, a King upon his knee
Begs you would live. Kneels on one side of her.









Your Pardon, Sir, this Posture does surprize. comes to her self.




Are you well Madam?








Your pardon, Sir: tho I did freedome give





Forfeit not my respects; for, Grillon, know
There is some difference 'twixt me and you.



Although I want a Crown that glittering thing,
Yet I can love as much as can a King.



A King! I am amaz'd at what I hear!
Who are you, Sir?



Madam, I am Navar.









Death! 'tis not my fault that I am no King.



But 'tis your fault that one no more you know.



And, Grillon, one that may be King o'r you.



When that time comes, I'l give him what is due.
I'l keep up mine, and yet respect his height;
And not be baffl'd tho I must not fight.



There are enow your Valour, Sir, to try:

Du Mayn's a fitter match for you, than I.
Honour and duty should your Actions move;
Your duty is to fight, but not to love.



How Int'rest differs? yours does this way move,

Grillon must fight, but Grillon must not love;
For ought you know now, mine may differ quite;
If Grillon may not love, he will not fight.
Yet greater pow'rs than Kings, do both allow;

Venus and Mars (they say) have joyn'd e'r now.
I'l humour then my courage and inspite
Of King I'l love, and spite of love I'l fight.





The King, Sir, wants you, your Instructions stay.
You must to Paris.




I'l not stir to day.



Your Equipage is fit; and you must go




Thrice happy those who no obedience know!



Displease not, Sir, the King with your delay;
Unless you could please others with your stay.





I will forsake thee and avenge me so.
Thou hast lost more, than e're thy Sex yet gain'd;
My self I value, now I am disdain'd.
I leave thee first, doing my Spirit right,






His bossom with a stubborn heart is fill'd,
Which neither can to love, or beauty yield.
Your Pardon for this question I implore,
Madam, did you ne'r see Navar before?



Yes, in the Wood. To you my life I owe.



O be so kind now, to requite me so.
Welcome blest hour! for which so long I pray'd;
And for which only, here my Soul had staid.
Blest minute! How I needed thy relief?
My soul was shrunk, and I was ag'd with grief.
O, Madam! Since you vanisht from my Eyes,
I've breath'd away my soul in amorous sighs.
E're Since your fair Idaea, like a Ghost,
Haunted my sleeps, my dreams it haunted most.
Madam, in Dreams I've seen and spoke to you;





But Lovers dreams you know are seldom true.



Nothing, ah, nothing can my joyes secure,
Unless you say my happiness is sure.



If, Sir, I could of such a thing admit;
Our young Acquaintance is not ripe for't yet.
Love (I have heard) like Wisdome is convey'd;
And by long tryals of successions made.



O Madam, leave such Arguments as these;
That cannot be true Love, which can increase.
Love like perfection's always at a stay;
For that which can increase, must needs decay.



Love Preaching is like other Preaching grown;
Manag'd by art, more than Devotion.



Preaching I know helps little our affairs;
We rather should betake us to our prayers.
And if you cannot think I'l faithful be,










O that your blush sprung from an inward flame!



A grateful flame Heav'n kindles in my breast;
Which shines quite through my Cheeks  
Sir, I can speak no more, I'l blush the rest.



I ne'r can merit this, nor dare beg more;
Only this thing, Dear Madam, I implore:
Before you give me trust, be pleas'd to try

  56My Services, and tempt my Constancy.
Then when my Crown of Truth does brighter shine










I was in fashion once, and bore more sway
I'th' Reigns of Nero and Caligula.

As th' Christian Faith increas'd, I took my flight;
My blood-shot Eyes being dazled at it's light.
In the old World I little had to do,
Until kind Spain imploy'd me in the New.

There did I triumph over millions slain;

Murder was then the Cath'lick Soveraign!

I for sometime there made my Empire good,
'Till almost famisht thence for want of blood.
In France I then did new imployment gain;
A brave imployment in thy Brother's Reign!
When forty thousand in one night were slain.
Fool'd by Repentance now thou layest me by!
  But know  
Furies and Fiends will not be fool'd, as I.

Then the Furies and Fiends dance about the King in mena∣cing postures; but suddenly shew a fear at the appearance of his Guardian-Angel, that flyes down with a flaming Sword, and interposes 'twixt the King and them.


I come fro'th' Fountain of Eternal light,
Whose gloomy'st ray is something more than bright.
Order'd by Fate (which is the will of Heaven)


I am his Sentinel; yet truely boast
My self a Leader in the Starry Hoast.
For willingly we leave our blest abodes,

  57To yield attendance on these earthly Gods.


Where onely fit Companions for you dwell,
Such aëry Phantoms, that possess with fear
The souls of common dreamers, come not here.
Those thin Inhabitants o'th' brain must fly
Before the peircing vertue of mine Eye.


Yet tremble now my self at what comes there

Vengeance (personated) descends in a bright Cloud; his Arm stript, holding a bloody Sword. Looking fiercely, a∣bout his Lip bloody, steps to the King and interposes his Sword, the Angel offers defence..


In vain thou striv'st to hinder my design;
For my Commission is more large than thine.
To that great Pow'r I my obedience owe,
At whose command Stars fall and Angels bow.


In vain! in vain! There is no fence for fate
Legions of Angels cannot bring him aid;
















Is Paris yet so stubborn not to yeild?



As stiff as Iron with Rebellion steel'd.
If you would make her bend to your desire,
Nothing must make her ductile, Sir, but fire.







To storm this waspish Town,
And with your Cannon beat her bulworks down;
Then burn 'em in their nests; till they expire
Such flaming breaths, as may augment the fire.



But may not we yet force her to repent?



Not whilst this Love is made in ev'ry Tent.
Great hopes! When two great Kings cannot subdue
One Woman!



Why? She also worsted you.



She did my Soul surprize, but not defeat;
But Souldier like, I made good my retreat.
I Lov'd as hotly as did he, or you;
Nay, faith, as much as both of you could do.
Yet I maintain'd my spirit at its hieght,
And cast her by, when I perceiv'd a slight.



A slight, a favour is to what I try!
I see a Rival, more belov'd than I:
But she shall now Love me, or cast him by.
Wait her in Grillon.




Sir, I am not inclin'd
There to pay service, where no Love I find;
But I'l send Larchant in, whose mean Soul moves





Has all my Love and Courtship then prov'd vain?
If any thing, this may my Love restrain.
'Tis just, her scorns with scornings to requite,
And answer all her slightings with a slight.
And yet for all her scorns, I yet would Love,
Would she as scornful unto others prove.
But to be triumph'd o'r is such a thing,
That common Lovers scorn, much more a King.





Whilst you are justly fighting for your Crown,
Such mean acquests as I, you should not own.
You ev'n should blush; and then that blush should be
Asham'd it self, that it did blush for me.



Let fortune, as she please, dispose of Crowns,
I'm more concern'd in Madam Gabriels frowns.

  59Madam, no time, no nor Resolves can ease,
Or calmmy thoughts, which rage like winter Seas.
Love's Pinnace in this Voyage needs must fail,
'T will be o'rborn soon with too large a sayl.
Hope sometimes fills a thought, like a swell'd wave,
Which breaks, and soon is to its self a Grave.



You have before with storms of Love been tost;
Yet both the danger, and the thoughts are lost.



My former Love was like a kindly heat,
Which healthful Bodies do by Nature get;
And tho sometimes unto a blaze it came,
Yet as Love fed, it also quencht the flame,
But this is wild-fire in my breast, I fear,
'T will always burn, I feel it flaming here.
Yet this my greatest torment needs must prove,

Navar shares deepest in your thoughts and Love.





This is not fair! Kings should such arts decline.






Is she your Queen?



Nor is she Queen to you.



But she's my Subject, and so are you too.



Talk not of Subject, Sir; I am a King;
And that great Name does such resentments bring,

If I affronted be  



What will you do?



I'l stake the Lillies betwixt me and you.







Sir, I have a share;
You thought so too, when you sent for me here.



Upbraid me not, Sir, with your aid, be gone:

I scorn your help, and can be King alone.



Well, Sir, I go, but I will have mine own.












Your life's in danger else, his Guards are here.



Dare not you me, Sir, with my self intrust?


O, Sir, if that you will not force forbear;





Sir, I have Guards too, and can show you sport:
You will not murder me too in your Court?



'Tis in your choice. But, Sir, she shall not go.
I'm King; and will not be control'd by you.



Take notice, Sir, I leave her to your trust;





Think of the ruin that may fall to France,

If any diff'rence 'twixt you two should chance.
Tho she be ne'r so fair, she cannot prove
Worthy your anger, tho she may you love.



Experienc'd Iudges only should condemn;
And none but Lovers should consult this Theme.
Your Merits, Madam, you should not confine; She off'ring to go.

Since Saints at their Adorers ne'r repine:
The greater number cellebrates the shrine.
Please then his services and mine to prove,



Larchant, attend her to the Town with care;
Wait on her humbly, strictly guard her there;












THe Sorbon with grave Iudgement and Advice,
Have by a Pollick Art asserted this:
Since Valois does with Hereticks agree,
Abets and sides with 'em, all Frenchmen be
Fro'th' Oath of Fealty and Allegiance free.



Are all hands crampt? and all Souls palsi'd to;
Past sense of what we suffer? Surely no.
Can the dull Dutchmen make an Orenge bleed?

  61And th' fiery French tremble at such a deed?
In vain we from their Armies seek supply;
Rather than fail we will our Covents try.



One of my Covent (but yet taught by me
What glorious Crowns are their rewards, that free
Their Country and the Church from tyranny;)
A glorious Project did to me reveal,
Inspir'd (no doubt) with a fierce heavenly zeal.



Have you confirm'd his thoughts?



His zeal's so bold
That all those Mountains, that go big with gold,
Could not his resolution now seduce.



Yet for all that let's keep him to the use:
Young men, we know, their Passions fall and rise,
As th'object is presented to their Eys.
Those two grand Seenes of horrour and of blisse,
(Which help to mould the souls of Novices)
Let us present unto his wondring view.



They both are ready here and painted new.






I wait here with intent
To beg your blessings and incouragement.



My Son! that blessing freely claim thy own,
Which Father Isaac gave his youngest son.
Thou shalt escape; trust son, to my presage;
And Prophesies 'tis known have bleft my age.
Ha! son! what say'st thou to the glorious Fact?



But shall I merit Heaven by the Act?



Thou know'st a Doctrine I have often spoke,
How curious Pictures give a smarter stroak
Upon our fancies, then dull Doctrines can;
These touch the outward, those the inward man,
Behold, my Son, (what thou hast often heard)
An Antipast of joys and of reward.




Who would not hazards tempt and torture dare,
To merit but the least of glories there?



What heav'nly flames his rosie Cheeks reveal?
Flusht in the face with inward heat of zeal!

I see thou art resolv'd! I plainly see't;
Thy Stature's taller, and thy Mein more great.
Thus when the Deities did Priests inspire,
They both exalted Soul and Body high'r.
If thou this glorious attempt survive,
(And Heav'n will sure make its own bus'ness thrive)
Abbots and Bishops at thy feet must fall,
As is but due unto a Cardinal.

But if thou dy'st, no Cherubim can come
Near to that Throne, design'd for Martyrdome.
Roses and Lawrels then must twist in one
T'adorn thy brow; both glories thou maist own
Of Militant and of Triumphant Crown.




O let me go, each tedious minute's stay
Robs me of glory, just in Heav'ns high-way!



Thy soul is fervent now, my hopeful Son!
Red-hot with zeal, fit for impression:
But if it cool, 'twill get a stubborn frame,
Not fit for any Furnace but Hells flame.



The terrour of those flames cannot prevail,
Where all those bright alluring glories fail.



I'l soon convince thee, and will now disclose
Here to thy sight a horrid Scene of Woes.




Cold drops of sweat condens'd by my sad fears,
Like Isicles, hang on my brows and hairs!



O! Son imagine but a Bed of Fire;
The Curtains flames; the Bed-cords burning Wire;
If thou wert bound unto this Bed all day,
And Fiends with red-hot Pinchers pluck away
Thy nervous parts; yet to renew thy pain,
With boyling Sulphur, glew 'em on again;
Thou'lt say this is intollerable! But oh!
What horrour to Eternities of woe?



O, Sir, forbear! My soul away does faint!
Your sad description has out done the paint.

  63Rather then hazard an eternal pain,
I will my purpose in short time obtain;
  Tho for a thonsand thousand years
I live in torments and cannot be slain.





King, Revol, Cuessle, Grillon, an Officer bringing at ano∣ther door Chateauneuf and Bonneval.


These Ladies, Sir, were flying to the Town.



It seems then, Madam, you the League will own.



The motion, Sir, to Nature did belong;
For all things are inclin'd to fly from wrong.
Beside 'twas reason did my flight procure
For hopeful good, from Ills that were too sure.



Where Nature, and where Reason is so known,
You should the force of stronger workings own.
For what can Nature, what can Reason move
(Gown'd-Councelours!) against that Tyrant Love?

Who like Usurpers, in their new-got throne,
Despise all other Laws, beside their own.
Then Chateneuf thou merciful shouldst be;
Your last Song proves too true a Prophecy,
And I love one, alas, who loves not me.



Without help pity, Sir, does little good;
Kind words to famisht men are slender food.
It like repining looks, at Heavens decree;
For her just scorns have vindicated me.
And justice now has equal Passion mov'd;
You love where hated, and you hate where lov'd.





To arms! to arms! the vigilence of Mayn

By our disorders did advantage gain,
And has our late disserted trenches ta'n.









What is the news?






Has some intentions that may cause your fear.



'Gainst us he never will his Arms advance;
His veins hold too much of the blood of France.


Grillen! I leave this bus'ness to thy care;
Tho not in love, yet thou hast skill in War.





The Camp they've enter'd, and our Guards now force:
All's in confusion!



I'l to th' Guards of Horse;
And at the head of them will swiftly fly,








Navar has quit his Post, and now stands still,
Drawn in Battalia on the neighb'ring Hill,
In view of all our Camp. His glittering Arms
That once assisted us, now threaten harms.
So Clouds, that promis'd once a fruitful birth,
O'r heated, send down Lightning to the Earth.










O, Sir, we're all undone!








Alas, Sir, she is gone!



Coward! Thy life to keep, and charge to lose.



What could I do against a thousand foes?



Had Grillon been but there, he'd routed all.



O, Sir! Brave Grillon's lost, I saw him fall.








O! 'Twould an Angel vex,
To loose at once the gloryes of each Sex.




Howe're you deal with me, Sir, you are free:





I in his gen'rous favour well might boast,

  65If Grillon and my Gabriel were not lost.
Since two such blessings are to me deny'd,
He had been kinder to have let me dy'd.

Grillon and Galriel in one hour opprest,
Whose worth two several Ages might have blest.
Afflictions presse upon my soul too far;
I never can hope more from Love, or War.
The Court is broke   It has no more to boast.


What shouts are those? what joys can now arrive.
Since they are dead?





Death! Sir, we're both alive.
Both of us in our gallantries appear,
I in the richest Skarlets Soldiers wear.
She in those blushes far more brave than I.
Whose Skarlets are of a more lasting dye.



What miracle has brought you here again?
Whoe're it be that sent you, tho Du Mayn;

I'l grant him any thing he can pretend,
And from this minute be his faithful friend.



We take you at you word, Sir.




Who is this gen'rous Heroe.






Bury'd 'mongst Enemys I had o'rcome,
(For of their Carkasses I'd made a Tomb)
He like an Angel did their Troops invade,
And cut his passage with a shining Blade.
Like Ghosts the Enemy before him flyes,
And he made Grillon from the dead to rise.



He fre'd me too; else I had not been here,



How! could Navar be your Deliverer,
And send you back to me?



He said his trust
Was firm in you, cause generous and just:
That your great soul would all its pow'rs unite,

  66To quit just scores and services requite.



Brave man! thou art too great to be exprest;
Thy soul's too mighty for a mortal breast.
None, none, but such a Hero could bestow
His Love on's Rival, and a life on's Foe.

He in one day so generous did prove,
Freely to give my Life, my Friend, my Love.
My boistrous Passions ought now to retreat,
And I, by his example, must be great.






Sir, here I come humbly to beg of you
T'accept those services which were your due,
And tho with that great honour they are grac'd,
They'l but attone for my offences pass'd,



Sir, I was passionate as well as you.



Death, who can tell the faultiest of the too?



Nature in all our souls sows precious seeds.
Vertues are flowers, and Vices are the Weeds.



Your souls (those curious Gardens) are not free;
But you your passions have, as well as we.



We were not men else: Sir, to let you know
That I can be as generous as you:
Of your three Presents here I thus dispose,
My life and Grillon I will only chuse.
This third so rich a recompence will be, Points to Gab. and gives her.

That with one favour here, I pay for three.



This royal gift contains so vast a sum,
It pays for all my services to come.



Dear Chateneuf! thou formerly we'rt given
To acts of mercy; imitate then Heaven.
Forgiveness (without crimes) had never been;
As Sun-beams, after Clouds, more chearful seen.
My roving Heart, neglectful of its rest,
Forsook the lovely Palace of your breast.
Then Idly for another rang'd about,



Th' afflicted Prodigal does home retire,
Stript from all vanities of loose desire,

  67Half-starv'd it begs refreshment at your fire.



'Tis only Pitty now that can me move.



Let me gain Pitty, and I'l merit Love.

Nor can you doubt my Passion to be true;
Since I leave Gabriel and return to you.








I scorn a Gamster that to all has lost.



My Title's forfeit then to womankind!
Yet I a nobler Mistress hope to find.
'Tis Madam, Honour: she delights in War;
She is a Mistress worth contending for.
This Leaguer-Lady (for in Camps she's bred)
Does all the Beauties of the Court exceed.
She asks no Riches, but those gain'd in Wars;

Wounds, for her Ioynter; for her Iewels, Scars.


Vict'ry and Fame she does for Portion yield;
At last, her Marriage bed, some well fought Field.

And then to prove her Virgin vertue good,
Her Mayden-head is alwayes got in Blood.




Such a description and so drawn to th' Life,
Plainly declares th' hast gain'd her to thy Wife.
Now I've more hopes than e're I had before;
Since, Grillon, thou wilt rival me no more.



Not, Sir, in Love: troth, 'tis not worth the while;
Love's favours are but like an April smile,
Clouded each day, or wept away in showers.





It is a maxime amongst Lovers known,








'Tis a great truth of which we make small use.
Why should we such a precious treasure lose?
We are not yet alone.



Here's no one by.



Too many, Madam; since there's you and I.



I'l then withdraw and leave you here alone.



You'l leave but half of me, when you are gone.



I understand you not.



Ah! this does prove
You are unknowing in the rules of Love.
We talk, we look, we touch, yet still are poor,
And 'midst of such enjoyments, long for more.
There is a thing (we know not) call'd delight,
Nor never shall, until our Souls unite.
Love is in Union plac'd: And whilst we're two,
We Love not, we, alass, but only woo!



I know not then how Lover's souls can joyn,
Unless when mine is yours, and yours is mine.



How can we at this distance gain such blisses,
Unless we breath 'em mutually in chast kisses?
Madam, when Heav'n does Soul and Body joyn,
O! that is Love! And that Love is divine.



But whilst our souls alternately rejoyce,
And rest contented in their purer choice?
Why should our Bodies, with their sensu'l weight
Retard our Souls in their more active flight?



Madam, 'tis true; our glorious souls praeside
Our Bodies, and our greatest actions guide:
No Love within the Body can begin
Without assistance from that God within.
Yet both must act whilst they on Earth reside;
Their faculties are vainly else imploy'd.



My Love (as lasting as my soul) receive;
For I no mortal thing to you would give.
You more oblig'd me than the World can do;
And by that rule I would be thankful too.



You in your nice distinctions cruel prove,
To keep the Body and bestow your Love:
Like those who rich Estates and Iewels give,
Yet will not yield possession whilst they live.



To the most precious gist I was inclin'd;
Because 'till Death, Love cannot be refin'd.



That credit Love has lost, let us restore,
A d by our Loves show what it was before.
Love and the World together did begin,
  And did out-shine the Sun  
  Before it clouded was with sin.

  69Such pure, such unmixt joyes our souls shall swell,










WHat makes you sad, Sir?



O! A dream last night;
Methought the Room was silver'd o'r with Light.
But such a light as darted gentle beams;
As clear and cool as those that glide o'r streams.
The Roof seem'd open and so seem'd the sky;
From whence a shining light did more than fly.
It hover'd o'r my Head; when soon there came
This Apparition through a door of flame.
The Chariot was less bright than his Attire;
His Lips were bloody, and his Eyes like fire.
He in his right hand held a flaming Blade;
Threatning me thus, he thundred out and said
My name is Vengeance, and I must be paid.



To look for truth from Dreams is full as vain,
As to hope counsel from a crazy brain.
Sleep is the Stage, and Fancy makes the Play;
The thoughts at night; act what they conn'd by day.
A Dream's a Play, Sir, and a Play's a dream;
Both aëry Descents of an idle Theme.



What e're this Vision may to thee appear,
I'm sure it makes a Deep impression here.
The threats of Vengeance most to those belong,
Who use that pow'r Heav'n gave 'em to do wrong.



I mean the bus'ness of the Massacre.


'T was in this Room, where we did it conclude,

I well remember in this place I stood;






A youth, Sir, seiz'd by Guards, I now have brought,
But his chief bus'ness, I have vainly sought.

I took him for a spy and all means try'd

  70To trap him, but he all things well apply'd.
He has Instructions, which he'l tell to none,
Unless unto your Majesty alone.








Sir, he says, he's sent
By divers Friends, and the first President.

Who, if your Majesty appoint a day,
Thorough a Port your Forces will convey.






Stay, Fellow, where you are, why do you thrust?



Speak out; here's none, but whom the King will trust.



Pardon me, Sir, my bus'ness is more great,
Than either he, or you imagine yet.








I know not what, I doubt.



Now thy chief bus'ness speak; but speak more out.



This is my bus'ness, Sir. As the King leans to him, he stabs him.




O! I am slain! Takes the Knife out of his wound, and stabs him.

Take thy Knife, Villain, thus and thus again.



Run for the Surgeons soon.












O! You have done you know not what.
We ne'r shall know th' Abettors of the Plot.




Your hands have seal'd the bargain now; and given





How feel you, Sir, your self. Is the danger past?



Where are these Surgeons? They make little hast.



I feel no pain, but hold it least it bleed.





Confus'd running over the Stage, by Chirurgions, &c. and Guards marching after Grillon.






All will be well, I hope, if he get rest;
The Surgeons say all danger then is past.
They have great hopes it is a slanting stroak

  71  Then his small pain
Makes 'em to hope, his Bowels are not broke.



May Heav'n confirm it. Whilst we here attend,
Methinks the time we cannot better spend,
Than to observe what I did lately hear.







About the Massacre. Viz.

King Charls and's Mother (for 'twas in their Reign)
The Cardinal of Guise and of Lorrain,

The Duke of Anjou (who is now our King)
Whom Guise into the horrid Plot did bring;
Those six consulted and pronounc'd the doom;
And, pray observe it, in this very Room.
Vengeance is terrible; but 'tis divine:
You know by whom 'tis said, Vengeance is mine.
First, Charls began, cut off in's very prime,
And by a judgement suited to the crime:
He dy'd in blood, who living shed such store;
And then was plung'd, nay drown'd in his own Gore.
The fire of Vengeance (which none can restrain)
Did melt the Glue that cimented each vain;
Those little Channels quickly made their way
To th'Brooks, those to the River, those to th' Sea;
Which overflow'd like an impetuous Tide,
And did thro' th' sluices of his Body glide.



Then follow'd next the old Priest of Lorrain,

Who Christians had for Sacrifices slain.



His punishment was also in his blood;
Not by an overflowing of the flood;
But heated by some mistick fire within,
It boil'd away i'th' Caldron of his skin.
Pale Ghosts before his dying Eyes did swim,
They first accus'd and then distracted him.
He raging dy'd!  
His last breath like a storm fro's breast did fly,
And met a greater tempest in the sky.



Then for the Duke and Cardinal of Guise

We lately saw their bloody Tragedies.



The old Queen's soul most servilly did wait,
First on the Guise's crime, then on their fate.
And tho one punishment they could not have,
They had one guilt, and might have had one Grave.
Her shrivel'd veins, for such crimes could not quit,
But in her childrens blood she paid for it.



Ther's none alive now, but our wounded Prince,
Whom doubtless Heav'n has pardon'd long time since,
And who, I hope, has many years to live.



Yet future Ages will this judgement give  
'T was just, that in the place, where once he stood
Condemning Innocents, he lost his blood.



Great were the Iudgements!



But more great the crime!
I think, he was in Poland at that time.



True, Plessis, and I waited on him there.



Strange, that no Ghosts o'th' murder'd did appear,
And with loud shriekings strike his tingling Ear!
O! 'T was a dismal night!




Will shortenth' time of our attendance here.



I need not aggravate the crime, nor tell
The murd'rous design, 'tis known too well.
Marg'ret of Valois marri'd to Navar;
That sacred tye of Love they made their snare.
Thus Marriage is their Sacrament! they Sign
Their horrid Plot; and then (instead of Wine)
They quench their thirst's with blood, like Catiline.

No State, no Sex, 'scap'd their unmanly rage;
They neither pitty'd Youth, nor rev'renc'd Age.
The Cross, which Heav'n gave as a glorious sign
Of Victory, to the great Constantine;

This Ensign first display'd i'th' Starry-Field,
  To which  
The Persian Sun and Turkish Moon did yield.
  Nay which  
The Blood of God himself did more than guild.
This sacred Badge's function they invade,

  71The Cross they upon ev'ry hat displaid,
Ten thousand Souls were forc't that fatal night
From Bodies pale to take an untim'd flight.
Lovers in midst of soft imbraces die;
Their Souls t'each other in their last breaths fly,
Then joyn i'th' vapours of a dying sigh.
Babes nuzling on stab'd Mothers breasts awake,
And gushing blood, alas, for milk they take.
Thin Ghosts (those airy Chariots of our Souls)
Hover'd all o'r the Town in num'rous Shoals,
Attending Guides, that might their wayes prepare
Thorough the pathless Regions of the Air.
Now cryes of dying Persons 'wake the Sun:
As Indians with loud clamours call the Moon.


The ground was pav'd with Carkasses; the Skies
Were hid with Clouds, which from spilt blood did rise.



Loud is the cry of blood! 'tis louder far
Than peals of Thunder when they rend the Air.
Their dying groans eccho'd to Poland soon,
Where we with scorn and hate were look'd upon.
The very Tartars, who their Children fill
With blood of slaves, whom purposely they kill;
Whose Bodies are first kneaded up with blood,
Which is as much their substance as their food:
They ev'n did those Murd'rers condemn
Of such a crime, as ne'r was known to them.




The King inquires for you.



Are all things well?



'Till th'wound is open'd, Sir, we cannot tell.



SCENA ultima. The Royal Bed-Chamber.

The King on 's Couch Navar, seated by him, Grillon, Re∣vol, Larchant, Gabriel, Chateauneuf, and Chyrurgions. Guessle, Plessis at the other door. Attendants.


Grieve not my Friends; I feel but little pain;

  72A sign (they say) I may be well again.
Strange was my dream and th'event too soon!



But, Sir, the work of Vengeance is not done.
He hovers there, Sir, or if gone he be,
H' has his Commission left, and Sword with me.




Grillon, thy vengeance shall have its desire;
We'l purge that treach'rous Town with sword and fire.



May I but kindle 't, tho i' th' midst I fry,
Then like the Phoenix, I'le triumphant die.



My thanks, Sir, for your love and care I give;
And shall requite you, if I die or live.



More certain favours to your life I owe,
Than the World, nay than my hopes can e'r bestow.
Talk not of dying, Sir; It nums the sense,
And deads the very thoughts of recompence.



The League is not so tender, Sir, as you;
I wear their Mark, but my revenge is due, Shews sense of pain.

Both from my Honour, and my Iustice too.



How are you, Sir?



The pains I now indure.





What say'st thou Man?



His Bowels, ah! are pierc'd!








Thy tongue's as fatal as the Villains knife!
O! that with mine, I could redeem his life.
I soon would like the balsome tree be found,
Distilling drops of blood to cure his wound.
So both of us might add to honour's score;
I finish mine and he might purchase more.



Ladies forbear! My wound has wept enough; Ladies weep.

My Soul, 'gainst stabs, but not 'gainst tears is proof.



If, Sir, my Tears could do you any good,
I'de ope the flood-gates, and the streams let loose;
Nay gladly weep my self into a Flood.
The nat'ral Balsam Virgins do produce.



Poor, hopeless Maid! I have receiv'd a wound
More deep, than that the Villain gave to you.
That you, when too unkind, I only found,
And now must lose you when both kind and true.



May you more happy in all fortunes prove,
And for your kind grief now, gain joyes in Love.
My End hastes on, my last breath does declare
(And you all know't) my brother of Navar

Is next in blood, and my immediate Heir.

Forgive my Enemies for Heav'n will be
So just both to avenge it self and me.
And for Religion I onely pray  
Heav'n would direct you in the safest way.
To turn you, Sir, to mine is vain to try;
Since, oh! this wound speaks louder far than I.



Grief has distracted me and ty'd my tongue;
And rob'd me of all sense, but of your wrong.



My soul from ev'ry faculty now flies,
And hovers at the Windows of my Eyes:
'T will take it's flight just at my next fetcht groan.









Heav'n was my choice before; and now shall be!





In death it was his duty to forgive,
As to do justice is our parts that live.
Let us indeavour then with all our might,
Both to revenge his wrong and gain my right.
I am your King; and will point out the way
To Honour, and oblige you to obey.



Let's now to Rheims, Sir, make a quick advance,
And with that sacred Oyl, anoint your Head,
Which was by Heav'n sent purposely to France.

To raise a new King, when the old on's dead.



The King's last Will, Sir, makes your Title good.
You are his Heir by Will, as well as Blood




I'l Love and serve you for no other thing.
But that you're very valiant and my King.



I thank you all. You all shall largely share
Both in my Royal favours and my care.


It is a needless thing, now to say more.
Only some diff'rence by this change is grown,


Love shall not die, tho for a time it cease;



