





THe Duke is mov'd.



The newes displeas'd him much.



And yet I see no reason why he should en∣gage so great affection to th' Daughter
Of Millan; he nere saw her.




Great beauties, and her picture (by which Princes
Court one another) may beget a flame
In him to raise this passion.




I like not that State-woing: see his Brother Enter Lodwicke.

Has left him. Pray my Lord how is it with
His Highnesse?



Somewhat calmer, Love I think
Will kill neither of us: although I be
No Stoick, yet I thank my Starres I have
A power o'r my affection, if hee'le not
Tame his, let it melt him into Sonnets,
He will prove the more loving Prince to you.
Get in again, and make wise speeches to him,

  There is Aristotles Ghost still with him,
My Philosophical Governour that was:
He wants but you two, and a paire of Spectacles,
To see what folly 'tis to love a woman
With that wicked resolution to marry her.
Though he be my elder Brother, and a Duke,
I ha more wit: when there's a death of women
I may turn fool, and place one of their Sexe
Neerer my heart: farewel, commend me to
My Brother, and the Councel-Table.
Exit



Still the same wild Prince, there needs no character
Where he is, to expresse him.




I doubt there is no roome for one, whom he:
Should place in's heart, and honour.




All pity her misfortune, both were too
Unripe for Hymen, 'twas the old Dukes act,
And in such marriages hearts seldom meet
When they grow older.



Wherefore would the Duke
Marry his young sonne first?



The walke of Princes,
To make provision betimes for them:
They can bequath small legacy, knowing th' heir
Carries both state and fortune for himself,
His fate's before him, here comes Grimundo!






The Duke is recollected, where's the Prince▪




I would he were return'd once to himself.



He has too soone forgot your precepts.



Your example might still be a Lecture,



I did not deceive the old Dukes trust
While I had power to manage him,
Hee's now past my tuition, but to the Duke 
Is it not strange my Lord, that the young Lady
Of Millan, should be forc'd to marry now, with
Her Uncle?











'Tis a trifle, reasons of State they urge
Against us, least their Dukedome by this match,
Be subject unto Savoy, for the scruple
Of Religion, they are in hope that
A Dispensation may be procur'd
To quit exceptions, and by this means
They shall preserve their Principality,
I'th name and blood, so reports Fabrichio

Whom the Duke imployed for treaty: how now?




The Duke calls for you my Lords.



We attend, Ha? he is coming forth.





His looks are chearful.











We will to Tennis.



What your Grace please. 




Because you take no pleasure in such pastimes,
Your contemplation may busie it self with that book.



Book my Lord, it is




Leonora's picture, a fair Table-book,
You may without offence to your young wife
Look on a picture.

Millan and we are parted, our breast weares
Again his natural temper, allow me pray
The excuse of common frailty, to be moved
At strangenesse of this newes.



Your Highnesse said, You would to Tennis.



And 'tis time enough,
We have the day before us: some Prince Grimundo

In such a case as this would have been angry,
Angry indeed, thrown of cold language, and
Call'd it a high, and loud affront, whose stirring
Imagination would have weakened Death,
And by a miserable warre, have taught
Repentance, to a paire of flourishing States,
Such things there have been?



But your grace is wise 



Nay, do not flatter now, I do not Court
Your praise so much, I speak but what our stories
Mention, if they abuse not soft posterity:

  I was not come to tell you, what my thoughts,
With a strong murmure prompt me too.







Ye fear, and do not know me yet, my actions
Shall clear your jealousie, l'me reconcil'd
At home, and while I cherisht a peace here,
Abroad I must continue it, there are
More Ladies i'the world?



Most true my Lord.



And as attractive great, and glorious women,
Are there not, ha?



Plenty my Lord i'the world.



l'the world, within the confines of our Dukedome
In Savoy, are there not?




Many choise beauties, but your birth my Lord 



Was but an honour purchas'd by another,
It might have been thy chance.



My Father was No Duke.



'Twas not thy fault, nor ist my vertue,
That I was born when the fresh Sunne was rising,
So came with greater shadow into life,
Than thou or he.



But royal Sir be pleas'd 



No more, weare not ignorant, you may
Take away this distinction, and alledge
In your grave wisdoms, specious arguments,
For your alliance with some forraign Prince,
But we have weighed their promising circumstance,
And find it only a device, that may
Serve time, and some dark ends, a meer state trick,
To disguise hatred, and is empty of
Those benefits, it seems to bring along:
Give me a Lady born in my obedience,
Whose disposition, will not engage
A search into the nature of her Climate,
Or make a scrutiny into the Starres:
Whose language is mine own, and will not need
A smooth Interpreter, whose vertue is
Above all titles, though her birth or fortune,
Be a degree beneath us, such a Wife
Were worth a thousand far fetcht Brides, that have
More state, and lesse Devotion.



If your Highnesse 



Come you shall know our purpose, in the last
We obay'd your directions, not without
Our free and firm allowance of the Lady
Whom wee'l forget, it will become our duties,
Follow us now, we have not been unthrifty
In our affections, and I must tell you
Here we are fixt to marry.




And shall solicit Heaven, you may finde one
Worthy your great acceptance.




And to put off the cloud we walk in, know
We are resolv'd to place all love and honour
Upon Cleona. Nor is't a new affection, we but cherish
Some seeds, which heretofore her vertue had
Scattered upon our heart.




Ambitious of a Lady, in your own
Dominion, to whom we shall more willingly
Prostrate our duties.



She's a Lady of
A flowing sweetnesse, and the living vertue
Of many noble Ancestors.




Their fortunes meet, as their Prophetick souls
Had taught them thrifty providence, for this
Great honour you intend her.




And thank your general vote:
You then shall straight prepare our visit, bear our
Princely respects, and say we shall take pleasure
To be her Guests to day: nay lose no time,
We shall the sooner quit the memory
Of Leonoraes Image.





The Prince your brother Sir?



Withdraw, but be not at too much distance.







I shall know that by my successe, I want
A thousand Crowns, a thousand Crowns.







Why will these foolish questions ne'e be left,
Is't not sufficient I would borrow em,
But you must still capitulate with me?
I would put em to that use they were ordain'd for;
You might have well have ask't me, when I meant

  To pay you again.



That to some other men
Might ha been necessary.




Do that, I have another easie suit to you.







A thing of nothing; I wo'd intreat you
To part with this same transitory honour,
This trifle call'd a Dukedome, and retire
Like a good Christian Brother, into some
Religious house, it would be a great ease to you,
And comfort to your friends, especially
To me, that would not trouble you with the noise
Of money thus, and I could help it.



'Tis a kind and honest motion, out of Charity,
Meere Charity, so I must needs accept it Why?
Ile only marry, and get a boy, or two,
To govern this poor trifle, for I'me bound
In duty, to provide for my succession.



What do you make of me, cannot I serve?



You that propound a benefit for my soul,
Wo'not neglect your own I know: wee'le both
Turn Fryers together?











I shall not have a thousand Crowns?







Then be a duke still; come, lets love, and be
Fine Princes: and thou hadst but two or three
Of my conditions, by this hand I wo'd not
Care and thou wert immortal, so I might
Live with thee, and enjoy this worlds felicity.



T'hast put me in tune, how shals be very merry
Now in the instant?




















Ile bring you to a Lady.







That is a little the courser name.



And can you play the Pander for me?



A toy, a toy.
What can a man do lesse for any brother?
Th'ordinary complement now a days, with great ones,
We prostitute our sisters with lesse scruple
Than eating flesh on vigils; 'tis out of fashion

  To trust a servant with our private sins;
The greater tye of blood, the greater faith,
And therefore Parents have been held of late
The safest wheeles on which the childrens lust
Hath hurried into act, with supple greatnesse.
Nature doth wear a vertuous charm, and will
Do more in soft compassion to the sin,
Than gold or swelling promises.





These things do carry horror, he is lost
I fear; no I ha thought of something else,
You shall with me to a Lady.



With all my heart.







Your Mistresse, who's that?












Yes, were she otherwise, she were not worth my visit;
Not to lose circumstance, I love her.











You do not mean to marry her?



It sha'not be my fault if she refuse
To be a Dutchesse.




You are in earnest.



As I hope to thrive in desires, come
You shall bear me company, and witnesse
How I woe her.




Your nimble resolution; then a Wise
Must be had somewhere, wo'd y'ad mine, to coole
Your appetite, take your own course, I can
But pray for you; the thousand Crowns 



Upon condition, you'l not refuse, to Accompany. 



Your Caroach quickly stay 
Now I think better on't, my Wife lives with her,
They are companions, I had forgot that?



Shee'l take it kindly.



It were enough to put her
Into conceipt, I come in love to her;
My Constitution will not bear it.



What? Not see her?



Yet a thousand Crowns God buy
Condemne me to my wife.
Exit.







With grief my Lord, and wonder at your sufferance.



He is our Brother, we are confident
Though he be wild he loves us, 'twill become
Us t' pray and leave him to a miracle,
But to our own affair.
Love and thy golden Arrow, we shall trie,
How you'll decide our second Destinie.
Exeunt.




A kisse, and then 'tis sealed; this she would know
Better than the impression, which I made,
With the rude signet; 'tis the same she left
Upon my lip, when I departed from her,
And I have kept it warm still, with breath,
That in my prayers have mentioned her.










Dulcino welcome: Thou Art soon return'd.
How dost thou like the City?



'Tis a heap of handsome building.



And how the people?



My conversation hath not age enough
To speak of them, more than they promise well
In their aspect: but I have argument
Enough in you, my Lord, to fortifie
Opinion, they are kind, and hospitable to Strangers.



Thy indulgence to my wound,
Which owes a Cure unto thy pretty Surgery,
Hath made thee too much Prisoner to my chamber,
But we shall walk abroad.



It was my duty?
Since you receiv'd it in my cause; and could
My blood have wrought it sooner, it had been
Your balmy Fountain.



Noble youth, I thank thee. Enter Servant.

How now, didst speak with him?



I had the happinesse, My Lord, to meet him
Waiting upon the Duke abroad: he bid me
Make haste with the remembrance of his Service:
He'll bring his own joys with him instantly,
To welcome your return.











I did, he promis'd silence.



So, I'le expect him, thou art sad Dulcino,

I prophesie thou shalt have cause, to bless
The minute, that first brought us to acquaintance.



Do not suspect my Lord, I am so wicked,
Not to do that already, you have saved
My life, and therefore have deserv'd that dutie.



Name it no more, I mean another way.



It is not in your power, to make me Richer,
With anie benefit, shall succeed it, though
I should live ever with you.




Not so much gratitude.



There is no way
Left for my hope, to do you any service,
Near my preserving, but by adding one
New favour, to a suit, which I would name.



To me, I prethee speak, it must be something
I can deny thee.



'Tis an humble suit,
You license my departure.











Do you call this a way to do me service?



It is the readiest I can studie Sir;
To tarrie were but to increase my debt,
And waste your favours; in my absence, I
May publish, how much vertue I have found
In Savoy, and make good unto your fame.
What I do owe you here, this shall survive you,
For I will speak the story with that truth,
And strength of passion, it shall do you honour,
And dwell upon your name sweeter than Myrrhe,
When we are both dead?



Thou hast art, to move
In all things, but in this, change thy desire,
And I'le denie thee nothing; do not urge
Thy unkind departure, thou hast met perhaps,
With some that have deceiv'd thee with a promise,
Won with thy prettie looks and presence; but
Trust not a great man, most of them dissemble,
Pride, and Court-cunning hath betrai'd their faith,
To a secure Idolatry, their soul
Is lighter than a complement; take heed,

  They'le flatter thy too young ambition,
Feed thee with names, and then like subtle Chimists
Having extracted, drawn thy spirit up,
Laugh, they have made thee miserable.




No jealousie my Lord, render me so
Unhappie, that preferments or the flatteries
Of anie great man hath seduc'd my will
To leave you.



Still I suspect thy safety?
And thou maist thus deceive me, it may be,
Some wanton Ladie hath beheld thy face,
And from her eyes shot Cupids into thine.
Trust not the innocence of thy soul too far,
For though their bosoms carrie whiteness, think,
It is not snow, they dwell in a hot Climate,
The Court, where men are but deceitful shadows,
The women, walking flames; what if this Ladie
Bestow a wealthie Carkanet upon thee,
Another give thee Wardrobes, a third promise
A Chain of Diamonds, to deck thy youth,
'Tis to buy thy vertue from thee, and when
Thy outside thrives, upon their treacherous bountie
Th' outstarve at heart, and lust will leave thy bodie
Manie unpitied Ruines, thou art young 



There is no fear my Lord, that I shall take
Such wicked courses, and I hope you see not
Anie propension in my youth, to sin
For pride, or wantonness.



Indeed I do not,
But being my boy so young, and beautiful,
Thou art apt to be seduc'd.




I will not serve the greatest Prince on earth
When I leave you.



Thou shalt not serve me, I
Will make thee my companion.




Though just, should buy the freedom I was born with,
Much less base ends, if I but meet agen
That good man, who in Reverence to his habit,
The theeves let go before your happie valour
Came to my Rescue.



He that was your Conduct
From Millan, for so if I remember
You named a Father, what could he advantage
Your fortune, were he present, more, than with
Religious Counsel?



I did trust him Sir,
As being the 〈…〉asurer, with that
Would make me welcom in Savoy, and
I know he will be faithful, when we meet.
For his sake let me beg you would discharge
A worthless Servant, that inquest of him 



No more, to cut off all unwelcom motives,
I charge thee by thy Love, thy Gratitude,
Thy life preserv'd, which but to stay thee here,
I would not name agen; urge no consent
From me, to thy departure, I have now
Use of thy faith, thou wo't not run away;
I have employment for thee, such a one
As shall not onlie pay my services,
But leave me in arrerage to thy love.
Receive this letter. Enter Grimundo.


Let me embrace thee with a spreading arm.



I have dispens'd with my attendance on
The Duke, to bid you welcom Sir from death;
Fame so had couz'nd our belief, but thus
She has made you the more precious.




If I may call it so, for I procur'd
That Rumour to be spread, excuse a minute,
I'le tell thee all my Counsels, I need not
Waste anie instructions on thee Dulcino,

For the conveyance of this paper, let me
Commend it to thy care, 'tis to my Mistress,
Conceal my lodgings, and do this for him
Will study noble Recompence.








What prettie youth is that? sure I have seen
That face before.



Never; I brought him first
To Savoy, having rescu'd him from the

Bandetti, in my passage ore the Confines:
Is't not a sweet-fac'd thing? there are some Ladies
Might change their beauties with him.



And gain by it.



Nay, to his shape he has as fine a Soul,
Which graceth that perfection.





  Been long acquainted with him?




In Phisnomy: believe my Character,
He's full of excellent sweetness.








His vertue will deserve
More praise, he suffers sit for love, in that
He is a Gentleman; for never could
Narrow and earthly minds be capable
Of Loves impression, or the injurie 
He willinglie forsook his friends and Countrey,
Because unkindlie for unworthie ends,
They would have forc'd him marrie against his heart,
He told me so himself, and it were sin
Not to believe him: but omitting these,
How fares the best of Ladies, my Cleona?









Mine, she is in affection,
She is not married?







She is in health?







There is something in thy looks, I cannot
Read, be thy own gloss, and make me know
That doubtful Text, to whom hath she given up
The hope of my felicity, her heart,
Since my too fatal absence?




Within the circle of my knowledge.




I am renew'd agen, may thy tongue never
Know sorrows accent.









I have sent a letter, to
Certifie, I am still her loving servant.



No matter, we'll be there before the boy,
There is necessity, if you knew all:
Come lets away.



Agen thou dost afflict
My Soul with jealousie, if she have still
The clear possession of her heart.




Dead Sir, remember that.



I shall be living,
And soon enough present my self her fresh
And active Lover.



If the Duke be not
Before you.







The Duke, 'tis so resolv'd,
Your Rival, if you still affect Cleona,

VVithin this hour, he means his first sollicite
And personal siege; loose not your self with wonder,

  If you neglect this opportunitie,
She having firm opinion of your death,
It will not be a miracle, if the Title
of Dutchess be a strong temptation
To a weak woman.



I must thank your love,
And counsel, but for this time disingage
Your further stay with me, the Duke may miss you,
Preserve his favour, and forget me in
Your conference, I would be still conceal'd;
Let me consider on my fate, agen
I thank you, and dismiss you.




Dwell in your breast, in all things I obey you;
You know you have my heart.



She's but a woman:
Yet how shall I be able to accuse her
With anie justice, when she thinks me dead.
The Duke, I must do something, I am full
Of discord, and my thoughts are fighting in me.
From our own Armie must arise one fear,
When Love it self is turn'd a Mutineer.







Enter Jacome, the Steward, and Servants.



So, so, yet more perfume, y' are sweet Servingmen, make everie corner of the house smoke, bestir your selves, everie man know his Province, and be officious to please my Lady, according to his talent; have you furnisht out the banquet?







'Tis well, here should have been a fresh suit of Arras, but no matter, these bear the age well, let'em hang.



And there were a Mask to entertain his Highness?



Hang Masks, let everie conceit shew his own face, my Ladie would not disguise her entertainment, and now I talk of disguising, where's the Butler?







Where Sir? 'tis my Ladies pleasure that you be drunk to day, you will deal her Wine abroad the more liberallie among the Dukes servants, you are two tall Fellows, make good the credit of the Butterie, and when you are drunk, I will send others to relieve
  
you: Go to your stations, if his Grace come hither a Sutor to my Ladie, as we have some cause to suspect, and after marrie her, I may be a great man, and ride upon a Reverend Moyle by patent, there is no end of my preferment; I did once teach my Ladie to dance, she must then teach me to rise: for indeed it is just, that only those, who get their living by their legs, should ride up∣on a Foot-cloth.



Here's a young Gentleman desires to speak with my Ladie.



More young Gentlemen? tell him I am busie.



With my Ladie 



Busie with my Ladie Sir?



Would speak with my Ladie Sir?



I ha not done with my Ladie my self yet, he shall stay, 'tis for my Ladies State, no time to interrupt my Ladie; but now? I'le know his business, and taste it for my Ladie; if I like it, she shall hear more, but bid him come to me, methinks I talk like a peremptorie Statesman alreadie, I shall quicklie learn to forget my self when I am in great office; I will oppress the Subject, flatter the Prince, take bribes a both sides, do right to neitber, serve heaven as far as my profit will give me leave, and tremble onlie at the summons of a Parliament.
Enter Dulcino.





I have a Letter Sir.



Let me see the complexion of the face, has it a handsom
Title Page, is it Stilo novo?




I have command Sir, to deliver it
To none but to my Ladie.



A forward Youth, I like him, he is not modest, I will as∣sist his preferment, to engage him to my faction, a special Court∣policie, see my Ladie.





Yet stay Belinda 



I beseech you Madam
Allow excuse to my abrupt departure.
There is a business of much consequence,
And which you will not mourn to see effected.
Besides the dutie that I owe my Lord,
Compells me to it Madam.




We are acquainted with your vertue, this
Would move suspition you were not in
Charitie with the Duke.



You are pleasant Madam.



You are severe to bind yourself too strictlie

  From Court and entertainments, sure your Lord
Should chide you for it.



If it please you stay,
Your Ladiship and I'le converse together,
My unkind Fate hath indisposed me,
To these State Ceremonies too.



You will oblige me by your pardon?







Nay you shall give me leave a little further,
Here I am useless.
Exeunt Astella, Belinda.



May it please you Madam,
This prettie Gentleman has a suit to you,
And I in his behalf; he will be serviceable
And active in his place, a friend of mine.



Your Steward Madam is too full of zeal
To do me a preferment, but I have
No other ambition, than to commend
This paper to your white hands.




'Tis done, be bold and call me fellow.




You circumspect I pray, that all things have
Their perfect shape and order to receive
The Duke: you know our pleasure, not to spare
Or cost or studie to delight his highness.



I hope I have not been your Steward so long,
But I know how to put your Ladiship
To cost enough without studie.
She reads.




So great a bliss? the date is fresh, Foscari

Whom I thought dead? give him five hundred Crowns▪



We will divide em.







You need not bid,
I use to make em stay, and long enough
Ere they receive such bounties.




Too cheap a payment for so rich a message.



This is the right Court largess.



The day breaks glorious to my darkned thoughts,
He lives, he lives yet; cease ye amorous fears,
More to perplex me: prethee speak sweet Youth,
How fares my Lord? upon my Virgin heart
I'le build a flaming Altar, to offer up
A thankful sacrifice for his Return

  To life, and me; speak and increase my comforts:
Is he in perfect health?



Not perfect Madam, until you bless him with
The knowledge of your constancie.



O get thee wings and flie then,
Tell him my love doth burn like vestal fire,
Which with his memory, richer than all spices,
Dispersed odors round about my soul,
And did refresh it when 'twas dull and sad,
With thinking of his absence.




My Ladie is in love with him.




Thou goest too soon away, where is he, speak?



He gave me no Commission for that Ladie,
He will soon save that question by his presence.



Time h'as no feathers, he walks now on crutches,
Relate his gesture when he gave thee this,
What other words, did mirth smile on his brow,
I would not for the wealth of this great world,
He should suspect my faith, what said he prethee?



He said, what a warm lover, whom desire
Makes eloquent could speak.



I have found it,
That boy comes from the Duke, that letter love,
'Twill be a match, and please your Ladiship 



Forbear your Ceremonies, what needs all this
Preparation, if the Duke vouchsafe
His person for my guest, dutie will teach me,
To entertain him without half this trouble;
I'le have no Ryot for his Highness.








Be less officious, you forget 
Sweet Youth, go forward with thy storie.




This is a Fayrie, and the Devil sent him
To make my Ladie mad, 'twere well to trie
Whether he be flesh and blood, ha, I'le pinch him first.








My care shall see nothing be wanting, for
Your honour, and the Dukes.



Your place I see,
Is better than your manners, go too, be
Less troublesom, his Highness brings intents
Of grace, not burden to us, know your dutie.



So, I were best keep my self warm with my own
  
office, while I may, the tyde is turn'd I see within two minutes, here was nothing but look to the Gallerie, perfume the Cham∣bers, what Musick for the Duke, a Banquet for the Duke, now, be less officious, We'll have no Riot for his Highness, 'tis this Urchin h'as undone all our preferment.



The Suns lov'd flower, that shuts his yellow Curtain,
When he declineth, opens it again
At his fair rising, with my parting Lord,
I clos'd all my delights, till his approach,
It shall not spread it self.

















Do not leave me,
I shall remember more.









The humble dutie of a Subject to your Highness.



Rise high in our thoughts, and thus
Confirm we are welcom, to these eyes, our heart,
Shall pay a lower dutie, than obedience
Hath taught your knee.



Your Grace much honours me,
Till this white hour, these walls were never proud,
T'inclose a guest, the genius of our house,
Is by so great a presence wak'd, and glories,
To entertain you.




Like a fresh Jewel, to encrease her value,
We can but thank Cleona.








Let me revoke that hastie syllable,
But thank thee; yes, we can do more, and will,
We have a heart to do't, our much griev'd Sister
I know you do not wear this sadness for
Our presence.



If I've anie skill in mine own eys,
Since they beheld you, they have looked
More chearfullie, than they were wont.



And yet I see a tear is readie to break prison.



It is of joy to see you sir in health,
I hope the Prince is well?



He will be so

Astella, when he leaves to be unkind
To thee, but let's forget him.




Injur'd him, in the character of his person.
And his shape promiseth a richer Soul,

  I feel a new and fierie spirit dance,
Upon my heart-strings.









With your Highness pardon,
That name was never so attended, it
Becomes your bountie, but not me to wear
That Title.







Of fair my Lord?



I said you were my fair Cleona 








I hope 't does not offend to call you so,
Y' are yet my Subject.



When I leave that name, may heaven 



Be pleas'd to change it for a better.







Do not sin, 'tis in our power
With your consent, to work that wonder Ladie.



I want my understanding.







Do not believe him Youth, by all the faith
Of Virgins, I'le not change my service, to
Thy Master for his Dukedom.



Y' are too Noble.



What boy is that? Ha Giotto?




Madam, the Duke observes us.



I ha seen him.
It is no common face.



My Lord we know not.








Not yet come my Lord.



Send for him strait, and bid him bring the picture
VVe gave into his keeping, yet forbear,
It is in vain.



My Lord, Cleona waits
Your farther Courtship.



VVhither am I carried?



I hope, dread Sir, my house affords no object,
To interrupt your quiet.




Or could this Roof be capable of ill,
Your onlie presence Ladie would convert it,
There is a vertuous magick in your eye.
For wheresoere it casts a beam, it does
Create a goodness, y'ave a handsom boy.



The Duke is troubled?



He's a prettie Youth.



I hope he wo'not take me from my Ladie,
I'le say I am her servant.




My speech, my heart is narrow of a sudden:

Giotto take some opportunitie
To enquire that Youths condition, name, and Countrey,

  And give us private knowledge, to cut off
* Circumstance Ladie, I am not your fresh,
And unacquainted Lover, that doth waste Soranzo whispers with Jacome.

The tedious Moons with preparation
To his amorous suit, I have been Cleona,

A long admirer of your Vertues, and
Do want the comfort of so sweet a partner,
In your young state.



You mock your humble hand-maid.







He brought some welcom letter
To my Ladie.



Not know his name, nor whence?



No my good Lord. So so, I like this well,
My Ladie does applie her to the Duke,
There is some hopes agen things may succeed;
This Lords discoursing with me, is an Omen
To my familiaritie to greatness.




Grimundo not come yet? I am not well.



Good heaven defend, Angels protect your Highness.



Your holie prayers cannot but do me good.
Continue that devotion, Charitie
Will teach you a consent to my departure.







Make me not so Ladie
By the least trouble of your self; I am
Acquainted with these passions, let me breath
A heart upon thy lip; farewell, agen
Your pardon.
Exit.



'Tis a verie strange distemper,
And sudden: Noble Ladie we must wait
Upon the Duke.
Exeunt.



My bud is nipt agen,
Would all the banquet were in his bellie for't.



Let not my eyes betray me.




Let not your Ladiship repent your cost,
I'le have a care the sweet-meats be not lost.
Exit.



Acquaint him with these passages of the Duke,
Tell him I long to see him, and at last,
To crown the storie, say my heartshall know
No other love but his.



I flie with this
Good news.
Exit. Dulc. Enter Jac.



Madam, here is Prince Lodwick.












Stay, it can do no harm.



Een what you please.



If he enquire for his Lady, answer
She is not very well, and keeps her Chamber.



Ile say she's dead if you please, 'tis my duty:
Ile never speak truth while I live that shall
Offend your Ladiship.



You may hear all, Enter Lodwick and Piero.


And when you please appear.



Sick; where's her Doctor?
Ile be acquainted with him. Noble Lady.



Your Grace is here most welcome.







I am happy that my duty to the Prince
Brought me to kisse your hand.



Beside the honour done to me, your person
Will add much comfort to Astella, your
Weak Lady.



She is sick; mend, let her mend, she'll spend her time worse, yet she knows my mind, and might do me the courtesie to die once; I'de take it more kindly, than to be at charge of a Physician.



You wo'd not poison her?



I think I must be driven to't; what shall a man do with a Woman that wo'not be ruled. I ha'given cause enough to break any reasonable womans heart in Savoy, and yet you see how I am troubled with her: but leave her to the Destinies. Where is my Brother all this while? I came to meet him; what, is't a match already? when shall we dance and triumph in the Tilt∣yard, for honour of the high and mightie Nuptials? where is he?



My Lord, he is gone.



















She jeers him: By this lip Ile love thee, and thou wot abuse him; I knew he would but shame himself, and therefore durst not come with him for my own credit; I warrant he came fierce upon thee with some parcel of Poetry, which he had conn'd by heart out of Tasso, Guarrini, or some other of the same melt∣ing
  
Tribe, and thought to have brought thy Maiden Town to his obedience, at the first noise of his furious Artillery.



My Lord, you understand me not, your Brother
Is not in health; some unkind pain within him
Compell'd him to forsake us.




That he is sick? My Brother sick Piero.




I am very well here.



So am not I: pray sir appear more civil,
Or I shall leave you.







'Tis too true my Lord.



No, no, Truth is a vertuous thing, and we cannot have too much on't. D'ye hear, if I may counsel you, be wise, and stay for me; you may be my Wife within this month, and the Dutchesse too.



Your Wife my Lord; why you are married,
What shall become of her?



Is she not sick?



But are you sure she'il die?



What a ridiculous question do you make: If death wo'not take a fair course with her, are there not reasons enough in State think you, to behead her; or if that seem cruel, because I do not affect blood, but for very good ends, I can be divorc'd from her, and leave her rich in the title of Lady Dowager.



Upon what offence can you pretend a divorce?



Because she is not fruitful; is not that a sin?



Would your Lordship have her fruitful, and you
Ne'r lie with her?



Have not I known a Lady, whose husband is an Eunuch upon Record, mother to three or four children, and no free con∣science but commends her?



But these things wo'not be easily perfect, unlesse
You were Duke to enforce em.



Is not my Brother in the way? sick already, and per∣haps as fit for heaven as another; I know he cannot live long, he's so well given, they never thrive, and then d'ye think Ile keep such a religious Court; in this corner lodge a Covy of Capou∣chins, who shall zealously pray for me without Stockins, in that a nest of Carthusians, things which in fine turn to Otters, appear flesh, but really are fish: No, no, give me a Court of flou∣rishing pleasure, where delight in all her shapes, and studied varie∣ties every minute courts the soul to act her chief felicity.



Do you never think of hell?



Faith I do, but it alwaies makes me melancholy, and therefore as seldome as I can my contemplation shall point thi∣ther; I am now in the spring of my life, winter will come on fast enough; when I am old, I will be as methodical an hypo∣crite, as any pair of Lawn Sleeves in Savoy.



I dare not hear him longer: Madam, release me.





How now; whence come you? were you sick?



At heart my Lord, to think of your unkindnesse.



At heart: Ile ne'r believe without inspection. Am I unkind? go to, there's not a friend in the whole world can wish you better: Would you were canoniz'd a Saint, 'tis more than I wish my self yet; I do not trouble thee much on earth, and thou wert in heaven I would not pray to thee, for fear of disturbing thy Seraphical devotion.



What sin have I committed deserves
This distance?



In Christian charitie salute her.



I would not have your Ladiship too ventrous,
The air is somewhat cold, and may endanger
A weak body.



If the suspicion that I am unchaste 



Unchaste; By this hand I do not know an honest woman in the Dukedome.



How, my Lord: what do ye think of me?



I know not whether you be a woman or no, yet.







What would you have me do? I have not seen her this six months.



O rather, my Lord, conclude my sufferings,
Than thus with tortures lengthen out my death:
Oh kill me, and I beseech you; I will kisse
The instrument, which guided by your hand,
Shall give my grief a period, and pronounce Enter Gri∣mundo.


With my last breath your free forgivenesse.



No, kill your self, more good will come on't: how now? nay then w'are like to have a precious time on't.



The Duke, my Lord, enquired for you.




His Highnesse in return, and he imploy'd me

  To bring back knowledge of his better health;
Which, he says, shall enable him but to
Expresse how much he honours fair Cleona.




I am his studious servant, and rejoice
In this good news: Your Brother is recovered.



I, I, I knew he would do well enough: Now sir?



I have some businesse with you, my Lord,
Were you at opportunity.



Some moral exhortations; they are fruitlesse: I shall never eat Garlick with Diogenes in a Tub, and speculate the Stars without a Shirt: Prithee enjoy thy Religion, and live at last most Philosophical lousie.



My design is of another nature.



May I obtain so great a favour Sir,
You'ld be my guest in absence of the Duke;
I'm but ambitious to remember
His health in Greek Wine.



So this Lady will be temperate, and use me but like a Stranger, without pressing me to inconveniences of kissing her, and other superstitious Courtship of a husband.



I will engage she'll not offend you.



And yet it goes against my conscience to tarrie so long in honest companie; but my comfort is, I do not use it. Come away Piero, you have had a fine time on't.







I follow Madam, yet have comfort,
Though reason and example urge our fears,
Heaven will not let you lose so many tears.
Exeunt.





Did she receive my Letter with such joy?



I want expression, my Lord, to give you
The circumstance; with what a flowing love,
Or rather, with what glad devotion
She entertain'd it; at your very name,
For so I ghest, to which her covetous sight
Made the first haste; one might have seen her heart
Dance in her eies, and as the wonder strove
To make her pale, warm love did fortifie
Her cheeks with guilty blushes, she did read
And kisse the paper often.



This was before the Duke came thither?







And didst thou not
Observe her at his presence •lack that fervour
Her former passion had begot of me?
Was she not courtlie to him, Boy?




As her great birth and breeding might direct
A Lady to behave her self to him, that was her Prince.



She kiss'd him, did she not?







He did salute her?







And didst not see a flame hang on her lip,
A spirit busie to betray her love,
And in a sigh conveigh it to him? Oh
Thou canst not read a woman. Did he not
Wooe her to be his Dutchesse?







Thou shouldst ha watcht her cheek then; there a blush
Had been a guilt indeed, a feeble answer,
With half a smile, had been an argument
She had been lost, and the temptation
Above her strength; which had I known, I could
Have slept, and never been disturb'd, although
I had met her in a dream.



My Lord, you weave a causeless trouble to your self.



Oh jealousie. I am asham'd 



If ever any woman lov'd
With faith, Cleona honours you above
Mankind; ▪twere sin, but to suspect so chaste,
So furnish'd with all vertue, your Cleona.




It were indeed; I am too blame Dulcino;

Yet when thou comst to be so ripe, for so
Much miserie, as to love, thou wo't excuse me.



My Lord, if I might not offend with my
Opinion, it were safest that you lose
No time, your presence would confirm a joy
To either, and prevent the Duke, whose strong
Solicits may in time endanger much
The quiet of your thoughts.



O never, never, and I will reward
Her love beyond example: Thus Dulcino





My Lord, I had much rather

  Write on you to her.



Tush, thou understandst not
What I have purpos'd, thou shalt presentlie
Go back, and tell Cleona I am dead.







I boy, that I am dead: nay, mark the issue.



But my Lord, she hath your Letter
To check that.



Thou shalt frame something to take
That off, some fine invention may be made,
To say 'twas forg'd, we'll studie that anon,
In the assurance of my death, which must
Be so delivered, as she shall believe thee,
She may affect the Duke.



Ho sir, the Duke?



I, I, the Duke: for that's the plot, I must advance.



And will you thus reward so great a love to you?



Best, best of all,
Shall I be so ungrateful to a Ladie
Of such rare merit, when a Prince desires
To make her great? by my unworthie interest
Destroy her blessings, hinder such a fortune
From fair Cleona? Let her love the Duke;
In this I will expresse the height and glorie
Of my best service.



Are you sir in earnest?



I love her, and can never see her more:
Posteritie shall learn new pietie
In love from me; it will become me look on

Cleona a far off, and only mention
Her name, as I do Angels in my prayer:
Thus she deserves I should converse with her;
Thus I most nobly love her.




Expecting you, and shall I carrie death
To comfort her? good heaven forbid this Sir.



Heaven doth engage me to it: she shall
Reign glorious in power, while I let fall my Beads
That she might prosper. Be not thou an enemy
To her and me, but do it, or never see more.
Exit.



I'm lost i'th springing of my hope, shall I
Obey him, to destroy my self? I must,

  I dare not be my self; no need have they
Of other force, that make themselves away?
Exit.











I smell a Match agen: the Duke will fetch her about; here was another Ambassadour at dinner, and his Highnesse is again expected: in confidence of my place that shall be, I will continue my state posture, use my Tooth-pick with discretion, and cough distinctly: what can hinder my rising? I am no Schol∣lar, that exception is taken away; for most our States-men do hold it a saucy thing, for any of their Servants to be wiser than themselves.









My Lady shall be at leisure for you presently 
It may be you would speak with me first?



I only entreat my Lady may have knowledge
That I wait here.



I will enrich my Ladies understanding; Ile say nothing else, but that you are here, shall I? That's enough if you have another Letter.







I would wish you deliver it to her own hand: but under your favour, the Contents of the last Chapter had like to undone us all, and Cupid had not bin more merciful.



Fear nothing, the news I bring will make you merrie.



I'de laugh at that; howsoever you are heartilie wel∣come, and ever shall be: You do hear no harm of the Duke?







You shall hear more shortly: I say no more, but heaven bless my Ladie and his Highnesse together, for my part, though I speak a proud word I'le tell my Ladie that you attend her.



I prithee do, and hasten the discharge
Of my sad Embassie, which when I have done,
And that it prospers in mine own misfortune,
I'le teach my breath to pray.







  Courts your acceptance, and I hope your wisdom
Will teach you how to meet it, y'ave receiv'd
His Highness bosom, now Ile take my leave.



Will you not see the Prince again?



I saw his highnesse walking with Grimundo

Toward the garden, and the Duke expects me 
Think of a Dutches Madam.




And needs must sink under the weight of such
A title; my humblest service to his grace,
I am his beads-woman.
Exit Fabrichio.




Madam here's the youth.



Art thou return'd already? why were you
So rude to make him waite?




'Tis but a pair of minutes.








He shall be with your Ladiship
Next time before he come; when I but spye him
A mile off, Ile acquaint you in my duty
To your self, and my honour unto him.







Here is no couth, I do not like
My Ladies familiarity with a boy:
Methinks a man were fitter, and more able
To give her a refreshing: but this Lobby
Shall be my next remove.
Exit, and stays behind the hangings.








What harsh sound is that?
Thy looks upon a suddain are become
Dismal, thy brow dull as Saturns issue;
Thy lips are hung with black, as if thy tongue
Were to pronounce some funeral.




But let your vertue place a guard about
Your eare; it is too weak a sence to trust
With a sad tale, that may disperse too soon
The killing sillables, and some one or other
Find out your heart.



The Mandrake hath no voice
Like this, the Raven and the night birds sing
More soft, nothing in nature, to which fear
Hath made us superstitious, but speak gently

  Compar'd with thee; discharge thy fatall burthen,
I am prepar'd, or stay but answer me,
I will and save thy breath, and quickly know
The total of my sorrow; is Foscari

Dead since I saw thee last? or hath some wound,
Or other dire mis-fortune seal'd him for
The grave? that though he yet live, I may bid
My heart despair to see him.




Since last I saw you Madam.




Then I despise all sorrow boy, there is
Not left another mischief in my Fate;
Call home thy beauty, why dost look so pale?
See I am arm'd, and can with valiant blood
Hear thee discourse of my terror now;
Methinks I can in the assurance of
His safety, hear of Battails, Tempest, death,
With all the horrid shapes that Poets fancy;
Tell me the tale of Troy or Rome on fire,
Rich in the trophies of the conquered world,
I will not shed so many tears to save
The Temples, as my joy doth sacrifice
To hear my Lord is well.



Turn them to grief
Agen, and here let me kneele, the accuser
Of him, that hath deserv'd more punishment,
Than your wrong'd piety will inflict.



Dost kneele, and call thy self accuser?








Thy Lord? take heed, for if I be thy judge
I shall condemn thee ere thou speak.




But I accuse my self, and of an injury
To you.







Too great to be forgiven.



My love to him thou serv'st hath found a pardon
Already for it; be it an offence
Against my life.



For his sake you must punish,
Dear Madam, I have sinn'd against his ghost,
In my deceiving you.









  His soul had not forgotten how he loved you,
I must expect him to afright my dreams,
The truth is, my Lord is dead.



How dead? when? where? did I
Not hear thee say, since I receiv'd this letter,
He was alive?











I said that neither death, nor any black
Misfortune had befalne him, since I gave
The letter to you.



Grant this truth, I am secur'd agen.



'Las he was dead before,

I'm sure you could not choose but hear as much,
It was my wickedness arriv'd to mock
Your credulous heart with a devised letter:

I know you are in wonder what should move me
To this imposture; sure it was no malice,
For you nere injur'd me, and that doth make
My crime the more deform'd, all my aime was,
Being a stranger here, and wanting means
After my Lords death, by this cunning to
Procure some bounty from you to sustain
My life, until by some good fortune, I
Might get another Master, for I knew
There was no hope to benefit my self
By saying he was dead: good heaven forgive me,
And keep my eys from weeping,



Thou hast undone me,
Like a most cruel boy.




I shall repair the ruines of your eye,
When I declare the cause that leades me to
This strange confession; I have observ'd
The Duke does love you, love you in that way,
You can deserve him, and though I have sinn'd,

I am not stubborn in my fault to suffer you
In the belief of my deceitful story,
To wrong your fortune by neglect of him
Can bring your merit such addition
Of state and title.



Dost thou mock agen?



Heaven knows I have no thought of such impiety,
If you will not believe that for your sake

I have betrayed my self, yet be so charitable,
To think it something of my duty to
The Duke, whose ends, while they are just and noble,
All loyal subjects ought to serve for him,
Whom I am not bound to honour, and I love him,
Else may I never know one day of comfort;

I durst not without guilt of treason to
His chaste desires deceive you any longer:
Collect your self dear Madam, in the grave
There dwells no musick, in the Dukes embrace
You meet a perfect happinesse.




And never see me more; who ever knew
Falshood so ripe at thy years?
Exit.




My poor heart broke? hath nature given it
So strong a temper that no wound will kill me?
What charm was in my gratitude to make me
Undoe so many comforts with one breath?
Or was it for some sin I had to satisfie?
I have not only widowed Cleona,

But made my self a misery beneath
An Orphant; I nere came to have a friend,
I ha destroy'd my hope, that little hope
I had to be so happy.





My friend what make you here? who sent for you? begon dee hear, begon I say the word too; there is a Porters lodge else, where you may have due chastisement, youle begon.




I have offended Sir,
Exit. Dul.



So am not I;
Let me see some body is dead, if I knew who, no matter 'tis one that my Lady lov'd, and I am glad to hear it for mine own sake; now Venus speed the Dukes plough, and turn me loose to a privy Councellor.





Signior Jacomo, where's your Lady?



She is within my good Lord, wilt please you walk this way?



Prethee make haste, the Duke is coming.
Exeunt.



I smell him hitherto.
Enter Jacomo presently.

So so, I will take this opportunitie to present my self to his High∣ness, that he may take particular notice of my bulk and personage, he may chance speak to me, I have common places to answer any ordinarie question, and for other, he shall find by my impudence, I come not short of a perfect Courtier. Here he comes, I will dissemble some contemplation, and with my Hat on, give him cause to observe me the better.









A servant of Cleona's.
The Duke extends his hand, Jacomo kisses it.







Your Highness humble creature, you have blest my lips, and I will wear them thred-bare with my prayers for your Gra∣ces immortal prosperitie.





Soranzo is return'd: How fares Cleona?



My Lord, not well, I found her full of sadness, which is encreast, she cannot, as becomes her dutie, observe your Highness.



One word with your Grace in private; she is as well, as either you or I.







There came indeed certain news before you, that a noble Gentleman, I know not who, and therefore he shall be nameless, but some dear friend of hers is dead, and that's all, and that hath put her into a melanchollie mood; with your gracious pardon, if I were worthie to be one of your Counsellors. 







I would advise you, as others do, to take your own course; your Grace knows best what is to be done.



So sir: Didst thou not see the prettie boy I told thee of?



No my good Lord.



We are resolv'd to comfort her; set forward▪



You had simple grace.



A touch or so, a beam with which his Highness
Doth use to keep desert warm: good my Lord, Exeunt.

It is not come to that yet.





Go to the next religious house, and pray
Some hosie father come and speak with me:
But hasten thy Return. Exit Ser.


  I must not entertain with the same thought

Cleona, and my love, lest my own passion
Betray the Resolution I ha made
To make my service famous to all ages.
A legend that may startle wanton blood,
And strike a chilness in the active veins
Of noblest lovers, when they hear, or read,
That to advance a Mistress, I have given her
From mine own heart, if anie shall be so
Impious at my memorie, to say
I could not do this act, and love her too,
Some power divine, that knew how much I lov'd her,
Some Angel that hath care to right the dead,
Punish that crime for me, he is come. Enter Valentio, a religious man.



I sent to intreat your help, but first, pray tell me,

I have no perfect memorie, what Saint
Gives title to your Order?




The Scapular of St. Bennet Sir.




Make you still worthie of that Reverend habit,

I have a great devotion, to be made
A brother of your sacrèd institution:
What persons of great birth it hath receiv'd?



To fashion my Reply to your demand,
Is not to boast, though I proclaim the honours
Of our profession; four Emperors,
Fortie six Kings, and one and fiftie Queens,
Have chang'd their Royal Ermines for our sables,
These Cowls have cloth'd the heads of fourteen hundred,
And six Kings sons, of Dukes, great Marquises,
And Earls, two thousand and above four hundred
Have turn'd their Princelie Coronets, into
An humble Coronet of hair left by
The Razor thus.



This, it is not.
There is a Sun ten times more glorious,
Than that which riseth in the East, attracts me
To feed upon his sweet beams, and become
A Bird of Paradise, a Religious man
To rise from earth, and no more to turn back,
But for a Burial.



Think what 'tis you do,

  It is nothing to play the wanton with,
In the strong bended passion of an humor,
For a friends death, a Kings frown, or perhaps
Loss of a Mistress.



O still bless the guide
VVhatever, that shall lead this happie way.



My Lord, the truth is like your Coat of Arms,
Richest when plainest; I do fear the world
Hath tyr'd you, and you seek a Cell to rest in,
As Birds that wing it o're the Sea, seek ships,
Till they get breath, and then they flie away.



Do not mistake a pietie, I am prepar'd,
And can endure your strict mortifications.
Good Father then prefer my humble suit,
To your Superior for the habit, and
Let me not long expect you, say I am,
Noble, but humblest in my thoughts.





Mean time examine well this new desire,
Whether it be a wild flash, or a heavenlie fire.
Exit.



Now my good Boy.





Sir, your command is done,
And she believes?



That I am dead Dulcino?




That you are dead, and as she now scorn'd life
Death lends her cheeks his paleness, and her eyes
Tell down their drops of silver to the earth,
VVishing her tears might Rain upon your Grave,
To make the gentle earth produce some flower,
Should bear your names and memories.










Sir, I should be blest,
If I did see you sought the means to live,
And to live happilie, O noble sir
Let me untread my steps, unsay my words,
And tell your love, you live.



No my sweet boy,
She thinks not much amiss, I am a man
But of an hour or two; my will is made
And now I go, never more chearfullie,
To give eternal farewell to my friends.



For heavens sake sir, what's this you mean to do?
There is a fear sits cold upon my heart,
And tells me 



Let it not misinform thee boy;

  I'le use no violence to my self, I am
Resolv'd a course, wherein I will not doubt,
But thou wilt bear me companie? we'll enter
Into Religion.







O'tis a heavenlie life, go with me Boy,
We'll imitate the singing Angels there,
Learn how to keep a Quire in heaven, and scorn
Earths transitorie glorie; wo't Dulcino?




Alas my Lord, I am too young.




To serve heaven? Never, never; O take heed
Of such excuse.



Alas, what shall I do?
And yet I'me wearie of the world, but how
Can I do this? I am not yet discovered:
Sir, I shall still attend you.



Thou art my comfort,
I have propounded it alreadie, to
A Benedictine, by whose means we may
Obtain the habit; stay thou and expect him,

I must be absent for a little time,
To finish something, will conduce to my
Eternal quiet, if th'hast anie scruple,
He will direct thee, having both made even
With earth, we'll travail hand in hand to heaven.
Exit.



Fortune hath lent me a prospective glass,
By which I have a look beyond all joyes,
To a new world of miserie, what's my best
Let it be so, for I am hopeless now,
And it were well, if when those weeds I have,
That I might go disguised to my grave.
Exit.









You know I have given you manie precepts of honestie?



And you know how I have followed em.



To mine own heart, I have made tedious discourses of heaven to ye, and the Moral Vertues, numbred up the duties of a good Prince, urg'd examples of vertues for your imitation.







Seem'd to sweat with agonie and vexation, for your ob∣stinate courses reprov'd you, nay, sometimes made complaints of you to the Duke.



And I ha'curst you for it, I remember.



Alas my Lord, I durst do no otherwise: was not the Duke your father an honest man? and your brother now foolish∣lie takes after him, whose credulities, when I had alreadie cozen∣ed, I was bound to appear Stoical, to preserve the opinion they had conceived of me.







It speaks discretion and abilities in States-men, to ap∣ply themselves to their Princes disposition, varie a thousand shapes; if he be honest, we put on a formal of gravitie; if he be vitious, we are Parasites. Indeed in a politique Common∣wealth, all things are but Representation, and my Lord, howso∣ever I have appear'd to you, I am at heart one of your own Sect, an Epicure; be but so subtle to seem honest, as I do, and we will laugh at the foolish world in our Cells, déclaim against intempe∣rate livers, and hug our own licentiousness, while we surfet our souls in the dark with Nectar and Ambrosia.



Can this be earnest, you did talk of hell, and bug-bears?



I confess, and were you in publick, I would urge manie other emptie names to fright you, put on my holie-day counte∣nance, and talk nothing but Divinitie, and golden sentences.



You were a Christian, how came you to be converted?



I think I had a name given me, and that's all I retain; I could never endure reallie their severe discipline: Marrie for my preferment, and other politique ends, I have, and can still dispense with fasting, prayer, and a thousand fond austerities, though I do penance for em in private.



Let me ask you one question, were you never drunk?



A thousand times in my studie, that's one of my Recre∣ations.



How chance I could never see't in you? you know I would ha'been drunk for companie.



But I durst not trust so young a sinner; for I alwayes held it a maxim, to do wickedness with circumspection.







I speak in the phrase of the foolish world, that holds voluptuousness a crime, which you and I, and everie'wise man knows to be the onlie happiness of life, and the inheritance we are born to.



But stay, how comes it to pass, that accounting me so young a sinner, you now adventure to discover your self?











Good my Lord conceive me, you were a young sinner, and in your Nonage, does that infer that you have made no growth, that y'are a Child still, dee think that I ha not wit to di∣stinguish a Principiant in vice, from a Graduate, shall I be afraid to lay open my secret impieties to you, that are almost as perfect as my self in Epicurism?







And yet my Lord, with your Princelie licence, you may learn too, and indeed the first vertue that I would commend to your practice, should be that, by which I have attain'd to this height, and opinion, and that's hypocrisie.







Yes, a delicate white Devil, do but fashion your self to seem holie, and studie to be worse in private, worse, you'll find your self more active in your sensualitie, and it will be another titillation, to think what an Ass you make a'the believing world, that will be readie to dote, nay, superstitiouslie adore you, for a∣busing them.



This is prettie wholsom doctrine, and hark you, ha you no wenches now and then?



Wenches? would the Duke your brother had so manie for his own sake, or you either.







Why judge by your self, how dee think a Gentleman should subsist? I'le not give a Chip to be an Emperour, and I may not curvet as often as my constitution requires. Wenches, why I have as manie yet now I think better on't, I'le keep that to my self, store makes a good proverb.



Nay, nay, be free and open to me, you have my oath not to betray.



Well, I'le not be nice to you, you little imagine (though I be married that I am the greatest Whoremaster i'th' Dukedom.







Have a strong faith, and save my proofs; but Caute si non Caste, my Nun at home knows nothing, like a Mole in the earth, I work deep, but invisible; I have my private houses, my Granaries, my Magasines Bullie, as manie Concubines, as would, collected, furnish the Great Turks Seraglio.



How do you conceal em? I should nere keep half so manie, but 'twould be known.



You are then a Novice in the Art of Uenus, and will tell Tales out a' the School, like your weak gallants o' the first Chin, that will bragge what Ladies they have brought to their o∣bedience,
  
that think it a mightie honour, to discourse how many Forts they have beleaguer'd; how many they have taken by bat∣terie; how many by composition, and how many by stratagem: a fine commendation for young whelps, is't not?



A fault, a fault; who can deny it? But what are those you practice with? A touch, come.



Not sale-ware, Mercenary stuff; but rich, fair, high∣fed, glorious, Ladies of blood; whose eys will make a souldier melt, and he were compos'd of marble; whose very smile hath a magnetick force to draw souls; whose voice will charm a Satyr, and turn a mans prayer into ambition.



I have heard you; and now I think fit to discover my self to you: You are a Rascal.



Sir, I think I am one.



Let not your Wisdome think, I can be so easilie gull'd.







You think you have talked very methodicallie, and cunninglie all this while, and that I am, as they say, a credulous Coxcomb, and cannot perceive, that by your politique jeers upon my pleasures, you labour to discredit, not onlie my recreations, but my self to my own face: D'ye hear? the time may come you will not dare these things, and yet you shall see, I will not now so much as seem angrie: preserve your humour, 'twill appear fresh o'th'Stage, my learned Gymnoso∣phist; verie well, excellent well.



Why does not your Lordship believe me then?



Do'st thou think throughout the year, I will lose one minute of my pastime, for this your toothlesse Satyr? I'le to a Wench presentlie.



I came to carrie you to one.







Do not deceive your self; come, you shall believe, and thank me: go with me, and I will demonstrate.







I'le carrie you to a Ladie; be not afraid, she is honest; such a charming brow, speaking eie, springing cheek, tempting lip, swelling bosome.



Will you lead me to such a creature?











And think your self richer, than to be Lord of both the Indies; here's my hand, cut it off, if I do not this feat for you when you please; and when you are satisfied with her, I'le help you to fortie more: but we are interrupted.






There he is with Grimundo.



His late Governour, he is giving him good counsell.



Pray heaven he have the grace to follow it.



Consider Sir, what will be the end
Of all these wicked courses.







We must be circumspect.



No more: I have a crotchet new sprung:
Where shall I meet thee?



I'le expect you in the Park be very secret.
My Lord, I can but grieve for you.
Exit.



How have we all been couzen'd?
What, is my Brother here?



This hour, my Lord, he is now upon return.



I'le see him, and then prepare me for this Ladie.
I feel a boiling in my veins alreadie;
This is the life of greatnesse, and of Court;
They're fools that will be frighted from their sport.
Exeunt.







Enter Lodwick and Piero.



Do't and thou lov'st me.



What d'ye mean, my Lord?



Nay, we must have such a deal of circumstance; I say, do it.







That: is that such a piece of matter, does it appear so horrid in your imagination, that you should look as if you were frighted now?



My Lord, it is 



A thing your heat will prompt you to, but that you af∣fect ceremonie, and love to be entreated.







Yet again: you have not been observ'd so dull in a businesse of this supple nature.



But think on'c agen; I pray you think a little better: I ha no great ambition to ha my throat cut.







By you; you cannot chuse but kill me for't when I have done. Your Ladie?



Is your mountanous promise come to this? Remem∣ber; if I do not turn honest 



My Lord, do but consider well, I will do what I can, and there be no remedie but



Never fear it, for if thou canst but corrupt her, I'le sue a Divorce presentlie.



And bring me in for a witness?





She's here; fear nothing, I'le be thy protection; it were not amisse to cast away some kindness upon her: nay, I was coming to take my leave.



I know you never meant it.



Thus my best intents are rewarded still, the more sin upon your conscience; y'have a hard heart, but heaven forgive us all: Astella farewell; Piero expect my return here pray entertain this Gentleman courteouslie in my absence, you know not how kindlie I may take it.



I would you would enjoyn me any testimonie,
So I may be in hope to win your love.



'Tis in the will of women to do much; do not despair; the proudest heart is but flesh, think a that.







Of flesh; and so I leave you.
Exit.



Will't please you Madam walk into your Chamber?
I have something to impart will require more privacie.



If it be grief 'tis welcome.
Exeunt.






A Stranger, but some Gentleman of qualitie,
Intending to leave Savoy, humbly prays
To kisse your hand.



A Gentleman: admit him.




You are a gracious Prince, and this high favour
Deserves my Person and my Sword, when you
Vouchfafe so much addition to this honour,
To call them to your service.







It is not complement my Lord alone,
Made me thus bold; I have a private message,

  Please you command their distance.







Have you forgot this face?







The substance, Sir, and once more at your feet.



Return'd to life. Rise; meet cut arms: why in
This Cloud?



Your pardon, Royal Sir; it will
Concern your Hignesse to permit me walk
In some Eclipse.







I said I had a message:
I come from Cleona.








And in her name I must
Propound a question; to which she prays
You would be just and noble in your answer.



Without disputing your Commission,
Upon mine honour 



Princes cannot stain it: D'ye love her;



Do I love her? Strange.



Nay, she would have you pause, and think well e'r
You give her resolution; for she bid me tell you,
She has been much afflicted since you left her, about your love.



About my love? I prithee be more particular.



I shall: So soon as you were gone, being alone, and full
Of melancholie thoughts.



I left her so.



Willing to ease her head upon her Couch,
Through silence, and some friendship of the dark,
She fell asleep, and in a short dream thought
Some Spirit told her softly in her ear,
You did but mock her with a smoo h pretence
Of love.







More; that you were fallen from honour,
Have taken impious flames into your bosome;
That y'are a bird of prey, and while she hath
No houshold Lar, to wait upon her threshold,
You would flie in, and seize upon her honour.



I hope she hath no faith in dreams.



She cannot tell; she hath some fears, my Lord;
Great men have left examples of their vice:
If you but once more say you love Cleona,

And speak it unto me, and to the Angels,

  Which in her prayers she hath invok'd to hear you,
She will be confident.



Though I need not
Give an account to any, but to heaven
And her fair self. Foscari thou shalt tell her
With what alacritie I display my heart:
I love her with chaste and noble fire; my intents are
Fair as her brow: tell her I dare proclaim it
In my devotions, at that minute when
I know a millon of adoring Spirits
Hover about the Altar: I do love her 



Enough: my Lord, be pleas'd to hear
What I have now to say; You have exprest
A brave and vertuous soul, but I must not
Carrie this message to her; therefore take
Your own words back agen for, I love Cleona

With chaste and noble fire; my intents are
Fair as her brow: I dare proclaim it Sir
In my devotions, at that minute when

I know a million of adoring Spirits
Hover about the Altar.



Do ye mock me?



Pardon a truth, my Lord: I have apparrel'd
My own sense with your language.




To affront us? you had better ha been sleeping
In your cold Urn, as fame late gave you out,
And mingled with the rude forgotten ashes,
Than live to move our anger.



Spare your frowns: it is not breath
Can fright a noble truth; nor is there Magick
I'th' person of a King.







Heaven avert so black a thought;
Though in my honours cause I can be flame,
My blood is frost to treason; yet I must tell you,

I love Cleona too; and I may say
You reach not my affection: I admit
You value her above your Dukedome, health;
That you would sacrifice your blood to avert
Any mishap should threaten that dear head;

  All this is but above your self: but I

Love her above her self; and while you can
But give your life, and all you have to do

Cleona service, I can give away
Her self, Cleona's self, in my love to her.

I see you are at losse; I'le reconcile
All, she is yours, this minute ends my claim;
Live, and enjoy her happilie; may you be
Famous in that beauteous Empire; She,
Blest in so great a Lord.




I must not be
O'recome in honour; nor would do so great
A wrong to enjoy the blessing; I knew not
You were engag'd.



E're you proceed, I must
Beseech you hear me out: I am but fresh
Return'd from travail; in my absence, she
Heard I was slain; at my return, upon
The hearing of these honours you intend her,
And which I now believe from your own lip,
I found a means, and have wrought her already
Into a firm belief that I am dead:
(For I have but pretended I came from her)
If for my sake you leave her now, I can
Make good her faith and die; 't sha' not be said,
I liv'd and overthrew Cleona's fortune.



Staie miracle of honour, and of love.



If you proceed, as it concerns your happiness,
I can secure all fear of me; I am
Resolv'd a course wherein I will be dead
To her, yet live to pray for her and you,
Although I never see you more: will you
My Royal Lord.



Did ever Lover plead
Against himself before?



I love her still,
And in that studie her advancement, Sir,
In you: I cannot give her.



Well, I will still love her, and solicite.



And not open that I am living.







I am confident, let me but kiss your hand
Agen: my blessings dwell with you for ever.
Exit.



He was alwaies noble; but this passion

  Has out-gone Historie: it makes for me:
Hail to my courteous fate; Foscari thanks;
Like th' aged Phoenix thy old love expires,
And from such death springs life to my desires.
Exit.





The Father is not come yet; nor my Lord
Return'd; yet when they do, I have no way
To help my self; nor have I power to go
From hence: sure this is the Religious Man.





Ha, 'tis the same.
















My tears express my joys, what miracle
Gave you this libertie?




By th' happie valour of a Gentleman,
To whom in gratitude I pay this service:
He bid me here expect a holy man; and is it you?



The circumstance confirms it.



Are you the good man whom my Lord expects?
'Tis some refreshing in the midst of sorrow
To meet agen.



And heaven hath heard my praier.



But I am miserable still, unless
Your counsel do relieve me.







This noble Gentleman, to whom I owe
My preservation, who appointed you
To meet him here, having resolv'd to enter
Into Religion, hath been very urgent
For me to do so too; and overcome
With many importunities, I gave
Consent, not knowing what was best to do:
Some cure, or I am lost; you know I cannot
Mix with religious men.







I did, and he is now upon the point
Of his return.



Y' are in a straight I must
Confess; no matter, hold your purpose, and
Leave all to me. He is return'd.






Now I am readie; have you dispos'd him for such a life?



He is constant to attend you,
I have prepat'd him, and made way to the Abbot
For your reception.



I am blest, Dulcino,

Nay no distinction now, methinks we move
Upon the wings of Cherubims alreadie;
'Tis but a step to heaven; come my sweet Boy,
We climbe by a short Ladder to our joy. Exeunt.






This, my Lord, is her Garden, into which you see
My Key hath given us a private accesse.



'Tis full of curiositie.



You see that Grove.







There is her house of pleasure: let your eie
Entertain some delight here, while I give her happie
Knowledge you are entred.
Exit.



Do so; an honest knave, I see that: how
Happie shall I be in his conversation? I sha not
Need to keep any in fee to procure, and he be
So well furnished: if ever I come to be Duke, I will
Erect a magnificent Colledge; endow it
With Revenue to maintain Wenches, and
With great Pensions invite the fairest Ladies
From all parts of Christendome into my Seraglio;
Then will I have this fellow gelded, and make him
My chief Eunuch ranger, or overseer of all
My precious tame Fowl.
Enter 3 like Satyrs, and lie down.
How now? what's this, some Furie asleep? Ile take another path; another? into what wilderness has this Fire-drake brought me? I dare not crie out for fear of waking 'em: would Grimun∣do were come back.





Rise you drowsie Satyrs, rise;
What strong charm doth bind your eies?
See who comes into your Grove,
To embrace the Queen of Love;
Leap for joy, and frisk about,
Find your prettie Dryads out;
Hand in hand compose a ring,
Dance and circle your new King;
Him, Silvanus must obey, Satyrs rise and run in.

Hence, and crie a holiday.
Exit▪



Some Mask; a device to entertain me, ha? And yet I see not how they should prepare so much ceremony, unlesse they had expected me. A curse upon their ill faces; they shook me at first: how now?
Enter Satyrs pursuing Nymphs, they dance together. Exeunt Satyrs, 3 Nymphs seem to intreat him to go with them.
Have ye no tongues? yes I will venture my self in your com∣pany, and you were my destinies; wo'd there were no worse in hell, must I walk like a bride too, fortune set on afore then, and thou dost not guide into a hansome place, wo'd thy eyes were out, and so thou maist be taken for the blind goddess indeed; forward to Venus Temple.
Exit.




Vanished like Fayries? Ha, what musicks this? the mo∣tion of the Sphears, or am I in Elisium?
Enter Grimundo, bare, leading Belinda richly attired, and attended by Nymphs.
Here is Grimundo, ha? what glorious creatures this commits a rape upon my sences on every side, but when I look on her, all other admirations are forgot, and lessen in her glory.



My Lord y'are welcom; most welcom.



I have kept my word Sir.



Thou hast oblieg'd my soul.



Be high and frolick, she loves to see one
Domineer; when y'are throughly acquainted you'le
Give me thanks.



Let us be private with at much speed as may be;
Away with those gossips, so, so. Exeunt all but Lodwick and Belinda.


I forgot to ask her name: Lady am come.



Wilt please you use that chair?



You are not ignorant
Of the intents my blood hath brought with me,

Grimundo I hope hath told my coming Lady.
And you I'me confident will justifie his promise
Of some pastime.




Whose bosom I dare trust the son of night,
And yet more secret than his mother, he

  Hath power to engage me, and I shall
Take pride in my obedience; first be pleas'd
To taste, what in my duty I prepar'd
For your first entertainment; these but serve
To quicken appetite.




I like this well, Recorders.


I sha not use much Courtship, where's this musick?



Doth it offend your ear?



'Tis ravishing, whence doth it breath?



If you command, weele change
A thousand airs, till you find one is sweet
And high enough to rock your wanton soul
Into Elisian slumbers.





I hear 'em in thy accents.





Calliopes fam'd sonne, upon whose Lute
Myriads of lovers ghosts do wait and hang
Upon the golden strings to have their own
Griefs softned with his noble touch, shall come
Again from hell with fresh and happier strains
To move your fancy.



That were very strange,
She is Poetical, more than half a fury:
But we prate all this while, and lose the time
We should imploy more preciously; I need
No more provocations, my veins are rich,
And swell with expectations: shall we to
This vaulting businesse?




I shall hope my Lord
You will be silent in mine honour, when
You have enjoy'd me, and not boast my name
To your disgrace, nor mine.



Your name, why Lady?
By my desires I know it not: I hope
You have receiv'd a better character,
Than to suspect my blabbing: I'le not trust
My Ghostly Father with my sins, much lesse
Your name.



O let me flie into your arms,
These words command my freedome; I shall love
You above my self, and to confirm how much
I dare repose upon your faith, I'le not
Be nice to tell you who I am.







I am a Princess.











I'm glad a that, but of what Countrey Ladie?



And my dominions are more spreading than
Your brothers.



Ha? that's excellent; if the Villain
Do prosper with my wife, I'le marrie her.



I was not born to perch upon a Dukedom,
Or some such spot of earth, which the dull eyes
Examine by a magnifying glass,
And wonder at; the Roman Eagles never
Did spread their wings upon so manie shores,
The silver Moon of Ottomon looks pale
Upon my great Empire; Kings of Spain,

That now may boast their ground, doth stretch as wide
As day, are but poor Landlords of a Cell,
Compar'd to mine inheritance; the truth is,
I am the Devil.








Be not affrighted Sir, you see I bring
No horror to distract you: if this presence
Delight you not, I'le wearie a thousand shapes
To please my Lord.











A Devil? I see her cloven foot: I ha not
The heart to pray, Grimundo has undone me.



I did command my spirits to put on
Satyrs, and Nymphs to entertain you first,
Whiles other in the aire maintain'd a quire
For your delight: why do you keep such distance
With one that loves you? Recollect your self,
You came for pleasure, what doth fright my love?
See I am covetous to return delight,
And satisfie your lustful genius:
Come let us withdraw, and on the bed prepar'd
Beget a Race of smooth and wanton Devils 



Hold, come not near me; ha? now I compare
The circumstances, they induce me to
A sad belief, and I had breath enough

I would ask a question.



Anie thing, and be
Resolved.



How came Grimundo and your Devilship
Acquainted?



He hath been my Agent long,

  And hath deserv'd for his hypocrisie,
And private sins, no common place in hell,
He's now my favourite, and we enjoy
Each other dailie; but he never did
By anie service more endear my love,
Than by this bringing you to my acquaintance,
Which I desir'd of him long since, with manie
And fierce sollicite, but he urg'd his fear,
You were not ripe enough in sin for his
Discoverie.



I feel my self dissolve
In sweat.



My Lord, I must acknowledge, I
Have ever had you in my first regard
Of anie mortal sinner, for you have
The same propention with me, though with
Less malice, spirits of the lower world
Have several offices assign'd; some are
To advance pride, some avarice, some wrath;
I am for lust, a gay voluptuous Devil,
Come lets embrace, for that I love my Lord,
Do, and command a Regiment of hell,
They all are at your service.







Beside my Lord, it is another motive
To honour you, and by my chains which now
I have left behind, it makes me grow enamour'd;
Your wife that sayes her prayers at home, and weeps
Away her fight; O let me hug you for it,
Despise her vows still, spurn her tears agen
Into her eyes, thou shalt be Prince in hell,
And have a Crown of flames, brighter than that
Which Ariadne wears of fixed stars;
Come shall we dallie now?




Are dust alreadie, and I wear my flesh
Like a loose upper garment.




Be not so pale at Liver, for I see
Your blood turns coward, how would you be frighted
To look upon me cloath'd with all my horror,
That shudder at me now? call up your spirit.



There are too manie spirits here alreadie,
Would thou wert conjur'd, what shall I do?



What other than to bathe your soul in pleasure,

  And never heard of Ravishings; we two
Will progress through the aire in Venus Charriot,
And when her silver Doves grow faint and tire,

Cupid and Mercury shall lend us wings,
And we will visit new worlds when we are
Wearie of this, we both will back the winds,
And hunt the Phoenix through the Arabian Deserts,
Her we will spoil of all her shining plumes,
To make a blazing Coronet for thy Temples,
Which from the earth beheld, shall draw up wonder,
And puzzle learned Astronomie to distinguish it
From some new Constellation, the Sea
Shall yield us pastime, when inveloped
With clouds blacker than night, we range about;
And when with storms we overthrow whole Navies,
We'll laugh to hear the Mariners exclaim
In manie thousand shipwracks; what do I
Urge these particulars? let us be one soul,
Aire, earth, and hell is yours.



I have a suit,
But dare not speak.



Take courage, and from me
Be confident to obtain.



I am not well,
The name of Dill came too quick upon me,
I was not well prepar'd for such a sound,
It turn'd my blood to Ice, and I ha not
Recovered so much warmth yet, to desire
The sport I came for; would you please but to
Dismiss for me a time, I would return
When I have heat and strength enough for such
A sprightful action.



I do find your cunning,
You pretend this excuse but to gain time,
In hope you may repent.



And please your Grace
Not I.



You will acquaint some Priest or other,
A tribe of all the world I most abhor,
And they will fool you with their Ghostlie counsel,
Perplex you with some fond Divinitie,
To make you lose the glories I have promis'd.



I could never abide such melanchollie people.



In this I must betray, we spirits we have
No perfect knowledge of mens thoughts; I see
Your bloods infeebled, and although my love

  Be infinite, and everie minute I
Shall languish in your absence, yet your health
I must preserve, 'tis that feeds my hopes,
Hereafter I shall perfectlie enjoy thee;
You will be faithful, and return.







One kiss shall seal consent.



Her breath smells on brimstone.



For this time I'le dismiss you do not pray,
A spirit shall attend you.



Do not pray, when did I last? I know not, farewell horror,
He wants a wench that goes to the Devil for her.
Exeunt.







Enter Astella and Piero.



Touch me not Villain, pietie defend me,
Art thou a man, or have I all this while
Converst with some ill Angel in the shape
Of my Lords friend.



What needeth all this stir,
I urge your benefit.



To undo my name,
Nay soul for ever with one act.




There be those Ladies that have acted it
A hundred times, yet think themselves as good
Christians as other women, and do carrie
As much opinion too for vertue.







What harm can there be in't, can you neglect
Revenge so just, so easie, and delightful?



Thy breath doth scatter an infection.



Scatter a toy, be wise, and lose no time,
You know not when such opportunitle
May tempt you to't agen; for my own part
I can but do you a pleasure in't, your blood
Should need no other argument.




Emptie my veins, not to redeem thy soul,
Should sin betray mine honour to one loose
Embrace: hence Traytor, I do feel corruption
I'th aire alreadie, it will kill me if
I stay: hereafter I'le not wonder how

  My Lord became so wicked.



You will lead me
To some more private Room, I'le follow Madam.
Exeunt




More private Room said he? I smell a business, I thought this Gamester had been gone, is it e'ne so, have at your Burrough Madam, he's a shrewd Ferret I can tell you, and just in the nick here comes the Warrener.




This Devil does not follow me, nor anie of her Cubs I hope, I'm glad I came off so well, I never was so hot to engen∣der with the Night-mare; could Grimundo find no other crea∣ture for my coupling but a Succubus, methinks I smell the fiend still.



He talks on her alreadie.



I am verie jealous.



Not without a cause my Lord.



Ha? there she is agen.



No my Lord, she is new gone into the withdrawing chamber.



Ha? who? who is gone?



A Gentlewoman that you were late in companie with.



The Devil? look well about you then, a spirit
Of her constitution will set the house on fire
Instantlie, and make a young hell on't, when
Came she? I shall be everlastinglie haunted
With goblings, art sure thou sawest her?



Saw her, yes, and him too.







No not Grimundo, but I saw another Gentleman
That has been held a notable spirit,
Familiar with her.
















I wonot say what I think, but I think somewhat▪
And I know what I say, if she be a Devil, as she
Can be little less, if she be as bad as I imagine,
Some bodies head will ake for't, for mine own
Part I did but see and hear, that's all, and
Yet I ha not told you half.



Let me collect, sure this fellow by th' circumstance
Means Astella; thou talkest all this while of my Ladie
Doest not?



Yes my Lord, she is all the Ladies in the house;
For my Ladie and Mistriss was sent for
To the Abbey.




I had forgotten my self, this is new horror,

  Is my Ladie and Piero so familiar saist, and
In private?



What I have said, I have said; and what they have
Done, they have done by this time.



Done? and I'le be active too.



Shew what feats of activitie you please. Ex. Lod.

So so, now I am alone, which is, as
The learned say, Solus cum sola, I will entertain
Some honourable thoughts of my preferment. Enter Piere.

Hum, the Gamester is returned; what melanchollie? then.
He has don't, I'le lay my head to a fools Cap on'c,
I was alwayes so my self after my capring.
Did you not meet the Prince sir?



No, where is he?



He was here but now, and enquired how his Ladie did, and I told him you could tell the state of her bodie better than I. for 



I did but see her.



That's not the right on't, it runs for I did but kiss her, for

I did but kiss her.



It was enough for me to kiss her hand.

I am suspected, I must turn this fools discourse
Another way, the present theam is dangerous:
What I hear say Iacomo, your Ladie is like to rise?



My Ladie does rise as earlie as other Ladies do that go to bed late.



And there will be a notable preferment for you.



'Tis verie likelie my Ladie understands her self.



There is a whisper abroad.



'Tis a good hearing.



What if she be married in this absence?



Verie likelie; I say notthing, but I think I know my Ladies secrets for the triumph, as pageants, or run∣ning at tilt, you may hear more shortlie, there may be Reasons of State to have things carried privatelie, they will break out in Bells and Bonefires hereafter; what their Graces have intended for me I conceal.



He is wound up alreadie.



You are a Gentleman I shall take particular notice of.



But what if after all this imagination of a marriage, for∣tune should forbid the banes?



How? fortune's a slut, and because she is a whore her self, would have no Ladie marrie and live honest.








Ha my Lord I ha don't.







I ha pleas'd thy excellence, and you had made more haste, you might a come to the fall a'th'Deer.



Th'ast not enjoy'd her?



They talk of Iupiter, and a golden shower,
Give me a Mercury with wit and tongue,
He shall charm more Ladies on their backs,
Than the whole bundle of gods pshew.



Shoot not so much compass, be brief and answer me; hast thou enjoy'd her?



I have, shall I swear?



No, thou wilt be damn'd sufficientlie without an oath; in the mean time I do mean to reward your nimble dili∣gence: draw.







And you be so sharp-set I do mean to withdraw.
Exit.



I do mean to cut your throat, or perish i'th attempt, you see your destinie, my birth and spirit wo'not let me kill thee in the dark; draw, and be circumspect.



Did not you engage me to it? have I done anie thing but by your directions? my Lord.



'Tis all one, my mind is altered, I will see what com∣plexion your heart bears; if I hit upon the right vein, I may cure your disease a'th blood.



Hold, and there be no remedie, I will die better than I ha liv'd; you shall see sir that I dare fight with you, and if I fall by your sword, my base consent to act your will deserves it.







I find your policie, and by this storm
You'd prove my Resolution, how boldlie I

Dare stand to't when this great
Dishonour comes to question, prepare
To be displeased she is a miracle
Of Chastitie, impenetrable like
A marble, she returned my sinful arrows,
And they have wounded me; forgive me Ladie.



I prethee tell me true; now thou shalt swear,
Hast thou not don't.



Not by my hope of heaven
Which I had almost forfeited, had not she
Relieved me with her vertue; in this truth

  I dare resign my breath.




I dare believe thee:
What did I see in her to doubt her firmness?





Here they are Madam, you do not mean to
Run upon their weapons.



Piero thou shalt wonder.



What means my Lord?



You shall know that anon;
My Ladie go with me.




You shall not need to force me sir, you may
Lead me with gossamere, or the least thread
The industrious Spider weaves.







What furie thus transport him at some distance,

I'le follow him, he may intend some violence,
She is too good to suffer, I shall grow
In love with my conversion.
Exit.



Grow in love with a Cockscomb, his last words
Stick on my stomack still fortune forbid the banes
Quotha slid if fortune, should forbid the banes,
And my Ladie be not converted into a Dutchess
Where are all my offices?
Exit.




Know you not who they are my Lord this day
Receive the habit?



I can meet with no intelligence.



They are persons of some qualitie 



The Duke does mean to grace their Ceremonie.



He was invited by the Abbot to their cloathing.



Which must be in private too, here in his lodgings.



Well we shall not long expect 'em, his Grace enters.




It helpt much that he never saw my wife.



Dost think 'twill take?



There's some hope my Lord alreadie,
And heaven may prosper it.



We cannot endear thee to thy merit.



How the Duke embraces him.





Cleona you are welcom, 'tis a blest
Occasion that makes us meet so happilie.



It pleas'd my Lord Abbot to invite me hither.



I appear'd too upon his friendlie summons,
We'll thank him for this presence.












We kneel to be received into the number
Of those Religious men that dedicate
Themselves to heaven i'th'habit of St. Bennet,

And humblie pray that you would rectifie
And teach our weak devotion the way
To imitate his life, by giving us
The precepts of your order.



Let me tell you,
You must take heed the ground of your Resolve
Be perfect; yet look back into the spring
Of your desires, Religious men should be
Tapers, first lighted by a holie beam:
Meteors may shine like stars, but are not constant.



We covet not the blaze, which a corrupt
And slimie matter may advance, our thoughts
Are flam'd with charitie.



Yet ere you embark,
Think on your hard adventure, there is more
To be examin'd beside your end,
And the Reward of such an undertaking;
You look on heaven afar off, like a land-skip,
Whether wild thoughts like your imperfect eye,
Without examination of those wayes,
Oblique and narrow are transported, but

  I'th walk and tryal of the difficulties
That interpose, you tire like inconsiderate
And wearie Pilgrims.



We desire to know
The Rules of our obedience.




Your Resolutions; can your will, not us'd
To anie Law beside it self, permit
The knowledge of severe and positive limits?
Submit to be controul'd, imploy'd sometime
In servile offices, against the greatness
Of your high birth and sufferance of nature?
Can you, forgetting all youthful desire,
And memorie of the worlds betraying pleasures,
Check wanton heat, and consecrate your blood
To Chastitie, and holie solitude?



I wonot be Religious Giotto.



Nor I, upon these terms, I pitie em.



Can you quit all the glories of your state,
Resign your titles and large wealth, to live
Poor and neglected, change high food and surfets
For a continual fasting, your down-beds
For hard and humble lodging, your gilt Roofs
And Galleries for a melanchollie Cell,
The pattern of agrave, where, stead of musick
To charm you into slumbers, to be wak'd
With the sad chiming of the sacring Bell;
Your Robes, whose curiositie hath tyred
Invention, and the Silk-worm to adorn you,
Your blaze of Jewels, that your pride have worn
To burn out Envies eyes, must be no more
Your ornament, but coarse, and rugged cloathing
Harrow your skins; these, and manie more
Unkind austerities will much offend
Your tender constitutions; yet consider.



He does insist much on their state and honour:
May we not know em yet?



One of them sir
Doth owe this character.
Gives him a paper.






  I find his noble purpose, he is perfect:
I honour thee young man, she must not see
This paper.
Gives another paper.



This doth speak the other Sir.



'Tis at large ha Grimundo, I prithee read,
I dare not credit my own eyes: Leonora,

So it begins, Leonora.





Leonora, Daughter to the late Gonzaga, Duke
Of Millan, fearing she should be compelled to marry
Her Uncle, in the habit of a Page, and the conduct
Of Father Valentio, came to Savoy, to try the
Love and honour of his Excellence, who once
Solicit•d by his Embassador 



No more, I am extasied;
If so much blessing may be met at once,
Ile do my heart that justice to proclaim
Thou hadst a deep impression; as a boy
I lov'd thee too, for it could be no other,
But with a Divine flame; fair Leonora,

Like to a perfect magnes, though inclos'd
With an Ivorie box, through the white wall
Shot forth imbracing vertue: now, oh now
Our Destinies are kind.



This is a misterie, Dulcino?



No my Lord, I am discovered;
You see Leonora now, a Millan Ladie,
If I may hope your pardon 




Thou dost enrich my heart: Cleona read,
And entertain the happiness to which
Thy Fate predestin'd thee, whilst I obey
Mine here.
Cleona reads.



How, my Lord Foscari?

If he be living, I must die before
This separation be confirm'd; my joy
Doth overcome my wonder; can you leave
The world, while I am in't?





Then willinglie I dispence with my intention,
And if the Duke have found another Mistris,

  It shall be my devotion to pray here,
And my Religion to honour thee.



Manie blessings crown this union.



Your pardon gracious Princesse,

I did impose too much.





To be your grateful Servant, as your self
Unto the fair Cleona; we are all happie.





They're here; by your leave Brother, my Lord Abbot,
Witness enough.



Why thus kneels Lodwick?



To make confession Brother, and beg heavens,
And everie good mans pardon, for the wrong

I ha done this excellent Ladie, whom my soul
New marries, and may heaven ha, do not hold
A justice back: Grimundo is a traitor,
Take heed on him, and say your praiers; he is
The Devils grand Solicitor for souls.
He hath not such another cunning engine i'th
World to ruine vertue.







You are no hypocrite: he does everie night
Lie with a Succubus; he brought me to one,
Let him denie it; but heaven had pittie on me.
Enter Belinda.

Ha! there she is: do you not see her? Devil

I do defie thee: my Lord, stand by me:

I will be honest spight of him and thee,
And lie with my own Wife.



Sure the Prince is mad.



O rise most noble Ladie, well deserving
A statue to record thy vertue.







This is Grimundo's Wife.



'Tis so, my Lord.



No Devil, but the servant of your vertue,
That shall rejoice if we have thriv'd in your conversion.







Have I bin mockt into honestie?
Are not you a Furie? and you a slie and subtile Epicure?




I do abhor the thought of being so:
Pardon my seeming, Sir.



O go not back,

  Prevent thus seasonable your real torment.




I am fullie wakened, be this kisse the Pledge
Of my new heart.



True love stream in your bosomes;
Ladie forgive me too.







Our joy is perfect: Lodwick salute
A Sifter in this Ladie Leonora,

The object of our first love; take the story
As we return: Lord Abbot we must thank
You for contriving this; and you good Father.
Embassadors shall be dispatcht to Millan,

To acquaint 'em where, and how their absent Princess

Leonora hath dispos'd her self; meanwhile,
Poets shall stretch invention, to express
Triumphs for thee, and Savoys happiness.
Exeunt Omnes.



