





NO, Fromund, I have had too many proofs
Of thy Fidelity, to doubt it now.



Sir, if you were not Filamor, nor Son
To my Prince, if I were not your sworn Servant;
Without relation, meerly for your Virtues,

Fromund would sacrifice his life to serve you
In this Design against your Step-Mother,
Your envious and imperious Step-Mother,
Who rules your Father, and would r•ine You.



The difficulty of the work will be,
When we have got my Father to the Woods,
How we shall keep him there: for since he marry'd
This Woman, she has master'd both his Courage
And Reason; she governs his very Soul,
He cannot live without her.




Whose pow'r can ballance hers, for your Old Father
Dotes but on two, his Wife and that great Scholar
My Friend.



And you can make him ours.




What I am to present him from your Highness
Will make him Yours.







If he once ingages
Nothing can alter him, he's an honest man▪
Peev•sh, but (to our comfort) Covetous:
Yet he'l not take a Bribe to do unjustly;
But if he be imploy'd, he will be pay'd,
This Gold and this rich Book will sweeten him.



Attacque him; I wait for my severe Mistress,
'Tis Princess Caesarina's walking-time.



Fromund claps Tetrick on the Back.



The Prince's Tutor? Well return'd to Britain.



Our good old Master's Favorite, learn'd Tetrick.



Out of what Region have the Clowds drop▪
Fromund?
Where all this while wert thou and our young Prince?



We liv'd where Grapes grow, like our Crabs, in
hedges,
Where every Tree looks lovelier then this Garden,

  3In Italy, the Paradise of Nature



The plague of War consume your Paradise;
The Galls over-run Italy again;
Ten thousand Dropsies, Cramps and Gouts torment
That leg of earth.



Still snarling my friend Tetrick?



Men may well snarle when they are us'd like Dogs,
As we have been, by our Italian Masters.



But now the Roman Legions are call'd back,
And we are free-men, Britain is old Britain.




But Italy is still curs'd Italy,

I would not hear thee praise it any more,
For twenty pieces of Imperial Gold.



I'l try what pow'r one piece has over you. aside.

This Medall (Caesar grav'd in gold) I brought
From Rome for thee: and is not Italy

(Where these Flowers grow) a most delicious Country?



The Garden of the World! how blind was I,
That could not see the Beauty of Italy

Till I had wip'd my eyes with Caesar's Picture;
Now I perceive the errour of my Judgment;
Why should we hate Countries that hurt not us?
The Roman Yoke galls not our necks: you see
Our old Lord, Prince of Verulam, dares own
His Title: and what Curiosities
Has our young Prince brought from the Nursery
Of Arms and Arts, sweet Italy?





And Voices, such a Trebble and a Base 



How merrily shall we live  pox o' the devill.
Pon•ia, Caesarina, and Brianella walk over the Stage.

There's the confoundress of thy Master's musique,

  4Pluto could not have rak'd him ou• of hell
Such a Step-Mother, she reigns o're his Father.



But the date of her Sovereign pow'r i• out▪
By this time the old Prince is in our hands,
We have him in the Woods.



And long you'l keep him;
His very first reflexion on the fury
Or slat•ery of's Wife, posts him to Court,
He'l leave you.



'Tis expected; therefore, Tetrick,

My Master has sent me to ingage you,
If th'old Prince change his mind, you can perswade him,
He believes all you say.




You say, or do; your Plot's a scurvy Plot.



But you can mold it into a better form.



Nay, since you can begin your plots without me,
End e'm without me.



And shall I return
The Prince this answer?







Shall I return his Princely Present too?



That is to be consider'd of let's fee't.



Alas, 'Tis only a poor Table-Book,
The cover is but Gold and set with Rubies,
Not worth your looking on




Without fee, I'd have been o'th' Prince's Counsel,
And the Cause shall go with him, never fear 't;
But they say, the Step-mother's inquiring
For Witches, th•y'l discover all we do.



That she may seek no further, I have told
Her Favorite, my Mistriss Brianella,


  5That yesternight there came into the Woods
A Bard, that's a Witch-maker:




By any means must be attended by
A Conju•er and a Witch to learn their Trades.



I'l be the Witch, I think my face will serve;



And Schollars make rare Conjurers, I'l play my part,
Come, bring me now to kisse your Masters hand.


Enter Pontia, Caesarina, and Brianella.



Stir Caesarina, only exercise,
Can prevent th' undermining of thy Colour
By the Green Sickness, that long gravel walk
Did alwayes please thee.



When I was in breath,
But I'm grown too short-winded for a walk
Of this length, Madam, I shall ne'r hold out.



One quarter of an hour, and I'l release thee.
Exit Caesarina▪
But Brianella, art thou sure thou saw'st

Filamor in the Arbor?




With him a Flamen, and a winged Boy
That should be Cupid, perhaps Priest and God
Will in some Dialogue present themselves
To Princesse Caesarina; the Prince said,
They should sing the Description of a Triumph▪



Then I shall now see whether Filamor

Continue still his Love to Caesarina,

And how she looks on him after his Travails;
Lets to the close walk, my Son Adolph's there.





  6Filamor discover'd in an Arbor, with a Lute in his hand; on either side the Arbor, on two pedestals, Cupid stands, and the Fla∣men kneels: as Caesarina walks by they sing.



Why unarm'd, poor Cupid, pr'y thee,
Tell a Mortal how tis with thee?



To one Mortal, what another
Has committed, may be told;
I am plunder'd, so's my Mother.



What frail Man durst be so bold?



No, to make us more inglorious,
Tis a Woman that's Victorious.







They (who saw her)
Say, she rides in Triumph here,
That my Mother's white Doves draw her
In their Chariot.











By a sure Token,
Thy Torch quench'd, and thy Bow broken,
Makes her Trophie; Captives follow.



One Slave Sorrow's Livery wears,
His Eyes sink, his Cheeks fall hollow,
In his Face his fate appears.



That Slaves Filamon; no Lover


Suffers in Love's Cause so sadly,






Him a favour; I would gladly:
But I am her Captive too.


  7Chorus.The World's grown so stupid
That now 'tis in fashion
To pray to God Cupid,

If a Man have a passion,
He that hopes for a Cure,
Must get it of Beauty,
Or else do his Duty.
That's Dye, or Indure.




Has Filamor been so long out of Britain,

To forget Caesarina is your Daughter?
Court her without your leave?







That's more then you know (by your favour, Madam)



He kneels, see. aside







Heav'n is in your Eyes,
Disorder not that beauty with a frown
On your Adorer; if my love displease,
Be not offended with my gratitude,
I name you in my Hymnes, as shipwrack't men
Sing to the Deities which have preserv'd them▪
By virtue of that sacred word, your Name,
I have out-liv'd the pains of death in absence,
At my return to you, dearer then life,
Friends, Father, or our common Mother Britain;
Will you, for want of one poor smile, destroy me?



Make not your self a Supplicant to me,
Prince Filamor, kneel where you owe a Duty;
Kneel to the Gods, to grant you Understanding,

  8That you may see, I cannot love; and then
To one that can love you, apply your self;
You have my counsel and resolve.




Leave me not to despair; though all my sighs
Breath'd on the aire of Italy, were lost
At such a distance; now we'r met again;
May not pray'rs alter your severity?



Can prayers alter a Decree of Fate?



Pray'rs joyn'd with services: if Verulam

Open too narrow a Prospect for your eye
I'l draw my sword, and merit from my Country
Th'inlargement of our bounds.




The humours of Ambition; I'm afraid
The Milk she suckt from my Breast will betray her.



To be the first on Mountains, in poor hovells,
Rather then t'have the second place in Rome,

Was Caesar's wish, but 'tis not Caesarina's;
Your Cottages cannot make me a Court;
I'm not like Ladies newly come to London,

Who from the vast height of Diana's Temple
Look down, and please their eyes with little people,

Ob•ects, that are not magnify'd, I s•orn;
The Prince that would dis•over his Dominions,
Let him turn the Prospective Glass to me
At the right End, great Subjects I must fee.







For my friends sake, would she did yield.



Great Subjects! all our British Lords shall kneel
To Caesarina; I have form'd it thus,
You know the Kentish-men have took up arms
Against the Trinobants, the Lond••ers▪

  9Whilst Scots and Borderers, with their deadly feuds,

Ingage the Northern parts in Civil Warr;
No sooner from the Roman Slavery
This Iland's free, but we (like mad-men arm'd)
Die our white-feather'd shafts in our own blood;
Against these Enemies to the Publick Peace
I'l make a League, and fight my Country's battails,
Till I fix Britain in a Settlement.
Then, as the best means to keep Peace, (thus Purchas'd
By me) I may with confidence presume,
The Wisedome of the Nation for their King
Will chuse their General; who shall lay down,
At Caesarina's feet, his British Crown.




Filamor, you have had a pleasing Dream,
And I was loath to wake you, till I found
My self concern'd; Britain you may subdue,
If you fight well: but for your fancy'd Conquest
Of Caesarina, let me undeceive you:
'Tis true, I have declar'd for Sovereignty,
The Title of a Queen I dote upon;
But if you offer'd me a Crown, I should
Refuse it as Gold poison'd by the giver.



Fly Brianella, and relieve my daughter,
She comes off bravely; tell her, I and Adolph

Stay for her; bid one call my Generall.





Will you not love? then I'l revenge you hatred.







On my self, I feel my Spirits,
Like those the Chymist is extracting, search
Their brittle prison, with a hope to find
Some Vent, and then to fly into the Wind.



In that point you may use your own discretion.





Madam, your Mother's in the Sicamor-Walk.



I shall attend her. 
Exit Caesarina.





I'l stay, and get newes aside.

Out of my Servant. 
He whispers Fi•amor.





Tetrick w•its you, Sir,
With modells for a Mask, he has already
Made your Witch-maker's Prophesie; I'l play
A Witch, Tetrick will be a Conjurer,

•assus the Bard, and we'l shew your weak Father
What a pernitious Wife he doates upon:
Exit Filamor.

What a•les he now, that he has lost his tongue?
Has not the Princess vex'd him?







And will not vo• vex me so?




For, you love me, you say:



I'l swear it, Madam.



What will not men swear; but swear your heart out,
You never shall swear me out of my Reason.



Reason! I warrant, Tetrick reads to you
The Mathematicks, you think nothing certain
But D•monstration.




Nothing but Proof is certain.




And we will prove, that One and Two make Three.




I will not two and three, pray leave your •ooling,



In ser•ou• earne•t, I would marry you.








Without a Portion you'r a Fortune, Madam▪



Thou art a flatt'ring Knave, I doubt




Your self, please to lay your Commands upon me.



I've no Commands for you, but I've some Questions.



Which if I answer not 



You'l hold your peace:
How many Duells did you fight at Rome▪







Answer me like a Gentleman,
Was't for your Mistris?



It concern'd You, Madam.



How do you look when you lie▪




But joyn'd with all our noble British Beauties,
Whose Honour a base Roman had traduc'd.







Your Cause slew him by my hand.



Modestly spoke; Had you no hurt?




An Artery, which pos'd th' Italian Surgeons.



Since, you your self have study'd Surgery?



Would all Gentlemen spent their time no worse;
I have found out some Secrets.




VVhat do you call't?







Wil't cure the Tooth-ake?







No, it may prov• Love-Pouder, then twill cause
The Heart-ake: in spight of my own and Love's teeth
I'l k•ep my heart whole. Now to my last Quaere,

  12What design has your Charge upon the Princess,
I see in thy sweet looks, there is some plotting.








But I shall know't, my Lady will tell me,
And she'l know't if there be a Witch in Britain.




What is thy Lady going to the Devill?
But let her go, for ther•'s other way
To sound the bo•tom of Prince Filamor,

He's forty •athom deep below my plummit,
She goes to a wisewoman?




To go to a Wiseman, to the VVitch-maker,
The Bard; who came last night into a Cave
In our VVoods, you shall bring me to the Bard,



Fie! the Bard sings only to Princes Ears,
His Prentices, VVitches, and Conjurers
Answer Great Ladies; I'l commend you to
Th'old Witch that deals in Palmistry; but then
I'l be your husband.



VVho shall be my husband
The VVitch must tell me.



And that Witch I'l be. 
Exit Fromund.





I live again, my Children ar• be•ome
The•r Mother's Parents: when thou, my dear Adolph,

Look'dst with the •yes of pious rage and scorn
Upon the Sacriledg of Filamor,

Who (without leave from me) durst court thy Sister,
Then my Soul clos'd in your dead Father's Urne,
Sprung from his ashes; but when Caesarina

Stood the temptation of a Showre of Gold,

  13Such as the Poets dream'd not of, a Crown
Offer'd her by a Prince, wise, young and handsome;
But yet my Enemy, then I felt the joys
Of Immortality, to see my self
Mother to a Beauty, born to revenge me
Upon a Villain.



Villain? then Fame is 




Filamor's Fool. Before he went to Rom•,


Filamor had the art of coz'ning Fame:
For with a Rebels Impudence he mask't
Foul Treasons under fair and specious Names:
The disimpowering me to rule my Husband
(An affront not to be forgiv'n) he call'd
Friendship to Adolph, Love to Caesarina:
He's now return'd improv'd in Villany,
Therefore tis time he went a longer Voy•ge.



And whether will you send him now?




Nor shall he go so far alone; his Father,



And his Sister Violinda

Shall bear him Company; th' indignity,
He would have put on me, shall ruine him
And his whole Family; I did not think
(When this Match with Sylvanus was first treated)
Occasion durst be giv'n, but I resolv'd
It should be taken; for I that was born
A Prince, and no mean Beauty, certainly
Would never have bury'd my self alive
In the cold Grave of an Old Prince's Bed,
But to rise up with his Crown on my head.
The principality of Verulam,

Which I am marry'd to, I'l joyn to that
Of Malden, which is my Inheritance,



But Madam, is this Justice?




Let honest men, that go to Law, have Justice:
Sub•ects may plead th•ir Titles, Princes must
Dispute what's Advantageous, not what's Just:
A Crown he merits, who piles Tow'r on Tow'r
To scale the Stars, and ri••le Soveraign Pow'r:
But he that puts himself into a fright
With empty sounds, meer Terms of Wrong and Rights.
Is sitter (when his Conscience checks at them)
To wear a Mitre then a Diadem.





Madam, my Lord General,




Are not our Orders s•nt away to Malde•▪
That I see your Lieutennant-General •ere▪



Yes•erday your Expr•ss came to his hand
In Malde•.




Pres•ntly I hors'd the Foot,
We march'd all night, and by the break of da•

I brought your Army into Barnet-Woods,
Whic• is within a League of Verulam,

Wh•re s•fe and undiscover'd they are lodg'd
Till my Lord General C•ispus please to come.




Capito, you've been active in my Servic•.
Our thanks is but th' earnest of your reward,
Ha! w•o are these?



Two of my Life-Guard,







No, Madam, Roman Gladiators, Sword-men,
We call them Masters of Defence,







Men that fear nothing, death's their play-fellow,
Th•y dye upon the Stage •o please Spectators,



But w•re thes• kind of men ever imploy'd
In a great Action?



In the Servile War;
They brought it to a measuring cast at Rome,

Which should Command in Chief the Lords or Slaves.



I'• have '•m for my own Guard, tel• '•m so;



G•ntlemen, tis the pleasure of my Prin•e,
On the account of Valour and of Service,
To intrust you with the Guard of her Person.



Tis a high •onour; Gracchus, I had rathe•

Be trusted with her Daughter,




Pox, that a Swan's N•st, this poor Iland should
Have more great Beauties then the sever•d World.



That narrow Seas should breed such Venuses,



That Brittish Whales should play with such sweet Mermaids.



We make short Meales, you may dine ere you go.



Tis past Twelve, if by One we be a Horse-back,
We shall return by Three to do your Work.



Then you'l have time to hear what good success
The Brittish Bard will promise, do you look
Your General's Commission be drawn up
For the Conqu•st of Verulam; come my Lord.
Exeunt Pon. Cri. Cap. Bri. Gra•. and Se•.







My Mother us'd to give us better Precepts,



She was good-natur'd, and had sense of Honour,



And of R•ligion; but now she leaves
The Temples of the Gods, to •onsult Witches,

  16As Brianella tells me; I suppose
The General must go with her, she knows we
Are for no such black Voyages, tis strange
The General should, for he's a man of Honour.



Was not our Mother once as strict as he
In point of Honour, but she's chang'd; this comes
Of Ma•ice; Sister, take you heed of Malice,
Outside and inside you'r my Mother's Picture,
In hate to Filamor you resemble her.



I have th' ayr of her Face, not of her Vices;
I love not Filamor, as you do, Brother,
B•t would not be his murdress, like my Mother.



You would not with a Dart or Poniard kill
Prince Filamor, but with a Frown you will:
It were an Honour by your Hand to dye,
My Friend falls sa•lly, murder'd by your Eye.




Can he be murder'd, who has pow'r to live?



He has no pow'r, but what you please to give▪
Lov'd Sister, save my dear Friend's life, and make
The noblest person happy, for my sake.



Can you (who to a Brother's love pretend)
Ruine your Sist•r to preserve your Friend?







Free Love forc'd, d•stroys
More then our Fortunes, or our Lives, our Joyes;
I'l here no more on't.



So, you'l part in anger,
And take this fair occasion to break promise?







Did not you promise me, to beg
Princess•Violindas's Picture?




But you shall have it.



Thou art my best Sister.



But if I get y' her Picture, you must do
Something for me.



Something, nay any thing;
Still my best Sister.



But when I enjoyn you
To take off him, for whom you thus torment me, aside

I shall be your worst Sister; for this Picture,
You will do whatsoever I Command?



Give me her Picture, and command my Life.



A Lover's life? what's that? some Authors say,
You've one to keep, and eight to give away:
Muster your nine Lives, Brother, if you'l stand
My Charge, for 'tis your Patience I•l Command.








BLessing on Blessing fall upon my Son,
Faster then tears fall from my Eyes for Joy
To see thee in my Arms, I•l keep thee her•,
Thou shalt travail no more.



Yes, if I say,
That 'tis not fit your wife should govern you.



Alas! I could not •at nor sleep in quiet,
Till I had to•d her, that 'twas thy advice:
Excuse the weakness of thy Father's age,
I was not born a Cowr'd.




Is one of Brinains memorable Fortunes;
For when Arcadius and Honorius lost
Their Laurell to the Scots, then you defeated
A Cohort of the Roman Horse of Malde•.




A man would think those Romans ran away
VVith my commanding Pow'r, for, ever since
I marry'd Pontia, I've serv'd under her,
She shall obey me now.



Spoke like a Prince
That und•rstands the duty of his Subjects.



I'l have no Governess but if my wi•e
Kn•w of our Meeting  



VVhat will your wife do?



She'l take 't unkindly, and I would not grieve her▪
Because she Loves me; she'l not stay thus long
From me  by this she's in my Bed-Chamber,
And misses me.



No, Sir, no Creature comes
Into your Bed-Chamber, the doors are bolted,
And your Physitians (fee'd by me) give out,
You rested not last Night, and have took something
To pro•ure sleep.



Then Filamor makes this
A day of happiness to his old Father.



Sir, you'l make this day happy to your Children,
If you'l lay your Commands on Violinda

To Love her Servant, my brave Friend, Prince Adolph;
I am a Suitor for him.




And two such Suitors must have no denial.



My Brother knows, Sir, that I love Prince Adolph,

As much as he loves Filamor•





'Tis enough in all conscience, Violinda.




In conscience: Violinda should love him
As much as he loves her, he doats upon her.



Then I would have thee doat upon him too.




Adolph's my Brother's Friend, and Caesarin•

Is my Friend; Sir, for both I have a •riendship:
Bu• that I should love Caesarina's Brother
Unless she's loves my Brother, there's no reason.



No reason, Girl, I am for thee again.



Away, you triffler, you spin out the time,
Knowing I must prepare for th' entertainment
Of my Step-Mother.




Comes she to the Wood,







My wife shall not come to me,
I'l go to her.



She shall not see you here,
Pray, stay, Sir.



Cross me not; I vow I'l go.






I must call Tetrick to him: Come away
My Father's leaving us.




Of me, but when you'r at a loss; I'l meddle
With no blown business.



Keep him in the Woods,
And I will make thee Lord of the whole Forest,




My humour's peevish, Sir, but my hearts good;
I'l stop your Father's hast: Sir, I must Charm you.



A Conjurer? I will so devill thee, 
he beats Tetrick.



Hold, hold your hand Sir; I'm your Servant Tetrick▪







I am justly punish'd
For looking ugly.



Follow me, thou know'st
My sweet wife loves me.



That's the Question, Sir
Be pleas'd to stay and you will hear 't determin'd;
Mat•er of Fact 's this, The Princess of Malden,

Your wife, intended to have dealt with Witches
For the bewitching you (some say) to death:
Your Son diverts her with the arti•ice
Of setting up (as she thinks) a Witch-maker,
Call'd (for the singing of's Predictions)
The British Bard; as soon as she has din'd
Your wife co•es to the Bard's Cave, then you'l know
Whether she loves or hates you.




But hide me from my wife.



She shall not see you. 
Exit Syl. and Fil▪




Fromund, I Conjure thee, appear O Witch.



All goes as well as heart can wish, th' old Prince
Is now ingag'd.





My Mistr•ss, with a Basket full of Plate,
Her Lady's offering to the British Bard:
You owe me thanks for 't, I hinted the Plate,
We must help one another,




Enter Brianella, and her Maid with a Basket.


I'l make teee tell h•r Fortune; speak out Sister,
You do so mumble, what would y' have me do?



Move the great Witch-maker, the British Bard,
To inlarge my Commission with power
Of Life and Death, over Plants, Beasts, and Men.







Sooner or latter, I am sure,
I must come to the Faggot and the Fire;
Shall I be burn'd for nothing?




You must tell Fortunes by the Hand; next Spring▪
I'l move the Bard for you, pretty sweet Sister.



In the mean time, if I might but bewitch
Dumb Creatures, only Monkeys, Cats, and Dogs:
A scurvy proud young Widow, yesternight,
Call'd me old Beldam, let me but bewitch
Her little Dog; though she bears patiently
The loss of a kind Husband, yet the death of
Her little Dog (I'm sure) will break her heart.



Teach me? I'l pull thy nose off, and that Dog
Shall eat it: go, take from that noble Lady
That Basket full of Plate, look in her hand
And tell her Fortune.





Your hand I'm prevented.



But Mother, Mother, I hope we shall meet,



At the Mark-Beech, an hour hence.




O Madam! they know all things; the Magician

  22Could tell me, 'twas a Basket full of Plate.



Ministers of Fate, I come to know the Issue
Of a design of Blood.



My Song will fit her aside.

Madam, we'r not impowr'd to answer Princes,
That's reserv'd for the Bard himself, who now
In the Bard's Cave is discovered a man with a grey beard, in a Russet Gown, sleeping with a Harp in his hand.
Lyes in a Trance: I'l hold up to his Soul
Your Princely Off'ring, with the names of those
You vow to death, if you'l but write them down,
'Tis the Bard's Custome.



Bring Pen, Ink and Paper. 
She writes, and gives the Paper to Tetrick.

Tetrick reads the List.

DIS MANIBUS. Pontia devotes to hell Filamor, Violinda and Sylvanus.


So, I've her Treason, now, under her hand.







With our usual Ceremony
Of Musique and a Dance.

Tet. and From. hold up to the Bard the List and the Basket, to which Sergius points.



Look you there Sirrha,
Barbara de pictis veni Bascauda Britannis:
That British Bascaud would sell well at Rome.




So would the pretty Maid that brought the Vascaud;
But Princess Caesarina for my money.



Tetrick and Fromund fall into a Dance, then comes in another Conjurer, and another Witch, and from under his Coat and her Gown, drop out two little Familiars, an he and a she. At the end of this Antique, the Bard wakes, a•d sings.

The Bard's Song.On the Poplars and Oaks
When the white Raven croaks,
And the crafty young Fox withdrawes,
With the fair Fawn
Through a green Lawn
Iust into the Lion's pawes:
Then the Scene of Blood is acted;
Then the Wood- Nymphs run distracted;
The Mandrake shrieks,
The Moon's pale cheeks
Look dark;
But hark,
Brasse Ba•ons and Trumpets are sounding;
See, see, how soon
They thunder the Moon
Out of the Eclipse she was drown'd in.
What should we fear?
The Sun shines clear;
No Mist on the Hill,
Not a Clowd in the Skie:
The Lark sings shrill,
And the Swallow flyes high.









The Generall's Commission, under Seal.



You'r now impowr'd to conquer Verulam; Pontia gives the Commission to Crispus.

What do you think of the success presag'd?
My Lord, what's your opinion of the Bard?



First, Madam, give me leave to hear your judgment.



I take him to be somewhat more then humane;
He speaks the Language of another World,
So well; that his expressions are all Picture;
The fair Fawn, the young Fox, and the white Raven
Is clearly my old Husband and his Children;
The Moon e•lyps'd that's I, whose light is drown'd
Till your victorious Drums and Trumpets sound:
You have my sense, give me your own; I know

Crispus to be a man of so much worth,
He scorns to flatter any Prince; speak freely.



E're we end our discourse, I'le clear that point:
She'l find I am no flatterer, I have watcht
A long time for this opportunity, aside.

To s•t a Look•ng-glass before her Soul:
Then freely (since I have it in command)
I think our D•uids Prophets; but our Bards

(Like all the tribe of Fortune-tellers) Juglers.



Th•n you believe not this to be a Vision;
What do you think it is?




From his confederate Knaves; you are betray'd.



And so, you would advise, not to proceed?



Madam, had I been of your Cabinet-Counsel,
You should not have begun it. What's, your quarell?
Th'Opinion, That Wives should not rule their Husbands,
For words spoken by a Child (for then
Prince Filamor was not sixteen years old,
You'l ruine him, his Sister, and your Husband;
Strange grounds for murdring Princes, and for Vesting
All their Dominions in your self.




Some Counsellors that are as wise as You,
Have approv'd both the Grounds and the Design.



If by wise, your Highness means Politique,
I grant those Counsellors were more wise than I:
For, my simplicity will never flatter
My Prince into a Deity; I cannot
Tell you, that Princes are exempted from
The Law of Nations; that Revenge and Murd•r
(Stains in the Meane) are Triumphs to the Great:
I cannot find out Presidents for Injustice,
Nor instance (as your Flatterers have done)
That if particular Rights had been preserv'd,
The World had been unconqu•r'd, Macedon

One private Kingdom still, and Rome another.



What are the M•xims upon which you build?



My Principles are Hones•y and Honour,
Jewels of value in a poor man's hand,
Inestinmable in a Prince's Breast:
How happy our Posterity will live
Under a Prince charact••'d by a Druid
Who prophecies that you little British Princes
Shall kneel to one King, and describes him.




May we hear the description?




So much as shews the great disparity
Between You and that Monarch: Thus 't begins,
Now in Britain reigns a King,
Young and act•ve as the Spring;
And pray observe it, Madam, thus it ends,
He has Valour, such as might
For the whole World safely fight:
Wisdome, which could rule it too;
But he's Just, and will not do
For a thousand Worlds one Wrong:
Never did his spirit long,
On another Prince's Throne
(By meer Pow'r) to raise his own.
And so far, for any ends,
Is he from destroying Friends,
Th at ev'n his Enemies confesse
His Mercy to the Mercilesse.
Make this Just King your Pattern.



Saw•y fool; She strikes the Commission out of his hand.

Deliver your Commission; we shall chuse
A Generall, not a Tutor.



Humbly thus, He layes down his Commission at her feet.

My publique Person I put off, and pray,
That, as a private man, I may be heard.



But not for your Commission; young man,
You have a Successor: he's in my •ye;





For him I move,
(In reference to your safety) that you'l put him

  27Into immediate Action, else you'r lost.
For (if I understand the Bard) you lie
Open to Filamor, your plot's betray'd,
Your life at stake: the Question is not now,
On what ill Grounds you have begun, but how
(Being ingag'd) you may preserve your Self.
That's a Just Cause, in which your nicest Subject
May draw his Sword with honour.




In a Just Cause, to be our Generall,
Then noble Crispus? There, take your Commission.



No, Madam; as the Romans manumit
Their Slaves, you have freed Crispus with a blow;
You struck me, as men strike their swounding friends,
To bring me to my Senses: hitherto,
Devotion to your service first, and then
My own concern (both as to Fame, and Fortune)
Gave me the trouble of distracted hopes:
Now all the lines of my Ambition
Meet in one little point (touch•d by your hand,)
I centre in my Self: fix'd to enjoy
The pleasure of a private life; retirement
From splendor, and from Care, which pr•sses in
To gilded Rooms; Porters at Prince's Gates
Could never keep out Care and Fear, two strangers
To low-rooft Houses, where I'l live and dye.



Will Crispus do a Service to his Prince
With such disservice, as to let me know
My Cause is just, and make the World suspect it,
By quitting the Imployment?




Should the Gods send their winged Messenger
With that Commission, and all their Hands to it,

  28The Go•s should pardon me. He offers to go.




Stay, if he goes,
In my Attempt I can proceed no further;
We may use valiant Rogues to do a Murder; aside.

But Polititians are concern'd to find
Persons of Wort•, when Conquests are design'd.

Crispus, how high a value I have for thee,
Let my great Heart demonstrate, which descends
B•low it self, to an acknowledgment
That I have wrong'd theee.



When I serve again,
I'l take up your Commission.




Then I stand up my self, your Prince, Accept it
From my Command.



You may command my Head,
My Hand shall be my Subject.




Though you'l not hear your Prince; you censure m•

For secking to destroy a Family
For a Boy's words; yet for a Woman's words
(And she your Sovegraign) you can dispense
With Loyalty in your self, abandoning
Your Prince to her awaken'd Enimies.



Justly I am rebuk'd; upon my knee He takes up the Commis∣sion.

I beg your pardon, and accept your favour;
Longer to hold you in discourse, were dan∣gerous
To your Affairs; I take my humble leave:
Now that your Sword is in my Hand again,
It shall not freeze, I'l strike a suddain blow;
Fortune's swift-turning Wheel deceives the slow.






Capito, you perceive, that in our Army
You hold the second Place, to have the first;
At the next Vacancy



Let me serve your Highness
In any Place, 'tis to my hand alike,
To bear a Truncheon or to trail a Pike. 
Exit Capito.




Other men are Fles• and Blood, the General, Fire;
Here were a Husband now, if one could catch him:
Old Witch, I'l venture at thy Lottery
All my Gold, but I'l draw a General.



The suddain blow tis I must strike, not Crispus;
Before he comes, Filamor may be fled:

Filamor's the Bard's Fox, Crispus my Lion,
Valiant, but generous, I know he'l seize,
But that's all, for he'l never kill the Prey,
Nor can I, bare-fac'd, do't; that Foxe's case
Shall piece this Lion's skin   Go Brianella,

Bid Caesarina meet me at the Poplars,
I've new Instructions for her, she must smooth
Her fore-head when she looks upon the Prince;
Do you seek him out, and tell Filamor

You'r not sent by my Daughter, (nor forbid)
To let her know (after his Mask) if he
Take her out, she'l dance with him.







The Gods are bound in Honour to perform
What they have promis'd by the British Bard.









And my Hand shall revenge his base affront,







If with our Pictures we could change our selves▪
I would be you: Would you be Violinda?



And never wish to be my self again;
If I were Violinda, I'd not Change
With Caesarina for the World to boot
But Violinda were you Caesarina,

You would not love your Brother Filamor.




What would he care for my hate, when you lov'd him?



My love would hardly please him were we chang'd,
For I should be his Sister, you his Mistress,
And you would be no kinder then I am,
But here's my Brother. 
Enter Adolph.




Then I take my leave.



Madam, you fly from me; as if our Hearts
Mov'd upon Needles touch'd by th' opposite Poles,
Of the Celestial Loadstone Love, yet may
I mention it to you.



From that I fly,
And not from you; I've an Esteem for you,
As Brother to my Friend; but till she love
My Brother, when you mention love to me;
I shall retire. 
Exit Violinda.




You see, how I'm concern'd
To be my Friend's Sollicitor in his Suit.



Sollicit me for your Mistresse's Picture.



Have you her Picture, that's some comfort yet,
This Violinda and I will never part.



Hold, you'r not like to meet, but on Conditions.



Have I not Sign'd a Blank? fill you it up
With yo•r own Articles.



First, you shall promise,
Never more to move me for Filamor.




You are not (sure you cannot be) in earnest?



No promise, Sir, no Picture▪




Let Filamor's own Merits speak for him 
Come 



Not so hasty: Secondly 




A pair of these Commands?




To use your best endeavours to perswade

Filamor to relinquish his pretence
Of Love to me.



And all this for a Picture?
Would y' have me loose, like Aesop's Dog, the substance
With catching at the Shadow? You know, Sister,
On Filamor's hope of you, depends my hope
Of Violinda.




Let what will depend;
These are your Termes.



You think, I'l not accept them?
Give me the Picture, I'l undo my self
To be reveng'd on thee; such pow'rfull Reasons
I'l give my Friend against thee  he shall take up
Thy scorn, and thou (as he does now) shalt sigh
(When Filamor enjoyes a greater Beauty)
And say, That matchless Prince was once my Servant.





Well, I have all, I would have; here's the Picture,
And there's your Man, look yo• to your Ingagement.


She give• Adolph the Picture.





Dance with me? Caesarina dance with me▪
One name may sound, at distance, like another,
Did she name me? Madam, excuse my doubts,
I do believe you, yet so great an honour,
To me so unexpected, on the suddain
Puzzled my faith: I owe to Brianeila

For the first newes that makes me Fortunate.



But, Sir, you must conceal th Intelligence,
Or else you'l lose your Spie.








You'r not like to keep it long, aside.

But to tell that, is out of my Commission:
I take my humble leave.




Compar'd to me, how happy art thou Adolph,

When Violinda gives thee a denial,
She grieves th•e with so much Civility.



Your sister •arri•s it the handsom•r;
Mine, like a Tigr•sse, shews an angry fore-head,
Her fury light•ns in her eyes: your Si•••r
Poisons me, like a Polititian, smiling;
Long since I'd burst, but for this Antidote
Our Friendship, Filamor.Emb•aces.






Is a feli•ity which ballances
All our misfortunes.



Love it self gives place
To Frien•ship in my Herauldry.




How you set up Friendship against Love, Adolph▪

Love is a God.



He is, and we are Men,

  33Who importune the Gods, and give them trouble
With Pray'rs and Sacrifices for our Loves;
But what Wives they will prove, Heav'n only knows:
We may pray for a curse, and some kind God
May crosse us for a blessing let me tell you
(As I do love you) truly, I suspect
My Sister.







Did I say, I suspect?



That was a Princely che•k upon his tongue.



I know, my Sister will be no good Wife.



If any man, but Adolph,•old me so,
I should not be thus patient.




I know, my Sister will be an ill Wife.



Is't madnesse? or is't envy that asp•rses
Thy Sister?



Wherefore do you furle your brow?
I tell you Caesarina is not worth
A thought of Filamor's.





Whilst we are friends.



If you remember her,
Let it be so as we remember Tyrants,
For th'evill they have done.




Kneel, and beg pardon of thy Sister's virtue:
Y•t we are friends.



Therefore I am oblig'd
To disabuse you 



Friendship, up to heaven,
From whence thou cam'st; against this Enemy,
The Common Enemy of Love and Virtue,

  34I draw the Swor• of Justice. Fil. drawes.





H•ar me out, A•. drawes.


Before I set this Seal upon thy hearing;
What Fury strikes out th•t clear light, thy R•ason?
Ar• you so blind, so obstinately blind,
You will not see a dreadful Pr•cipice,
When I point to it? If you'l not believe
Your Fri•nd, you have before your •yes the sad
Example of your Fath•r, good old man!
How like a child is he aw'd by my Mother!
There's twenty thousand Mothers in my Sister;
Already she b•gins her tyrannous reign,
And mak•s you more a child than your weak Fath•r,
Or else you would have more Sence then to love
On• that scorns you. I've done.




First, let me joy my self, for cancelling
The long misplac'd relation of a Friend
To so unnatural a Brother; then,
Thou stranger to my heart, in thy heart's blood
I'l wash off the durt cast upon thy Sister.
Not love her? Why? because she scorns me? fool,
I would not love her if she did not scorn
One of no merit.



Then you do her wrong,
To move my Sister for one of no merit.



Unworthy man, that which thou would'st destroy,
My Love to her, creates i• me a Merit.



Alas poor Filamor, to deceive thy self
What curious Art thou hast, what subtile non-cense,
A merit and no Merit? and for this,
The fast an• loose, the Juggle of a Word,
Thou draw'st upon thy friend?



Dear friend, forgive me,
Som•thing you said (which concern'd Caesarina)
That put m• into passion; what it was
I have fo•got, but as 'tis state• now,
I must confesse, I blush to find my self
In this off•n••ve posture.




Your sword; for you may fight, and you may chuse:
Will you relinquish all pretence of love
To Caesarina?




Not whilst I've a sword,
And strength to guide to thy heart.




I'm glad to hear that you are so resolved:
You may fight; bu•, Filamor, if you do,
You shall fight with my Sister. For this Picture,
(A part of F•lamor, and Adolph's All)
I p•omis'd •aesari•a, to perswade you
(With •y be•• oratory) to relinquish
Your lov• to h•r; I •ave perform'd: and you,
B•fore, lik• a rough Dia•ond, only rich
In my belief t•us polish'd, strikes •y eyes:
Ama•'d to m•et so glorious a surprize.

Filamor's •stimate is trebbl•d now
In Adolph's valuation; and by this time
(You have y•t more advantage by your triall,
For) Caesarina's heart (I warrant) •akes
For fear I should prevail.



She meant (I hope
I flatter not my self) to try, if she
Might vent•re on me any further Grace
Then th'honour she intends me at my Mask,
To dance with me.



That's some kindness yet; my Sister
Has but one fault, she thinks Love is below her;
But Friend if, from so high a pitch▪ h•r Pride
Can stoop to any Husband, sh•'s thy Bride. Exeu•t▪








THis is th' appointed place; th•re's the Mark-Beech,
And the old Witch too; luck an't be thy will:
A General, I beseech thee, gracious B•ldam;
Mother, you are a Woman of your word.



O •y good Daughter, neither Man nor Woman
Will break their word with you; show me your hand,
Off with your Glove▪ Ay marry, Child, if Caesar
Were now our Lord, he would send for his Guards
That watch th' Arabian Trees, and set them Centree
Upon this Balm.



A Complemental Hag, aside.

How come you to be such a Courtier, Mother?



I shall be catch'd  First, Daughter, I pray re∣solve me,
Did never any Gentleman, at Court,
Tell you your Fortune?







Then if your Hand
Can turn a Courtier to a Fortune-Teller;

  37Why may't not make us Fortune-Tellers Courtiers?



A pleasant Witch: what? Compasses? do you
Mean to survey my Hand with your Glass-eyes?
Come, on with them: First, how long sha•• I li•e?



Here's a deep Life-line, without Cross or Break;
Ten, twenty, thirty, you'l live, till you be
Just a year older then am I, a hun∣dr•d. Fromund with his •ompasses measures her Vi•al Line.





That's long enough; shall I b• fortunate?



I never saw such a prosperity-line

Running quite through your Triangle; it cuts
Your Table-line, and has the nobl•st Sis•er,

You'l be Right Honourable.




And Honour; but what Pleasure? how many Hu•b••ds?



To that what say•s the Mount of Mercury?
Tis cross'd with one Line, you'l have but one Husband,



How? but one Husband in a hundred years?
O pittiful!



But in the Mount of Venus

Are Stars; in Sol and Iupiter a Zone;
A Venus-Girle, you'l have store of Servants.



Shall I keep Counsel?



At foot of Iove's Mount,
Your Capital line and your Vital line
Meet in an acute Angle, which demonstrates,
Your Head holds correspondence with your Heart:
You'l not tell any Secrets of your own.



No, if I do; like a poor Vestal-Nun
That can't keep Counsel when she meets her Servant,
Let me be bury'd alive; this one Husband

  38Will be (I hope) a good one: pray, what manner
Of Man?



Black hair, not curl'd by Art, but Nature;
Good hop•full Signs▪



Have I seen him?




He courted you for a Wife.





He has a voluble Tongue?



The Gudg•on bites. aside.

A winning way (•he's taken with my Courtship)aside.

The young man Complem•nts better then th' old Witch.







One who in Forr•ign parts
Has noted Men and Manners; I'm cock-sure. aside.








In some Pla•e, or Imployment,
About a Prince: •he's m•ne, from all the World. aside.




Prince Filamor's Tutor, Fromund, out upon him
A younger Brother. Fro•und is about to discover himself.





So, so, my C•ke's dow,
Wh•n I believ'd my self to be cock-sure,
If I had flung off my disguise, how she
Had laught at m•?



What? Moth•r, a la mort?



Daughter, I am considering your Condition,
Will you lead Ap•s in Hell.



Yes, (Apes is something
To t•ust to) rather then I'l marry Hopes:
I am for Honour, and Estate in Hand,
No promising Husband is for me; can you
Change me this Courtier for a General?
For Fromund I'l not give one farthing-token.



He's much bound to you. aside.



Make it my Lord Crispus,

You shall •ave the worth of a hundred pieces,
This Saphyr-Ring.



If you would give me Lo•don,

I cannot find a General in your Hand.







But the young Conjurer makes Love to me,
And I'l lay my Commands upon my Servant,
To search the Stars for my Lord General.



Take the Ring; Mother: when shall I hear of you?



In th'Evening: mean time, if you could but get
Your Lady to move my Lord Crispus for you.



That I am sure she will. Fromund throwes off the Witches habit.




Then I am sure  
Exit Brianella.

The Generall will not have thee, he's a person
Of so much honour, that he'l never marry
One, thy dishonourable Lady speaks for:


There's life in't yet; Tetrick, I must have thee
To help me in the businesse of my love.



The devill's in't, when men make love their business;
Thou a man? thou a horse: and would thou hadst
(Besides thy amorous curvetting qualme)
All the diseases of a horse: I help thee?



Thee I have help'd, and may prove to thy p•rse
More instrumentall yet.



Why, look you, Fromund,

How you misconstrue me: I'l serve your love,
If you will love at seasonable times,
But to stand fooling now, when Pontia,

Th'Illustrious Traytresse, takes up Gladiators

  40To murder our great Master here he 
Enter Sylvanu reading a Paper.
 comes
Reading the bloody List she gave the Bard.




Dis Manibus. Pontia devotes to hell

Filamor, Violinda, and Sylvanus 
Am I here? Is my name down? thank you, Wife;
Kind second wife, I v•ry •umbly thank you
For the recovery of my Wits  you hear
No news?







But what you hear from me 



What news is that, Sir?Syl. frowns on Fromund.



Sense, Sir; I speak sense.



That we have heard oft. Syl. smiles on Tetrick.



But when, Tetrick? when?
Before I marry'd Pontia; never since,
Till now.



And now you understand your danger▪
Pr•vent it in her ruine.




Sha•l I destroy my wife for her first fault?



That were to imitate her cruelty.







If she commit another Treason 



Then she shall die.



But you'l forget your Promise,
Be pleas'd to write it down.



I'l set my hand
To nothing 



That's unprincely: but 'tis just

To write as she did, your Note for her Note.



'Tis just indeed, I'l underwrite her Paper.



You'l find her Pen and Ink too ith'Bard's Cave.





See how Affection swayes! though both our Reasons
Were of one colour, mine look'd dull; thine bright,

When Prejudice and Favour chang'd the light.







This Mask was made for you by Filamor,

And therefore if he take you out to dan•e,
Dance with him Caesarina, though you love not
The Man, be civill to the Prin•e.







Af•er the Masque, whither will you two walk▪







Just into the Lion's pawes; aside.

O excellent, incomparable Bard!

Gracchus and Sergiu•, you know the Lawne?



I do; That's the Place.








If •ither he or I n•glect your s•rvice.



Our Roman Swords shall fall upon your Foes▪
Swift•r then Arrow•s from your British bowes.



When the Masque's done, remember Bria•ella,





Your M•ssage to the Prince shall be
D•liver'd, as from Princess Caesari•a.




Filamor will beli•ve th•e, when he sees
Thy first newes (of h•r dancing with him) true:
Do't •arefully, and I'l make th•e my care,

  42The Generall will not deny thy love
VVhen I move for thee.



You'r a royall Mistresse.



My Dear; what are these Maskers?They sit.





Their Forms (chang'd by his Gods) the God of Hunting,

Apollo, has restor'd to Phaeton,











The Scene, a Grove, in which is a Law∣rell Tree, and three Poplar Trees.




Hey! brother Wood-men come away,





Never may they see Sport, who stay
When Phaeton sayes, Come, or Go:



Shall we 〈◊〉 the long-liv'd Hart?



Ask the Youthfull God of Art,
(Who restor'd us our Forms) Apollo,




See, the great Huntsman comes at last.



Our morning-Rites in Delphos past;
I came to London, where my Sister
Dwells in her Temple; but I miss'd her:
For (vex'd with things, which fools desir'd)
She was into her Grove retir'd:
Then swift as ever Lightning flew,
I cut the Clowds, and sail'd to You.
















Four of the Metamorphosis:
In those three Poplars grow thy Sisters,
That Laurell Cloisters my coy Mis•ris;
We two will untrans•orm them now.



A•-pow'rfull Father, shew me how.




That Conquerors and Poets browes
Crown'st with thy immortall boughs,
From thunder free,
With Musique shaken, cleave asunder, 
The Laurell opens, and in it appears Daphne.




Ay me! a suddain clap of thunder
Could not strike Daphne's heart so dead,
As does that Voice, from which I fled
To this Tree, that (whea th'Earth deny'd me)
Open'd, and shut again to hide me:
False Laurell, wer't thou kind so long,
At last to sell me for a Song?
What hope that Strangers will be just,
When our old Friends betray their trust?
Cruell Apollo, dost thou give
Life to a Maid who fears to live?
Some gentler God take Daphne's part,
And close my Tree, or break my Heart.



Sweet Nymph, thy Panick Fear dismiss,

Apollo will not force a kiss.



Why then for Daphne do you call?



This is the Huntsman's Festivall,
We'l only dance together.










Dear Sisters, that (when I was drown'd)
Wept your selves into Poplar-Trees:
Now my Platonick Year's come round,
Enjoy the Light which Phaeton sees;
Phaethusa?











I come, I come.







Thy Breath is my Restorative

Chorus.On the Huntsman's Feast,
Like Pris'ners releas'd,
Let's dance and sing;
Till the Birds admire,
What new happy Quire
Make the Woods ring,
And drawes the Sphears nigher.
No Pleasure transcends
The Meeting of Friends.

Filamor Walks up to Caesarina,


Not Filamor, but Cephalus begs the honour
Of a Corant.



Cephalus'es Suit is granted.



Come my bold Sword-men, now you'l have imployment,





May I presume to kiss the Princely hand
To which I owe this honour.




Incourage begging? you shall be content
VVith the next favour you receive from me.





So does the covetous Fav'rite lose his place,
By offering to impose upon free Grace.



My Sister's too high-hea•ted to be gov•rn'd;
Proud Minds, like billowes in a storm, are toss'd
At their own rate; but if you steer, y'are lost.



What a dull fool was I to lose her thus?


I hope not; here comes one who can resolve me;
Dear friend, leave me alone with my Goo• Angel.



VVhat means he? is the Devil his Good Angel?
My Mother's Messenger? I'l hear Adolph stands and listens.
 her newes.



Now Brianella, speak; is't life, or death?



Life, life Sir, Princess Caesarina walks
To gather Violets in the Lawne, from thence
She strikes up to the Lime-tree Grove, come thither,
But keep your masking habit on, she said,
If so by chance you met her in that Grove,
You might have better Audience as a Huntsman,
Then ever yet she gave you as a Prince.



How's that? my Mother has a Plot upon hi•

This cannot be a Message from my Sister.



This Embassage shall put about thy neck
A string of Pearl.



A string of hemp were fitter, aside.

I am sure I deserve't, If you knew all:
Excuse me; if my Lady call, she may
Suspect my absence. 
Exit Brianella.






You shall not go.



Then you shall kill me, Adolph;
For if I live, I'l go.



You are not mad?
Do you know, who invites you? Brianella,

My Mother's Confident, the Agent for
Thy cruel Step-Mother, who seeks thy blood:
Do you know, what she said? Is't probable,
My Sister (who scorn'd th'offer of a Crown)
VVill love a Masking Suit?




Your Sister would have danc'd with me? yet she would;
And Brianella praeacquainted me
With her intention: non ore words, I'l go.





A happy voyage; I'l be there before yo•:
She told him, Caesarina's in the Lawne;
If he go thither, 'tis upon the Bow;
I know the String, the strait path to the Grove;
And whosoever is to meet him there,
Shall find me on the place, to answer for him.







Our Trade is to kill men, we never yet
Shed Woman's blood.



But Madam, for your service 



And my Reward: you shall be so rewarded,
You'l wish I had more Princess Violinda's

For you to kill.



May we not have the honour
Of murdering her brother?




For my hand; none shall revenge Pontia,






If the Prince, your husband, wants
An Officer to cut his Throat 




I'l provide meaner Instruments, there's Gold,
Jewels too; You are Strangers, and the Natives
(After this fact, if th•y can take you) will
Tear you to pieces: To prevent your danger
You see my Groom waits for you with good horses,
Fly; though for me you have lost Italy,

And must lose Bri•ain; wheresoe're you land,
You'l make your selves a Country with that Treasure;





Our saddest losse is, such
A bounteous Mistr•sse.



And it wounds us deeper
Then we can wound the Princess, when our Swords
Shall weep her blood.



But Gentlemen, pray skill
My Daughter-in-Law with as little fright
To my own Daughter, as is possible:
If you bind Caesarina, bind her gently. 
Exit Pontia.




As gently as these arms can bind a Lady;
To kill her Step-Daughter, she gives me a stock,
Will keep me like a man on any Ground;
But before I leave Britain, I'• be bold
To ravish her own Daughter; I have had
A Stoma•k •o her long.



Meat for your Master;
Thou ravish her? I'l ravish her my self;

  48Room for your betters, from the Gracchi I am
Descended.




When we play'd Prizes on the Stage at Rome,

Then wert not thou my Mimick? did not I,
With this short Faucheon, round about the Stage,
Chase thee in that high crown'd Hat, with Gold-labells?



And what did I, the while?



Why, at my Head
(Helmet and all, in which I wore this Fish)
Thou flungst a Casting-Net, and crydst, fear nothing,
I catch not you Sir, I catch but your Fish.





Upbraided with my Calling? Ganlick-Rogue,
You Country-low, did not I hear thee Beg
(Like a cow'd Slave) the People's suff'rages;
To give thee leave to take up that white wand,

The Rudies (which discharges Sword-Players,
From f•ar of playing Prizes by Command)
And wilt thou play a new Prize for a Princesse?
Come on.



Take notice of this Thumb reverst, Sergius draws, and bends his Thumb back.


The sign of death to Fencers.




What? Roman against Roman? lets draw Cuts?



Then I bend down my Thumb; live, to be hang'd:
The long cut carries her. They draw cuts.





To give the prop'rer man the shorter Cut▪
No remedy, I must content my self
With Prin•ess Violinda.




The Fencers seize them.




Princesses by your leave, I'm somewhat bold.



And I am welcome.











No faith, tis but a Rape.







Peace, you shrill Grashopper,
Or I'l open your Heart to stop your mouth;
Do y' see this triffle, this was Tarquin's Dagger,
And knows the way to Rape. 
Enter Filam•r.





Look a man in the Face.



That's not so pleasant
As looking Babyes in a Ladye's Eyes:
Help Gracchus.Serg. falls.





There's a poor Remembrance Gracchus comes behind Filamor, and runs him in at the left arm: Fi∣lamor runs him into the Body: Grac•hus falls, and mak'd a strange Grimas grinning like a dead man.
 for you.



Die like a Coward: he's dead out-right that stirs;
Answer, what put into your hearts a hope
To ravish Princesses?




There was a Devil (of their own Sex) in 't,
The Devil Pontia  she contracted for
The Life of Violinda 




Your Wages, Slave. Sergius stretches out himself as dead.





Justly, oh, I die justly.



How it afflicts me, that my cruel Mother
Should be my dear Friend's mortal Enemy,

  50And seek the Life I prize above my own?
Your Brother bleeds much, Violinda; have you
Nothing about you that will stop his Wound?
Tear, tear my Handkercher! Pray, take it Sir,
Lose not you self in the preserving me;
You look pale.



Madam, My Wound blushes for me,
To hear your pr•servation ascrib'd
To Filamor, 'twas Innocence preserv'd you,
When betray'd by this habit.







By th' honour you intended me, if thus

•T had been my Fortune to have met you in
The Lime-Tree Grove.











She did abuse you.



Has she not abus'd
Your Brother too, and sent him to meet me
Among the Lime-Trees? to that Grove he went,
Just as we turn'd into the Lawne.






Excuse me, Madam, I must needs go see
What becomes of my Friend.




To the place, if you go thus bleeding thither,
You'l faint.



I'l die, before I leave Prince Adolph







Let us follow Filamor,

I hear my Mother has a plot upon him.







'Twas well for me that I was bred a Mimick,
If I could not have made strange ugly Faces,
And imitated the Grimas of Death,
The very last grinn, I had never past
For a dead man; Dead-man indeed, by'r leave,
Your Gold and Jewels too fall to my Gracchus sear∣ches S•rgius his Pocket.
 share,
By the right of Survivorship.



The right Sergius gets upon his Feet.


Of a Fool's head: soft; Hands off, Goodman Gracchus,

Or I'l so slice your Fingers 




Dead man's Ape? nay, Sergius, if you out-do me
At my own Weapon, I'l give thee the Bucklers:
Hereafter we'l turn Tables (since thou art
The better Zany,) thou shalt be my Mimick.



Come, let's not fool away our Lives, and stay
Untill the Hangman cure our wounds; our Horses
Stand ready: Farewel Britain, where the Ladies
Yield not to Romans.




Where we have no luck
In any thing; for as the Mastives fly on's,
So do the Men, and they both fright like Lions. Exeunt.






Sure all but I forget this Lune-tree Grove;
Here's neither Filamor, not Violinda,

Nor any of my Mother's blood-hounds; ha!
My nose bleeds, and these drops some hold to be
Ominous Effects, when they've a natural Cause,
The fear that hants a Lover till he sees
His absent Mistress safe: but Violinda

Thou art not altogether absent from me,

  52For here here sits thy Proxy, in my bosome
I wear thy painted Representative
In Gold, too poor a Temple for my Goddesse.






The strong imagination Filamor has
That Caesarina is to meet him here,
And something in my face resembling her,
Will passe me, and my Poniard.



Fair'•t of Pictures, Adolph opens his buttons.


Come forth, thou dear Companion to my heart.



Fall right; go now, and counsel thy old Father
Not to be rul'd by's Wife.


As she stabbs Adolph, enter Filamor staggering, Caesarina, Violinda, and Servants.



I come too late
To save my friend, but not to perish with him.



My Mother?Adolph looks up.




My Son Adolph?Pontia flyes away, Filamor falls at the feet of Adolph.







No, noble Violinda, Adolph lives.









But he might have surviv'd this fatal hour,
Had'st thou been kind.



Had I been fortunate,
But I was Mistress neither of my Love,
Nor Fortune: the Gods govern'd that and me.



Pray let me weep Filamor's Obsequies, He puts by his Sister.

He was my Friend.



He was my dearest Brother.



He was, thou best of Sisters; and methinks
There should be virtue in thy lips to kiss him
Alive again: but if he liv'd, thy kisse
Would kill him, cruell, cruell Caesarina,

Thou hast no title to him.




He was my honour's and my life's pres•rver.



And would you not, if he could live now, love
So brave a man?



They who dispose our Wills,
Left it not in my pow'r to grain him love.



A Surgeon! call a Surgeon for the Prince!


Here comes one that has skill inn Surgery,
Good Fromund, search your noble Master's wound.
No hope?



No fear; 'twas but the losse of blood
That made him swoond, he lives, carry him to rest▪
O Sir, your Mother's giving up the ghost,
I left her Women chafing her.




She deserves death for murdring of her Son:
Good Fromund search Prince Adolph, for he has
A wound at heart.



But Violinda gave it;
Come Caesarina, if our Mother were
Worse then she is, yet she's our Mother still,
Not to be cast away for want of help,
When we see how 'tis with her, I'l be dress'd
For this slight hurt, a scratch upon my breast:

But Violinda shoots into my heart










FIlamor slightly hurt, and did he swound?
What riddle's this?




After the Villain hurt him, when he knew
That Princess Caesarina never wish'd
To meet him like a Huntsman in the Grove,
As Brianella told Prince Filamor,

Hearing that Adolph (who believ'd her Message
An Artifice us'd by his bloody Mother)
In the same Habit was upon the Place:
The wounded Prince (never considering
Himself, but fearing danger to his friend)
From the Lawne walk'd up to the Grove so fast,
That th'agitation of his Mind and Body
Caus'd such effusion of his Blood and Spirits,
As made him (when he came to embrace Adolph)
Fall in a swound at's feet▪ I stanch'd the blood,
And Sir, immediately your Son recover'd.



My Wife's recover'd too?



H•r Mask go•s on,
In whi•h you are to represent your name-sake,
The God Sylvanus: 'tis time you were dress'd,
They'r ready to begin.



Her Mask? does she
Triumph in Princes blood?




The pleasure of a Mask will make the Prince
Forget her malice, and her Servants say,
That when the Mask's done, sh•'l divulge a Secr•t
In which you are concern'd.



How is't with Adolph?

Did not my Wife take him for Filamor,

And strike a• her Son's heart?



But miss'd her aime
Miraculously; for Prince Adolph had
Princess Violinda's Picture, which he wore
In a Gold Tablet next his heart, he was
About to look on't; opening of his buttons
And stooping, comes your wife, who being deceiv'd
By's Huntsman's Suit (so like Prince Filamor's)
Stabb'd at his heart, but light upon the Gold

And did not pierce it, only her Poniard glanc'd
Upon his breast, and drew some crimson drops▪
Straight he look'd up; but when she saw her hand
Imbru'd in her son's blood, she fled and fell
Dead (as we thought); but she deceiv'd us all.



Will you please to put on the Wood-God's shape;
You'l be too late, what do you study on?



Why should the Gods reprieve that guilty woman▪



The Gods themselves had not been innocent,
If they had let her die a natural death,
And scape the hand of Justice▪







I'l have no Mask, till Pontia's in her Grave;
Arrest her, Fromund, and when she's condemn'd
See Execution done, be sure my wife
Revive no more,




My life for her death: she's a Venimons Creature;
But if she were a Viper, let me get
Her Head and Body parted once, I'l watch 'em
For ever meeting.



In her List for Hell,
When Pontia writ my Name, I bound my self
To punish her with death for her next Treason.



Sir, your best time will be when her Mask's done,
Or else the Secret she means then to publish.
Will die with her.



God of the Woods, Sylvanus,

Whose shape I now assume, do thou inspire me.







If the Celestial minds had been possess'd
With such a bloody rage as fill'd my Breast,
My House had been destroy'd for my Offence:
But the Gods spar'd my Children's Innocence;
And when my Soul was frighted with her Crime,
Bound for Eternity, they gave me Time
For the recovery of Life, and Fame
(Dearer then Life) that my corrupted Name
Might be with tears purifi'd, and made fit
To grace my Tomb, when my Inscription's writ.









I sent for you, to let you know
The Gladiators were not slain; my Servant
Tells me, they fled to Barnet-Woods: I 'v• sent
To have them apprehended, and they shall

  57Be brought to Justice; now let's mind our Sport,

Which must disguise my trouble, that I may aside.

Give Filamor an opportunity:

Diana's Cressent to a nobler end
Was never worn; Goddesse of Chastity
Assist the God of Love, shout from thy Bow
His Arrow into Caesarina's Heart.
Dear Caesarina, you are dress'd, stay here
And thank Prince Filamor.




I shall obey you;
But Madam, I beseech you, why am I
Enjoyn'd to give him thanks? do you suspect,
That I'm inclining to ingratitude?



No: But your Gratitude at this time, may
Dispose him to forgive my Cruelty,
Which strikes into my Heart the very Poniard
I aym'd at his.



This you'd have him believe?



That Question makes me fear, that you your self
Believe not my Repentance; 'tis no more
Then I am to expect from all the World.
But ere the Hour-glass, that's now turn'd, runs out,
I hope to satisfie that general Doubt.


He's here, the God of Marriage bless their Meeting.





What Nymph's this? tis not Caesarina, sure,
Though it presents her divine form? 'tis she.







Heark, she calls me Filamor!
But am I Filamor? do I see and hear?
Nay, do I live? has not the Villain slain me?
And is not that bless'd Form, inherent in

  58My Soul, descended with it to the Shades?



No, Filamor lives, a Sacrifice of Thanks
For the Panth•on in which all the Gods
Are worship'd, whose united Pow'rs preserv'd
Your Valour, that redeem'd my Life and Honour▪
An Obligation (past a•knowledgment)
For which I wish you all you can desire 



How I am ravish'd with Celestial Musique▪







Oh, that Clause has spoil'd
The fair•st Evidence that was ever drawn
For the intitling of a Lov•r's Faith
To his sweet •ope.






〈◊〉 away that •ff•minate vain Hope,
And •hink of noble Objects, Spoils and Triumphs.



Gr•at Actions, M•dam, are for happy men▪
But misery designs my Arms to Rust,
My Glory to the Urne that holds my Dust:
I see, you do not love me,




Then you do love your self; for if I might
Dispose of your Succ•sses, Filamor

Sho•l•, like young Alexander, conquer all


Th• World, but Caesarina; there's your Friend;
Now Company comes in, I take leave of you. Exitura.




And I must bi• adieu to Happiness.



Yet this my brave Preserver may believe,
If I'd sub•ect my self to any man,

Filamor should be Lord of Caesarina.
Exit Caesarina▪




And so thou shalt, I'l pass my word; and then
You may be the Insurer of my Mistress:

  59For as the great Ship towes the little Cock-boat,
My Sister towes thy Sister after her.








Now sit, and let's see, if Diana's Mask


Be no worse than Apollo's ; What sayes th'Authour?



That the Mask is beginning.








The Scene a Haw∣•horn Tree.





Goddess of Flowr's, though you have still

Narcissus in your Daffadil,
I fear you'l lose him by degrees;
My Brother dis-inchants the Trees;
Birds I restore; some other Powers
May un-metamorphose Flowe•s.




Diana, the fair Huntresse▪ •nowes
She may my Flowr's and Me dispose.



Come hither Flora, do you know
This blushing Lady?







You have •orgot her; so bad •:
When, lo, I saw a Swallow fly
O're London, to my Temple-top,
Then to the gro•nd she seems to drop.

  60But in her fall spreading her wings,
Flyes to my Altar, sits and sings;
Her voice I know, and that she mourn'd
For her lost Form, which I return'd;
The Swallow's Progne once agen.



And shall be happy Progne, when
My Sister P•ilomel I see;
I hear her in that Hawthorn-tree:The Nightingale sings in a Haw∣thorn Bush.


Diana, pitty her sweet sorrow.



My Grove, thy Nightingale I'l borrow,
She shall be now Diana's Creature,
I'l joyn her Honour to her Feature.
A Maid the second time I'l make her;
Bac• back my Moons, and overtake her
An hour before that sad dishonour
Thy husband (Progne) forc'd upon her.



He was a Villain; yet that shape 
Violinda, as Philo∣mel, appears in the Hawthorn, & sings.

Might tempt a God to act a Rape.






How my Rape was brought about,
And how my Tongue cut out,
I need not t•ll,
'Tis known as well
As my woful name of Philomel,

Which, though my speech did fail,
My Soul did so bewail,
That it throbb'd into a Nightingale.
Then I, poor Bird,
Had Tongue, but not a Word;

  61I sung, but c•uld not speak:
As if my heart would break
Warbled I.
But no more Revenge I cry,
Now the Ravisher's acquitted;
For, Diana's mighty pow'r
Calls back this the happy'st Hour,
The Hour before the Crime committed.


As Philomel comes down from the Hawthorn Tree, a Satyr leaps out of a Bush, and catches the hem of her Vest.



And both times betray'd:
Your Virginity's private Gra•t
Must be sung
With your new tongue,
To inveigle • young Gallant?















I can assure you,
Goats are ravishers by Nature;
But I love, let that secure you.



What dost thou love?



To dance, that's Sweet.



Satyr, our Inclinations meet;
Let's dance.



No; I'm too much below you,
My antique tricks I dare not show you,



  62Diana so affects Sobriety, 
Enter Sylvan•s, as the God Syl∣vanu•, af••r him 3. other Wood-Gods▪

Th'old Wood-God dances with her Deity;
For you three God Sylvanus brings
Gods of the Copses, Groves and Springs;
But though you are above my levell,
Yet through a Bush I'l see you revell.

Chorus.The Wood puts down
The Field and the Town:
Men labour there,
As Ants toil here;
But we still please our fancies:
Nature sets us no task,
Our whole Life's a Mask
Compos'd of Songs and Dances.

•he four Gods dance with the four Ladies.


The S•tyr acts the Roman
To Tetrick.



Yes, I made aside.

Princes•Violinda Philomel, to mind
Th'old Prince of's wife's barbarity to's daughter.




The Compa•y's desir'd to stay, and hear
What she'l discover for the Publick Good▪







Perhaps she may build Temples,
Now that she's in the habit of a Goddesse.



W•en she does any Good, Publick or Private,
Let none think that I'm vers'd in both the Globes,
If th'Earth does not rise up, or the Skie fall▪



Justice and Truth compel me to reveal
A Secret, which Discretion would conceal:
But I'l reveal it to no private Ear;
All are concen'd, and therefore all shall hear.
If any think it stange, that I express
My serious thoughts in such a fained Dress,
Know, since by his sad fate your Prince was curs't
To marry me, this Habit is the first
In which I've done no mischief; Treason stains
My Prin•ely Robes: and if my Hand retains
The native whiteness, tis not that I'm Good,
But that I could not take the dye of Blood.
So foul as I never had Woman been,
Had but my Pow'r been equal to my Spleen:
My Husband's life I did to Hell devote,
Ma•ice, which Hell it self would not promote;
But the just wrath of Heav'n turn'd my Design
Laid against him and his, on me and mine;
To murder Violinda, Rogues I hir'd,
To ravish Caesarina they Conspir'd;
And wh•n I thought a Dagg•r to have struck
In Filamor, at Adolph's Heart I stuck.
Who would be wicked? when the very Crime
Conceiv'd, torments our Souls, and at the time
When 'tis deliver'd, like an Engin broke,
D•stroys us with the force of our own stroke.
Forgive me all that bear a Prince's Name,
The glorious Title which sets off my shame;
And you, dear Pledges of my Lord's first Bed,
With mer•y look upon the tears I shed;
Now that you see my traitors Offence
Wash'd in these streams of Publick Penitence▪

  64In one Orb let us near Relations move,
Forget my Hatred, and embrace my Love.




The Devil, out of all his Languages,
Could not pick words more moving.



Yet they work not,
The Prince sits still.



Though she stands up to Court him.



If any man believes the secret of
The Princess's Repentance, let him speak.



Their very silence has pronounc'd her door.



The hope of comfort adds but to my grief,
For I see, all I say finds no belief;
But when in Charge against my self I bring
Facts out of which your fears and dangers spring;
You'l answer, what security affords,
The soft contexture of a few good words;
I grant, they rather may your Fears increase,
And therefore I'l give Hostages of Peace:
My Adolph bound in Love's eternal Bands,
I'l •ender into Violinda's Hands;
And Filamor (by sacred Hymen's leave)
Shall Caesarina from my hand receive.
Pontia rises, and goes to joyn their hanas.

Come Caesarina, give the Prince your self.



From me what is not due to Filamor,

Who, with his life in's hand, rescu'd my Honour?



Did not I prophesy? dear Filamor?



The Prince, in lieu of his, may claim my Life,
But not my Slavery; I'l be no man's Wife.



She speaks my resolution.





Now who's the Prophet?



Thou art the blind Prophet;
I am the Seer; they are ours as sure
As we are theirs  Sylvanus sits down i• the Chair of State.





I'l try another Speech 
Ha! who presumes to take my place? what's he?



A Judge, bound by his oath, when he hears Treaso•

C•nfess'd, to doom the Parricide to death.



No Judge shall doom me, but the Prince my Husband.





Behold the Husband to whom you appeal,
A Judge, bound by the honour of my word,
When you first sought my life, that if you ever
Committed a new Treason, you should die:
There needs no form of Law, from your own mouth
A clowd of Witnesses have prov'd your Treason;
Nor will we torture you with hearing it
Repeated, nor with your accursed blood
Will we prophane Diana's sacred Grove.
Be it decreed, That in the Lawne, the place
Where by thy Gladiators Violinda

Should have been murder'd, thou shalt lose thy head.
A guard: away with her, but give her time
(So it exceed not half an hour) to pray.



Vengeance is slow, but certain. I have vext
This World too long, dispatch me to the next.



Doubt nothing Adolph, I'l secure her life:

Tetrick, you have too far ingag'd my Father,
'Twas never my intention, she should die.



'Tis your own business, you may do't your way
And save h•r life, that she may ruine you.



Nay I would have her out of hope to live▪
That she may really repent, but then

  66Dear Tetrick (thou command'st the Guards) reprieve her:
Do't at my perill.



I am like to do it
At my own peril too; but I'l obey you.



Come friend, and as we go, tell Caesarina
To Adolph

How careful I am to preserve your Mother.






What a strange Monster your great Mistress is,
That neither her son nor her daughter open
Their lipps for her?



But do you think she'l die?



Unless she has, like Nile, more Heads then one,
One head's condemn'd, I'l see't cut off, your servant.



But heark you Fromund; I took you to be
An honest man.



Do y' find the contrary?



Troth, 'tis no sign of exc'lent honesty
To profess love to me, and in a time
Of danger leave me to my Fortune.




Are you in any danger?



Then you know not
I was my Lady's Coy-duck, to bring in
Prince Filamor?




Pish! a poor little Treason,
They'l never mind you, now they've got the Princess.



This all the care yo• take for her that loves you?



I understand not loving; will you marry?











Do you call marrying, loving?







Then I will love you.



Then I'l secure you.
But will you not break promise when you'r safe?



No, I hate baseness; I have lov'd you long,
But I'm so bashful, I should scarce have own'd it,
If this unlucky occasion had not offer'd
It self.



Well, Madam, I have caught you now.



I hope you'l keep me
















Every good man, you'r undone.



Must I be hang'd?



No (drown you) you'l scape th'halter,
That falls to our shares; but no matter what
Becomes of us: Sylvanus 







Lost! all's lost, Pontia rescu'd, we are now
Her Slaves.








We came into the Lawne; and though 'twas meant

Pontia should live, she knew't not, but compos'd
Her self to die, so mildly, that it struck
Into astonishment all the beholders;
Such a dead stilnesse was upon the place,
'Twas like a Sea becalm'd; when, in an instant,
The Storm breaks forth, thund'ring came Pontia's Horse,
And in the head of them her Gen'rall Crispus:
Our Guards (amaz'd before) now as if they
Had seen in th'En•mies shields the Gorgon's head

  68(Which had the petrifying quality)
Turn'd Statues; stood still, whilst the Maldener•

Bound them; and Crispus, like young Perseu•,

Releas'd the condemn'd Princesse, seiz'd the Prince.
And Principality of Verulam:
They took me Pris'n•r, but the General
(When he was told my Name, •emembering
He had r•ad my Book of Fortification)
Freed me.



Then we may live to free our Masters;
Nay, we may speak Treason before this Lady;

〈◊〉 has promis'd me marriage.




I'l be judg'd by this learned Gentleman;
You said, that mar•ying was loving; I
Answ•r'd, that I would love you; but I hope
I did not say, that I would marry you:
Alas, poor Fool; O brave, brave General!



The General's the Man, and I'm the Fool; aside.

You will not have me?



First, I'l see you hang'd.



But though in point of Love you have deceived me,
Upon th' account of Gratitude; I hope
You'l beg my life?



That's all you have to beg,
Y' have neither Lands nor Goods; but I'm too rich
To be a B•ggar upon any score.



To save your Life, I would have ventur'd mine,



But your simplicity's no rule for me;
In sober sadness, I will never marry
You, nor espouse your Danger: So adieu,
Kind younger Brother, do what you were born to;
Shift for your self: O brave, brave General!



Come Fromund, follow me, I know the Woods,
I'l lead thee to a place of sweet recesse,
Where we'l enjoy our selves, and never think
Of Women more.



But rise up Bard and Driud.


Farewel Philosophers, and welcome General.





Command in our Name, upon pain of death,
That none presume to pillage, or take Pris'ner
Any of my Subjects of Verulam,

Unless that Subject desperately rebel,
And put his Country in Blood




And have I liv'd to see my Princely Mistresse
Soveraign of Verulam?





And Life I owe to •y Lord General.



What Virgin would not love so brave a man?
Madam, R•member now your gracious Promise,
And move the General for me.




Will be when business of the War is over;
For, Marriages are businesses of Peace.



O Madam, when your Highness was concern'd,
I put not you off to a better time.



If you'l not take advise, then take your Fortune;
My Lord, you know this Lady?







You know her quality?



That she's the richest
In all your Principality of Malden;

  70In all your Court of Verulam the greatest,
For she's your Fav'rite.



She would be your wife;
I have ingag'd to use my pow'r with you 



Not to make her my wife▪ y'are not in earnest▪











And so am I,
Never to marry a Property.







A Property for Murder, was not she
Us'd for the intrapping of Prince Filamor?

Madam, to me you made another Promise,
By which you are oblig'd to banish her.



My word's past, so's her greatness: Brianella,

If to our Court thou com'st after this day,
Thou dy'st.



But I may see your Husband dye
Before I go; then, I hope, you'l perform
Your other Promise to the General;
For, it seems, you have promis'd him your self;
Give you Joy  of my Curses, I've one day aside.

Yet left to curse you; •ang me, if I pray. 
Exit Brian.




My Fav'rite's banish'd; now Sir do you think
That I'l perform my Promise?




A real Convert, of your own accord
You would have banish'd all such Instruments,



I have been so long wicked, that no man
Will credit my Repentance, but distrust
From Crispus wounds me.



Why then (I beseech you)
Do y' keep your Husband and his Children Pris'ners?



Why are you so presumptious as to ask?
Who made you our Examiner? your duty
Is to attend, till we declare our self.






Bid the Groom bring my Horses to the Gate.







Sure, you'l let me go.



Believe't I'l sooner part with my new Conquest;
After you were commanded to withdraw,
My Promise being debated, 'twas resolv'd
Upon the Question, that you should be still
My Favorite.



Great hope of her amendment. aside▪



Sir, you shall now have proof of our Repentance,
Call in the Pris'ners. 
Exit Crispus.




To restore me to
Your favour, was t•e General consenting?



He hates thee, as I hate him, mortally.







Poorly; thou shalt see him crush'd
To his first Nothing.




'Twill elevate my Soul to see thy Fall:
There is a Pleasure in Revenge, above
The expectation or the joyes of Love.
And to revenge my selve on thee, is just;
But the betraying of Prince Filamor,aside.

Who never injur'd me, was base: Some power
That, as I do, pities that noble Prince,
Put it into her Heart, to spare his life
One hour, and I'l make use of her new Favour
To expiate my Crime; I'l now Charm Her,
And free him from his cruel Step-Mother.






Old man, who hast outliv'd Humanity,
From me what can'st expect?




Death: death, to which my Justice sentenc'd thee,
I do expect now from thy Cruelty;
And I'l meet th'Axe with such a Resolution
As shall (if thou dar'st be a looker on)
Shake thy weak Soul into another Swound.
Though I liv'd under thy Reign like a Waman,
Yet I'l die like a Man.



Since you'r so brave,
I'l not take pattern by your former baseness;
For, Sir, when I was to have lost my head,
No state was thought upon, no Princes order'd
To follow me; You shall have Filamor

And Violinda to bear up your train.
Between your Sentence and my Execution,
Your wither'd narrow heart could afford me
But half an hour; I'l give you a whole hour.



Bountiful wife, you are extream obliging.



My Pray'r is heard, I'l now serve Filamor.aside.



Filamor, what is Death?




'Tis Nature's greater bounty, for we may
Improve it to an immortality
Of Fame, by dying nobly.




By Caesarina's rule, by yours I'l dye.



Oh, name not dying; though my Mother has
Condemn'd you, yet Heav'n cannot be so cruell.




Capito take you charge of the old man,
And my Lord Gen'rall to your Custody,
We do commit his Children.






For all my Services, I am preferr'd
To th'Office of a Marshall.




With your permission, my Lord Generall,
Speak with your Pris'ners?



At your pleasure, Sir:
For, as to that, I am not limited,
And I'l put no R•straint upon my self.



You ever were a Person of great honour.



Therefore in this base Charge •y Shame's the more;
To serve my Prince I never blush'd before. Exeunt.



Pontia sitting, and writing the Superscription of a Letter; Brianella standing by her, on the Table lyes a Parchment.



FOr taking of the Pris'ners from the Generall,
That Letter to Pri•ce Adolph I procur'd,
Which shews there is a justice in my nature,
I hope 'twill save the life of Filamor

Whom I wrong'd: and I'm sure 'twill take away
The last remainder of his Trust from Crispus,



Who wrong'd me my Lord Generall Capito,

The Princesse call'd for you: he minds uot me?
I have no fortune to these Generalls.

Capito kisses Pontia's h••d.



My Lord, you'r rais'd to the command in chi•f
Over our Forces, by obeying us.



Madam, my Will is vassal to your Pleasure,
You are my Gen'rall, not to be ask'd, Why,

But What you please; and that I'l do, or die.



First, show to Crispus your Commission,
And vacate his: then take you charge of th'Army,
Which we design'd you two hours since, when he
Gave rules to us, but I was forc'd to use him,
Till to this height he rais'd my Soveraignty.

  75Now Verulam is ours, the Building's finish'd,
And we'l take down the Scaffolds.



Such a fall aside.

May all the proud Men have, who scorn kind Women.



In the last place, double your Guards, that w•

May prevent suddain tumults, and attempts
In favour of the condemn'd Princes, they
(I doubt) have Parties in our Camp and Court;
But were it in our own veins th•y should bleed.



Without distinction, whos'•re lifts his hand
Against your pow'r, shall feel the weight of mine.
Please to dismiss me, that I be not straiten'd
In point of time?



Go, and be fortunate.



Fortune, my Goddess, is great Pontia's hand-maid.



I forgot one particular; I'l send
This Lady to you, when she comes, do you
Return, and bring Crispus to us.







Pontia gives the Letter to Brianella.


There Brianella, I have writ to Adolph

As you desir'd, I can deny you nothing;
But y•t to trust my Son with custody
Of Violinda and Filamor (the Prince
Being my Son's Friend, the Princ•ss his Mistris,
(Should Love against his Interest byass him)
May be of dangerous consequence.





To preserve them, will not lose Verulam.




I see Brianella is for Filamor:aside.

Well, I will venture't, upon your account▪
Though Adolph may d•c•ive me.



I hope he will. aside.




Give him that Letter, in which is inclos'd
A discharge of our latest trust to Crispu•.




Then Crispus (whether bound for Heav'n or Hel•)
She, whom you scorn'd, shall toul your passing Bell.



Away, leave me to perfect my own story;
I'l add to my two Crowns a third of Glory.






We have out-walk'd the General and my Sister▪
Let's tarry for them? 



By no means, least Fate
Should overtake you; th' Executioner
Is setting up your Scaffold: Filamor

S•ands now upon the Verge of Life and Death;
Here is a Grave, and there's a Sanctuary:
Behind that Hedge I've laid for you a Horse,
A Fleeter's not in Britain; mount him, fly.



As for your noble Sister and your Father,
(When on•e my Mother knows that you'r escap'd)
She will not dare to touch them; fly.




You heard the General take my Parol,
And would my Friends have me to save my Life
Lose th'end for which Man lives, Honour?




Under the notion of a private man
Consider not your self, on you depend.
Thousands of Subjects Lives.



And a whole race
Of unborn Princes.




I'd not break my Ingagement; though till now
I never valu'd life, yet when 'tis off•r'd
By those I prize above life, I am bound
In honour to refuse it.



'Tis too late 
Enter Crispus and Violinda.

To pass now; here's your Keeper, but I'l make
Way through him with my sword, I'l fight with Crispus.




I hope you'l not fight with the Generall
That uses us with such Civility,
'Tis Pontia, not Crispu•, that condemn'd us;
And we had rather suffer death, than you
Should res•ue us with hazard of your life.



First let me move him: My Lord Generall,
Fame gives you such a noble Character,
That I can't think you a willing Instrument
In the injustice done to these two Princes.



Madam, to shew how my Obedience
Has been constrain'd to act against my Will,
If an exchange of Lives may be admitted,
I'l die to excuse them.



That you may do,
And not die, only wink at their Escape▪



No, then my Honour dyes.




Shall recompence that Piety.




Than Caesar claimes, and all the sparkling Gold
Into the Sea with ebbing Tagus roll'd,
Cannot buy me out of a sacred Trust:

Poor Crispus may be, but he will be just.





Crispus, with a Friend's arm I could embrace thee,
W•re not thy worth destructive to my Friends;
But now I'l meet thee as an enemy.








Such as does amaze
The Messenger, that Parchment will inform
You, my Lord Generall.



I kiss her Name 
Enter Brianella.

That sign'd it, and so vanishes my power;
'Tis Capito's the Generall: Have y' Order
To take the pris'ners from me?




For I bring up the rear of your Discharges,
This is your last: but this you'r will'd to l•av•

Your Pris'ners with Prince Adolph.









No; we two must attend
The P•incess, after we have view'd the Army.



My Lord, I'l wa•t on you, as cheerfully
As ever I charg'd with you.




In qui•t; though I long, I have no pow•r
To insult o'r• thee, thou'rt so brave a man:



B•t to my business: humbly at your feet, She kneels.

Prince Filamor, I beg your pardon, for
The impudent abuse I put on You

  79To pl•ase my Mistresse: but to make my self
Capable of your mercy, I've us'd all
My interest with her •o get that Letter
Which trusts you and your Sister to your Friend;
Your Mother thought it dangerous, but my power
Wi•h her, prevail'd against her Reason.




For what your Prince commands, you may be excus'd,
I'm satisfy'd.



So am not I, to see
My Mother's favour thus misplac'd on thee:
Out of my sight; were not Women, like Priests,
Exempted from the power of the sword,
I would have ki'lld thee.



It had been but Justice,
I do deserve to die, and I deserve not
To be believ'd.



Come Princes, I'l not trust you
Out of my hands till I have lodg'd you safe.



Then you must see them out of Verulam

Within this half hour. 
Exit Brianella.




This goes to my Mother; 
To Filamor.

But my Friend and my Love shall go with me.



We'l all be pris'ners, or we'l all be free.


In the B•rds Cave,





Once more I'm the mock-Conjurer, the Gods
Or else the devill take her that's the cause on't!
Another Devil take mock-Prophecies,

  80They prove so true: when I made the Bard's Song,
Who would have thought those can•ing words should prove
An Oracle?



I'l be the Bard to purpose;
For, Tetrick, in these Fortune-tell•ng Shapes,
As mighty Po•t•a's Prophets we shall passe
The regim•nt drawn up to guard the Scaffold.



T•en if the G•n•ral• scape my dagger, he
Shall have Prince Adolph's luck, but Crispu• is not
So well br•d as to w•ar a La•y's Picture
Next to his heart.



Strike home I'l second thee;
By •y hand the L••t•nant-G•nerall fal•s:
Prince Adolph•ay t•en be th• G•nerall,
And he'l prot•ct the Prin•es: what b•com•s
Of thee and me, no matter.



As I live, 
Enter Brianella.

Thy Mistris, coming hither, do thou slip
Be•i•d these Bush•s; as I promis'd t•ee,
I'l dispatch thy love business, if w'have time

















Go see the Princes die.



No, th•y'r sa•e in
Prince Adolph's hands, that one good deed I've done.



Th•n to the Bard's Cave you are kindly w•lcome;
(Now I may fool a little) what's your pleasure?aside.




Is the good Wo•an h•re, she that tells fortunes?



You mean •y pretty Mistris, the old Witch;
She's riding on her di••aff into Lapland,

(To morrow being our Wedding-day) to fetch

  81Her Gemmes, and all her Parafarnalia:
Before she set forth, she commanded me,
I should examine all the Stars that shin'd
At your Nativity, for a Generall
To be your husband: take't upon my word,
The Planets know not any Generall
That loves you.



I hate Generalls, can you tell
My husband's name?



Ill news I'l tell you, Madam;
My reverend Spouse went away in a whirlwind;
Poor heart, the saddest soul; you'l hardly guess
What griev'd her, the losse of your Saphyr-Ring,
For which I set a figure, and t'appears
Your Ring was lost by a strange providence,
For he that finds it is to be your Husband.



What if I like him not?




Torn in a hundred pieces.




Of the malignant party, or a rebell,
You shall tear me into a thousand pieces
Before I marry him.



The man that found it
(For now 'tis found) is of the Loyal Party.





Madam, I think, you dropt this Sap•yr-ring?
I saw you p•sse, and strove to over-take you:
You were too n•mble for me; but I kiss'd
The ground you trod upon, and there lay this.



'Twas mine, 'tis yours, keep't, I'l take nothing from you
Which Fortune gives you.



Though it be her self;
An• (as the mouth of fortune) I pronounce,
'Tis so; com•, let me joyn your hands in Marriage:
Now you are Man and Wife; I leave the rest
For night, if we out-live this day, that looks
So black on Verulam, and our great Masters.



Who's the Magician's Master, pray?







But the Magician is Pontia's Creature.



Your humble Servant, Madam; do you know me?









Fromund was th'old Witch.



Yes faith, I was th'old Witch, an't please you Daughter.



Oh you'r rare Fortune-telling youths! but we
Are soon perswaded to a thing we like:
For if I had not lov'd you 




I would not have marry'd another Lady.



Nor would I've had another younger brother.



On, on; the Princes have imployment for us?



And We have Lives for them.



I'l be your guide.






Our horses are now come, I'l be your Conyoy.



You shall not give your self that dangerous trouble.



I'l see you safe, out of my Mother's power.



Then you must see us die, for that determine•





Why do you make a halt?
What do you mean?



I mean to go no further;

Filamor is now at his Journey's end,
Here I'l lay down the burden of my life,
And rest.



Defend me! this is such a Madness,
That 'tis infectious, it distracts me too;
Will you stay, till your last hour be run out?
Will you be accessary (not alone
To your own death, but) to the murder of
Your Father, and your Sister?




By a base flight, my Father's age would fall
At Pontia's feet a bleeding Sacrifice:
Forgive me, Sister; for thy tender Youth
My heart bleeds through my •yes. Filamor weeps.






Your self for me; the World is full of Ladies,
And I shall not be miss'd in that great Crowd:
But howsoever, when you go to find
Another World, I would not stay behind.



Do y' pitty her sweet youth? and are y'unmov'd
With her mind's bravery? how easily
Will you leave us?
he takes Caesarina by the hand.





As the soul leaves the body;
Forc'd to it by fatall necessity:
For a memorial of my love, I make you
My Heirs, between you divide Verulam.




Let a Sea-breach (to quench thy Funeral Fire)
Swallow up Verulam, and Malden first:
But whence comes this fatall necessity?
You think to fly, is base? who ever stood
More upon honour then th'old Romans? y•t,
After his Cimbrian Triumph, Marius fled
And begg'd near conquer'd Carthage; you shall live
Like a Prince still.



I must not live at all;
And bett•r die by the hand of Injustice,
Then by my own hand: in a word, I'm barr'd
From my love, and I'l not accept my life.



Do y'hear this, Caesarina? now you know,
Your resolution is the cause of his;
He will not live, because you will not love him:
Though Filamor might live long, if my Sister
Were not more barbarous to him than my Mother:
For she's his enemy, death from her must be
Expected: You, his friend, may get him off,
And yet you leave him to his enemy's mercy.



Farwell, brave Filamor; a point is started
Which makes me take my leave.



You shall not go;
Though for my own life I was not concer•'d,
Yet, Caesarina, for my brother's safety
I must petition you.



Move not a Suit,
I cannot grant.



Can you not grant one Suit,
To save two Lives?



Nay Siste•, you may go:
But yet, remember, he, you leave to die,
Res•u'd your honour▪




I can preserve his life without destroying
My own contentment; therefore, Filamor,

Your interest h•s the preference, I am yours.



I am I know not what, my Joy's so vast,
It puts an Army's strength into my nerves.
To horse, to horse, I'l bear this Prize away
Through Groves of Pikes.



Stay, stay till I be ready;
I'l not fight, till Violinda gives the word:
Madam, you know, I had your gracious promise,
When she was his Wife, that you would be mine?



Well Adolph, by her copy I'm your wife:
But Sir, if she had not been forc'd to render,
I would have held out, till I had been older
And wiser, for I understand not Love.



Dear Madam, I'l instruct you now l•t's •harge 





Your Mistresses; this Coupling-time's the death
Of more Wild-fowl then all the Year besides;
Look, here's another pair, of Widgeons, catch'd,
And I am in the Net for company:
Th' Army has h•dg'd about the Grove, on• Passe
Is only open, at which we came in.



No matter; Hannibal wrought through the Rock.



Our Swords are sharper then his Vinegar.



Yet, my young Hannibals, pray, view your danger?



That's requisite; come dear.




He offers to kiss Violinda.



What would you do?



I'd only kiss my heart into more courage.



Speak softly, Sir, for fear your Mother hear you,
And then, you will be chid abominably. Exeunt.








Crispus, you see, your Greatness, like our Coin,
Ev'n when 'twas Yours was Ours; wee've call'd it in
As a base Mettal, that dishonours us.



I'm what you please, but only 




Yet will you own the Justice of my Cause,
And act in the reducing of the Pris'ners,
And th'Army for their Generall shall own you?



First, do like Xerxes, cut me into halves:
Then lay me, where the moving Army may
March through their Generall.



Make him close Pris'ner.



Take Crispus to your Custody, admit
None to speak with him. 
Exit Crispus guarded.










One in a tree (close by them)
Saw them joyn hands.



It seems th•y'r marry'd then,

  87Yet since Adolph's ingag'd, I'd have them taken
Without a drop of blood.




Unless we send out more Spyes to discover,
Before the Princes come to fight, what place
They leave the Ladies in: If th•y be taken,

Adolph and Filamor will lay down their arms,
As I shall work it.



Go, dispatch your Spyes. Exeunt.





None believes my Predictions but your Mother;
You'r in a Pound now, get out as you may.



The Pass•, at which you came, is slightest guarded,
Let's break out there.



Where shall the Ladies be?



In the Bard's Cave, for there they will be safe,



Your Mother has a reverence for the place,
She'l violate a Temple e're she'l take e'm
Out of that Cave.



The Counsell is not ill;
To the Bard's Cave we'l wait upon our Loves,
If we break through, we'l send for you at night:
But if the Army comes in to Prince Adolph,

We'l see you presently.



And if we fall,
(Nay, weep not, Dear) we will have company
Into the Stars, if the rogues go not downward.



'Tis only Multitudes that I'm afraid of▪



When Filamor fights, I can fear no odds,
His Cause is Honour's, Love's, and all the Gods.







Your Spyes are not come in?



They've had no time Capito pulls out a Letter, and two Purses.


For a discovery yet: do y' know these,
Madam?



The Jewells which I gave the Gladiators.



One would think, you sprung from that fortunate King,
Whose Jewells, lost at Sea, came to his Table
Serv'd up i'th belly of a Fish.








This account the Letter gives:

Barnet- Woods were laid for them; by your Order:
Our Souldiers follow'd, and came up so close;
The rogues, for their last refuge, were constrain'd
To imitate Merchants in a storm, who save

Themselves, by casting over-board their Treasure:
So, emptying into their hands these purses,
They sew'd th'unplough'd Earth with your Gold and Jewells;
And whil'st our covetous men gather'd them up,
The Gladiators fled; and here's your Own.



And they have their reward, a fearful Judgm•nt;
Their Lives are sav'd, but their Livelihood's lost,
And that's more horrid then the death th•y fear'd;
For in this Isle they dare not stay, nor dare they
Go to the Continent, lest their Countrymen

  83(Who command there) should hang them; they must starve.


You look as if we had our wish, what news?



How infinitely fortunate are you,
The Ladies in the Bard's Cave are secur'd.



For Us, not for Themselves.



My men have orders;
The Princesses shall be brought in, to face
The Princes, there they come; I will amuze them
Till the work's done.



They shall not see me yet. Pontia goes aside.







Princes, what means this fury, that you brave
With a few hands the strength of a whole Army?
Pray, tell me, what do you rely upon,
Your selves? or others? do y' look for Assistance?
It must come down from heav'n, and there dwells none
That will assist a Son against a Mother:
He points to Filamor.

Nor will heav'n own a Cause it has deserted?
With Adolph Nature's angry, and the Gods
With Filamor: If to your selves you trust,
Reason will tell you, four before four thousand
Must fall to th'Earth's cold arms, from whence they sprung▪
So that you only can expect to have
From Heav'n a Thunderbolt, from th'Earth a Grave.



Our Answer's in our hands.



Hold Filamor,Capito gives the sign to the Centree, and then Sylvanus is brought in by an Executioner.


If you have no compassion for your self,

  90Look on the snow that lyes uponthat head,
Which must be taken off, at the first blow
You strike.




Filamor, if thou pitty'st me,
Strike quickly, and let me die, any death,
So I may be rid of my wife, I care not.



Poor Prince, the Grief to see his Son so wilful,
Distracts him.



If he will not hold his prating,
Cut his throat, Filamor; charge them, that my Soul
May have her liberty, a thousand blessings
Upon the hand, that fighting moves this Engine
To strike my head off and divorce me from
My brutish wife.



We shall obey you, Sir.

As the Princes are coming on, the Princesses are discovered under a Guard in the, Bard's Cave.


Hold, once more; Princes take heed what y do
How showes this Object? Pontia shewes her self.









Yes, Filamor; she that was once my child,
Is now my pris'ner: when she marry'd thee,
I disclai•'d her: I look upon her now
As on a Rebell, yet her life I'l pardon,
If you lay down your Arms.




A Roman would not pause in such a C•se.

He turns his Sword on his own Breast.


If you but offer at your life, she dyes.



Friend, there's no struggling against Fate, give me
Thy Sword; There Capito, with my own I render

  91Prince Filamor's Arms, he shall not kill himself,
Let's Enemy do that office, I'l wait on him.



So, now I'm all that I can wish to be;
O 'tis the Queen of all Felicities
To have full pow'r to reward and revenge.

Bring the late General Crisp••, that I may Crispus guarded.


At one time cut off all my Enemies.
First, Filamor, to you I give my Daughter;
To your Sister my Son, and to my Son
I give my Principality of Malden,

For I'l depend only upon my husband:
For whose pardon and love thus low I b•g.



Rely on me, and you'l be a good Wife,
Then I shall study to forget your Evill,
And love you for your Goodness.




For this inestimable Guift, I crave
Your pardon for my incredulity
When you return'd to Virtue.




Was universall, for which all have suffer'd;
And yet thus far I would not have pursued
Th'advantage fortune put into my hands,
But that I knew nothing could bring my Daughter
To Love's obedience, but the hope to save
His life who sav'd her honour: To give her
That opportunity, I committed you
Both Pris'ners to your Friend.



I am bound to you
For my conv•rsion to Love's Deity.




Adolph, for thee I have a second Guift,
But greater then the first; into thy service
And (nearer yet) into thy bosome take

  82This man of honour, thoroughly I've 
She presents Cris∣pus to Adolph. him,
He's perfect, use him, and he'l make thee Great.

Let him be Captain Generall of thy Army,
And give the Second Place to Capito,

Whose strict Obedience and prudent Conduct,
Makes him inferiour to none but Crispu•.




Now Pontia, like the Planet of the Night,
Breaks from her clowd, and shews us her pure light.



Though one Prince limits my Obedience,
Two Sov•reigns my bosome does contain,
For in my heart Adolph and Pontia reign.




Me and my love you've crown'd, and added these
Two rich Crown-jewels. 
He embraces Crispus and Capito.




I'm oblig'd to you
Both for my interest in the Crown and Prince.




Fromund, I joy you; and I'l move my husband
To add a Title of Honour to you• Fortune.







Well, you are a Witch,
You told me, I should be Right Honourable.




Tetrick, to make you a Fortune, take this gold
And Jewells.



Nay, since Fortune smiles upon me,
I'l not be testy now: I humbly thank you.



Let us all thank Providence, that directs
Bad Causes to produce such good Effects.


