
The Curtain drawn, discovers the Queen, Amarante, Brutus, Soziman, and Attendants.



WEe'l sacrifice to the obliging Storm
That lodg'd us on this Hospitable Coast;
O Realm belov'd of heaven, Glory of Nations,
Whose Vertue vies with Mortals of first Ages,
E're lust of power in open discord flam'd,
And wak'd the slumbring World into Alarms.



Whilst suffering worth and exil'd vertue find
Reception here, what do we more then pay
A debt by Nature's law from Nations due?
But Prince, you bring more then a common claim,
Fame, worthy of your noble Ancestors 
There's magick in his Language, Looks and Meen!
Aside.

How has my hospitality betray'd me!
Permit me not just powers to perish by
The goodness you enjoyn the impetuous passion
Storms at my Heart but I shall stand the shock.



Since the untimely fate of my Eudemia,

Grief so congeal'd my Breast I thought no glance
Aside.

Cou'd thaw me, but I melt before those Eyes.



His griefs like mists rise silent from his Breast,
And settle in a Cloud upon his Brow.
Confide Sir in the pow'rs that favour vertue,
The remnant of your Fleet may yet be safe.



I'm scap't to shore, but my best Treasure's lost,
My Friend, the sharer of my heart and toyls!
When prest by rav'nous Death, devouring dangers,
To him as to an Altar I repair'd
For refuge as t'an Oracle for Counsel:
His worth's large story wou'd consume the day,
Oh he engrost the vertues of mankind,
Pious as Flamens, and for Martial deeds
A greater strove not on the Phrygian Plains.
Oft watchfull in his Tent he past the night,
Projecting th' Enemies slaughter, while they slept
Dreaming perhaps of Vict'ry.
None better knew the well-rang'd Files to force,
And clear a breach for rout and general ruine:
Or if with too unequal pow'r opprest,
How would he manage his reserves o'th' War;
His rallying Troops in firm Battalion fix,
And shield the gasping Battle to the last!
His grov'ling Squadrons stiff with cooling gore
His voice cou'd quicken, to renew the Fray,
Forcing the greedy fates to wait, till they
Had snatcht a Conquest but my zeal I find
Grows talkative and rude your Pardon Madam.



Proceed brave Prince, there's musick i'th' relation.
Your Friend lives fam'd whilest you survive t'avouch
His wondrous worth in more surprizing streins.



By your indulgence I'le resume the theam,
In which my fond soul is with pleasure lost.
In Child-hood years with lisping Tongue I swore
With this Asaracus eternal friendship,
As my prophetick mind presag'd how much
My future toyls would such a Partner need;
For when Youth's Down first flowr'd upon my Cheek
(Whilst practising i'th' Chace the stubborn Bow)
I shot at Rovers, and by fatal chance
My Royal Father slew, an exile then

  3To Greece with my Asaracus I fled,
Where having found remains o'th' Dardan Race
By Grecian Tyranny opprest, we rag'd,
Became their Chiefs, and led the ill-treated Tribe
To th' Desart Hills, where sought by Pandrasus

Forth from our Mount'nous holds we sallied down
And chas'd his scattered Legion to the Cliffs,
Where plunging in the deep they shun'd our fury.
This my Asaracus perform'd.
Next Morn' the Tyrant terms of peace propos'd,
Free passage from his Coasts, with all our pow'rs
In Squadrons cull'd from the Eubaean Fleet;
With the first winde we sail'd, but having past
The Sound forgive an interrupting tear,
My dear Eudemia sickened dyed






Vain as I was to tempt such charming sorrow.



At Delos first we toucht, where with due rites
We approach't the Orac'lous shrine, whilst from the Cave
(In sounds that shook the Fane) the God pronounc'd
To Albion, Brutus, bend thy naval course,
Fate gives that seat of Empire; mighty toils
Attend thy way, and thou shalt be divorc't
From what thou hold'st most dear that last dire Clause
Boded the loss of my Asaracus.

Thus Niggard Destiny by halves oblig'd me,
Gave me dull Empire while it snatcht my friend.




Madam, the Ambassadors demand your audience,
Imperious and impatient of delay.







These Warlikes Guests at length may prove our Lords,
Aside.

If no resenting Syracusian frame
Some timely project to supplant their pow'r;
Each hour assaults me with a fresh temptation
To take th'important task in hand, sure time
Must usher my designs from their dark Cell
Well form'd, and fair as Nature from the Chaos.







From the Agrigentine Court we are arriv'd;
Our charge is short, but bears a weighty sense,
Our King by us demands your Love or War.




The seasons both of Peace and Arms alike
Conduce to swell his Glory, for he wears
With equal grace his Olive Wreaths and Lawrel.




'Tis in your choice to rule him or obey,
To mount or follow his Triumphant Carr,
To wear his bands of Conquest or of Love,
To ensure your own and share a greater Crown,
Or fall from Empire tender'd and possest.



Your servile flatteries have sure pufft up
Your Monarch to a self-reputed God,
He courts like Iove, with thunder in his hand:
But let him draw our just War on his Head,
'Tis odds wee'l undeceive the flatter'd Mortal:
Let him approach like Mars in ruffled Dress,
His grisly Curls deform'd with dust and gore,
Or like the Idean Youth with Locks perfum'd,
Fragrant and chearfull as the rising Day,
We bid defiance to his threats and charms;
I weigh not of a grain his love and rage,
My leisure Theams of laughter and disdain.




Think how your infant Town defenceless lies,
An easie plunder for the next Invader.



Your storming threats are calm'd into advice;
Your caution (though impertinent) was kind;
But to the Gods and her own Citizens
Leave Syracuse, she like the World's first Worthies
Wars naked, as Alcides in his Cradle,
When the Infant-God disarm'd the hissing foes,
And chain'd the Captive snakes in their own Folds.




Your passion has had scope, and now we wait
Your more considerate and final answer.



To your Imperious Prince bear this reply,
Bid him despair both of my Heart and Crown,
Be th' God of War the Cupid, which he brings,

  5Yet shall not Conquest his designs secure;
For should the chance of War leave me the loser
I'de fly to fate to shun his loath'd embrace,
And in death's brazen holds make safe retreat.




Then for the last extreams of War prepare,
Despair not to enjoy that death you covet.
Exeunt Ambassad.




I knew their Embassie brought Love or War;
With their hot Master I'le divide the Queen;
Her Person be his prize, her Sceptre mine,
His Lust of beauty and my lust of pow'r
At once shall ryot on their several Quarries.





Keep distance slaves, who offers at my Sword
Grasps certain death, your vile Hands shall not soil it,
I will resign it, but the noblest way,
And yield it with my Life an Offering here.

Kneels, and lays it at the Queens feet.


What means this bloudy Steel laid at my Feet?



Young Hylax Son to this old Lord,
Lies slain i'th' Cloysters by this Princes hand.



My Hylax slain! and his bold murderer
Come reeking in his gore to dare the Law?
But I with more assurance could not move
The Gods for Justice, then the Queen I serve!
I'le use no Rhetorick, no Invectives seek
Kneels.

To aggravate my wrongs; All, all I crave
Is that the Queen would view that Bloud, these Tears!



True, he's my Son, the fruit of my first Love,
Joy of Eudemia's Life, her dying care,
Our Countries hopes, and sole heir of my War,
Yet for his breach of hospitality
I yield him up to Law.




Speak Prince, how kill'd you Hylax?







The occasion of the fray?




He struck me, then before I cou'd return

  6The blow, he drew, I drew, he thrust, I thrust,
And like a Trojan pass'd him through the heart.



To his own rashness then impute his Fate.
To doom the Princes death for self-defence
Wou'd be to murder with the sword of Justice.
But to convince you of the strong regard



Which our deserving Subjects find with us,
We to your care our Cittadel commit,
Full Successor to our late General's Honours.



I blush and bow beneath the mighty grace!
Now my designs take life, I'm now empow'rd
Aside.

To do my self that justice she refus'd.
To my ambition too 'twill give pretence,
Make it approv'd, as gen'rous brave revenge
That else had been detested Treason stil'd.
Thus specious forms give foulest crimes applause.
Exit.








Asaracus my griefs convert to rapture!
Support me or the Ecstasie will kill me.



Your Squadron's safe arriv'd the shore, and I
To my Lords sacred breast.



There shalt thou grow,
Nor will I more be wrackt with fears to lose thee;
Go kneel unto this hospitable Queen,
And take her blessing thankfully as Heavens.
Presents him to the Queen, and then speaks aside.
A secret fear springs up to damp my joy,
And checks my transport for my friends arrival.
The cause too obvious is, I love this Queen;
And the soft Cupid at his presence shrinks:
He never will be won t'endulge my passion!
Yet why shou'd he be Judge of what I suffer?
He's stern, and never felt a pang of Love,
Can gaze unhurt on beautie's fullest blaze,
That blinds my weaker sight and makes me stray!
But these are dreams, I'le rowze and shake 'em off.



O Tutor great in Arms, the Gods can tell



How oft your Martial precepts I revolv'd,

  7How punctual to each Mornings Exercise;
But oh! when I conceiv'd you lost, it dampt
The glory I presag'd i'th' Albian War
To think you liv'd not witness of my Fame,
To see me copy out your Rules in Bloud,
When I no more should hear you tell of Battels,
Nor take new flames from your applause, nor in
Your Arms be claspt, and call'd your Royal Charge.



Once more let my embraces lock thee fast,
And chain my dearest blessing to my heart.
Teach me to make thy merit some return,
I wou'd not die ungratefull take my glories,
The Scepter from my Hand, or Lawrel from my Brow.



That were a sacriledge! as soon I'le wrest
The Thund'rers lifted bolts, your Souldier knows
No greater blessing then laid prostrate thus,
To kiss those Feet that with sure speed have trod
The loftiest tracks of Glory.




And briefly tell the accidents befell thee,
Since we were scatter'd on the Ionian Floud.



When by the Tempest from the Squadrons snatcht,
We pass'd the Harpyan Strophades to gain

Zacynthus Port, where having come t'a Road
The Surges topt us, and a Northern gust
From th' head Lands faln to Leeward drove us out;
Thus without Sun twelve times twelve hours we hull'd,
Till the Ledaean Twins in Lambent flames
Pearcht on our Shrowds, whilst we the Omen blest,
And with warm Entrails (their Lov'd sacrifice)
Appeas'd the fretted Waves; with the next Light

Pachynus promontories we descry'd,
Where landing near the point,
We kneel'd and jointly Hail'd th'auspicious Shore.
Thence Coasting the vast Cliffs, Elorus Bay
We gain'd, where certified of your arrival,
Our clamours shook the Rocky Theatre.
Rouz'd Tritons from the Floud breast high appear'd,
Gaz'd wondring round, and to the deep retir'd.



Our self will thither instantly repair,

  8To cheer the dear Companions of our voyage,
And bless the Gods as loud as the Storm rag'd.






All but my Amarante be withdrawn 
Come near; this distance is unkind, we are
Not Queen and Subject now, but Friend and Friend.
Thou hast my heart and ne'er deceiv'st my ear;
Tell me the present rumours of the State,
And how our Syracusians stand affected
To our reception of this Royal stranger?



Content smiles on each Syracusian's Brow,
Who for the safety of our Widdow'd Realm
Wait your Espousals with your Royal Guest,
To wed your Persons and your States together;
For this the suppliant Crowd to th'Altars throng,
Where with religious violence and joint prayers
They storm and press the Heavens into compliance.



Their prayers are impious and their zeal rebellion;
But thou more impious to approve their wishes;
Thou to seduce me to a second Love,
Thou that art conscious to my midnight vows
Of constancy to my departed Lord,
Whose Genius I with nightly worship meet,
Crown his dear Urn, and at his Tomb keep State,
Whilst hallow'd Nymphs successively attend,
And through the Cell eternal Tapers shine.



I told (at your command) your peoples wishes,
But were my private choice approv'd, the Queen
Should hold her Syracusian State intire,
Not blend it with the strangers broken fortunes,
But banish from the Court the dangerous guests
To seek their promis'd Empire through the Main.



This is a worse extream! rather then cruel
Be false, 'tis in our tender Sex a crime
More natural yet were thy Nature savage,
My soft example might at least have wrought
Some change, a tame bred Tygress will forget
Her fierceness, and domestick mildness take.



Yet whilst you charge me with a Tygress Heart,
Grant me at least to have a Woman's Eyes!



Ha weepst thou tender Maid! this gentle Show'r
Has laid the Storm that would have wreckt my quiet.
Excuse the ravings of my feav'rish mind,
If I am difficult and wayward grown,
Impute my frowardness to my Disease!
Support me dear Companion on thy Breast,
Those Pillows yield me ease in every pain.
The restless Secret in my Bosome strives,
But when 'tis toil'd with beating in the Cage,
It will grow tame and sleep.




Am I abridg'd the dear and wonted freedom
To share your cares? To Fav'rites more esteem'd
Your smiles and happier hours you may dispense,
But to your griefs I claim the first access;
My friendship early sought that priviledge,
Obtain'd the grace and nought beyond aspir'd.



Oh Amarante guardian of my Breast,
Heaven so indulge my hopes as well I know
Thy truth, thy wondrous truth, and prize it dear!
So oft (beyond the suff'rance even of Friendship)
I've pierc't thee with complaints of my hard fate,
Wounded thy tender Soul with tales of sorrow,
As none but Amarante wou'd bear with me;
Yet (now I should discharge thee from thy toil)
Impose a new and heavier task of grief,
To mourn with my unhappiness of folly,
I am grown frail and love 



What you are pleas'd
Thus darkly to deliver, were in me
Presumption to expound.




Rather then chide, thou wilt not seem to know
My frailty, but thy troubled Blushes give
That just Reproof this partial Tongue withholds!
I know thou wouldst be shockt with the relation,
But now I've told my grief I am at ease.
I wanted but thy aid to check my fears,
And crush the danger e're 'thas strength to wound.

  10This tender Cupid in his Cradle dies,

Nor shall he move me with his smiles or cries:
From's infant Hand I'le wrest the poison'd Dart,
And stab the little Tyrant to the Heart.










MY Lords, presume not of an easy Conquest,
Corrupted States lull'd in security,
When with Alarms into confusion rouz'd,
Are sackt with ease in their disorder'd fright;
Not so our Syracuse that nightly watches
And ever wakes to danger.





When we assault wee'd find her on her Guard.



Beside, the Prince's Pow'rs assist her now,
Troops fed by Rapine, and whose Trade is War.
Masters of Arms th'uncertain Fray decline,
And foil by Stratagem a pow'rfull Foe.
Suppose I point your Prince a bloudless Path
To his designs, and without danger, lodge
Th'impatient Youth in this coy Queen's embrace?




Think not old Syracusian that we doat
Like thee, to credit a protesting Foe.



My Lords, to give you a resistless proof
That I am serious, know, 'tis interest.
Self-interest and revenge are the sure Springs
That drive my Wheel, and give my Projects motion:
I am abus'd into Disloyalty,

  11And like a Torrent from my channel forc't
Where peacefully I roll'd, will now bear down
And lay all waste where my diverted Current falls.




Say then what method will you chuse t'effect
Your glorious Crime?



A method safe and speedy,
The Cittadel is in my pow'r, and that
Commands the Town below; if then your Prince
Conspire with my design, let him convey
A trusty Legion hither, which by Night
I will admit into the Palace, where
The Queen may be surpriz'd.





And we stand Sureties for our King.




Our Terms of Compact be agreed on first;
None are unjust or just but for Reward:
I'll sell my vertue, but I'll rate it dear,
I will possess the Crown which I betray,
When I renounce my Loyalty I'le Reign.




Yours be the Sceptre then, provided you
Submit to hold it of our King.




Thus kneel we then t'invoke the conscious Pow'rs,
And with our clashing Swords the Contract bind.
Now that keen Steel be sheath'd i'th' Owners Breast
That starts from his giv'n Promise.









Thus far I drive not but am driven, and glide
On a smooth Current into glorious Ills.
The Court are bound to Morrow for the Chase,
Old as I am I will be first in Field,
There to consult the Sorc'ress at her Cave,
To my dark Plots her darker Counsels join.
The rig'rous Amarante may receive
My Suit, when in Imperial Robes I woo.
Fortune sets me at once Love and a Crown,
And boldly I resolve to throw at both.
Exit.







She's Fair! all Beauteous but what's that to me?
Nature seems curious to have made her Charms
Excell; but why should that disturb my Quiet?
'Tis mean! I'le not endure't! my warlike Heart
Become at last a wanton Cupid's Toy!
He curls about me, but I'le tear his Hold,
I'le bear the soft Enchanter to the Camp,
And scare him with Alarms: hee'l quit me then.


The Charming Foe appears; I'le bear up roughly,
And make a bold Reprizal of my Heart 
Stay Madam, I have business of Importance,
A Secret to impart.








'Tis a Discovery I have lately made,
(A truth that ne'er cou'd gain with me till now)
That Lovers Hearts will ake!



And call you this Discovery?



A most surprizing one to me, I thought
Their Smart and Pangs were meer Imaginations,
They sigh'd, and wept, and swore, and rav'd of Wounds
Invisible; I prais'd the Mimick Craft,
With wonder saw the pale Youth's trembling Visit:
The tend'rest, gentlest Creatures Nature frames!
But I am now seiz'd with the Frenzy too;
And charge you with my suff'rings; you have wrong'd me,
Possest me with a fond and foolish Pain
Which I despise;  Yet trust me, 'tis uneasie!



How various are his Forms! this Protean Love
Sighs with the Silent, with the Frolick smiles,
Weeps with the Soft, and in the Souldier storms.
The Wrongs you accuse me of, I nor design'd
Nor knew, if you are serious, charge not me
With what I cou'd not help.



By Mars nor I.
But if my folly shou'd grow troublesome,
As you are mercifull indulge it not,
It will divert me from pursuit of Glory;
Whate're my fawning Passion may pretend
Believe it not, for I was never form'd
For Love, but bred i'th' Camp, rockt in a Shield,
And cannot take the softness Beauty craves;
Want all the little Arts to please the Fair.



I am at once provokt to Smile and Rage.



I do not think I shall again offend you
With Talk of my rough-cast unpolisht Love,
But if I shou'd Oh to my Fame be just,
Disdain my Suit and frown me into silence.



Despair not of so cheap a Charity.
You'l find me Sir, reserv'd as you cou'd wish.



I thank thee now I grow my self again;
The peevish Pain has rag'd it self asleep
To wake no more: 'twas a tormenting Fit.



His surly Passion bears so odd a Grace,
It charms me more then all the smiling Loves;
But I am sworn impartial Foe to all.
Exit.






My Lord, the Queen invites you to the Chase
I'th' Morn'.



Wee'l wait her Majesty to the Field.






To th' Chase? I like it not; I have seen nothing
That shakes my temper more then that old Lord;
Mischief and Destiny low'r on his Brow.



O my Asaracus, how much I fear'd
On what the Delian God presag'd, that I
Shou'd be divorc't from what I held most Dear,
The hasty Fates had cruelly perform'd
In snatching thee ye Pow'rs secure my Friend,
And from your promis'd Empire be absolv'd.



Perish a Legion nobler Lives then mine,
E're Brutus be from th' Albian Isle diverted;
Your rich Loins hold an endless Race of Kings,

  14Fair Albion of their Reign th'Eternal Seat,

Albion, that in the Flouds erects her Cliffs
Sits Queen o'th' Seas, whilst the aw'd Nations round
At distance wait, and in their mutual Jarrs
From this great Arbitress take Law; their States
She poizes, and to Each deals equal Power.



Thou speak'st my Friend as thou wert still at Delos

One of th' Orac'lous Tribe, whilst hallow'd Wine
Had steept thy Breast for the Inspiring God.




Alcander in the late Storm was Embarqu't
With me, you know him by Descent inclin'd
To Prophecie, and like his Sire Inspir'd:
O'th' suddain I observ'd him knit his Brow,
Look wild, start, laugh, and grow compos'd again.
Then prostrate fall'n lay breathless, till anon
The Rapture flusht him, and his Dancing Bloud
Glow'd through his Veins: thus wrapt, in wond'rous Stile
The Fates of future Ages he Divin'd,
Prodigious Glories that i'th' Albian Isle
Wait noble Brutus and his Progeny:
The Conscious Storm with rev'rend Silence heard
The Prophet speak, and then resum'd its Fury.



Thou fir'st my Soul, mak'st Glory dart upon me
So fierce, I must have Respite or expire.
At leisure I will hear of this at large,
The Queen approaches now, this Passage leads
T' Argaces Cell, where nightly she repairs,
There to Devotion she converts her Love,
And treats her dead Lords Genius like a God,
With fragrant Flow'rs and Gumms then Flow'rs more sweet
Perfumes his Vault, believes him there invisible
And pleas'd with her Officious Piety.



It shews her strange Regard to the Diseas'd.



Regard! Asaracus, call't not Regard,
'Tis Superstition, Fondness, Zeal misguided,
And pity 'tis but she were undeceiv'd.



But why my Lord shou'd her mistake offend
Your Quiet?



Ha! whilst I accuse her weakness
Aside.

How has my foolish Heart betray'd its own!

  15'Tis true, it was in me a wild Concern.
No more good Rest my Friend.



Permit me wait you in.



I wou'd be private.
Ex. Severally.




I.Sleep ye great Manes of the Dead,
Whilst our Solemn Round we Tread,
Whilst at our Cell as at a Shrine,
We nightly wait with Rites Divine;
Whilst to adorn the Tomb we bring
The earliest Glories of the Spring,
And Sweetest Softest Anthems Sing;
The Floor with hallow'd Drops Bedewing,
And all around fresh Roses Strewing.

II.Ye Guardian Powers that here resort,
For ever make this Cell your Court;
If devoutest Pray'rs invite ye,
Or Sabaean Gumms delight ye,
Then make this Sacred Vrn your Care,
And nightly to this Cell repair,
To Feast on Frankincense and Pray'r.
Around we goe the Floor bedewing,
Violets, Pinks, and Roses Strewing.


After the Song all retire but the Queen.


Hail, ever hail, ye sacred dear Remains
Of my Argaces! Hail my first last Lord!
Accept thy Widow'd Queen's Religious Sorrow;

  16Her restless Love pursues thee to thy Grave,
Nor glow'd more vig'rous in the genial Bed.
Rises after a Pause.
What sudden Damp congeals my streaming Language?
My stubborn Tongue refuses to perform
Its practis'd Task! my Rebell Eyes withhold
Their wonted Tribute This new Flame,
This feav'rish Flame has drunk up all my Tears!
Whilst my Argaces Genius I Invoke,
His Rival's Image on my Thought intrudes,
And from his Seat the rightfull Owner drives.


Prince Brutus? or Argaces in his Shape
To tempt my Constancy? Heav'n! 'tis the Prince!
As at th' appearance of an Angel, I
Am Terrifi'd and Pleas'd!  My Lord, this Visit
(Not to impeach you of a Rudeness) is
Unseas'nable at best and indiscreet.



My Indiscretion justly you impeach,
But who was e're a Lover and Discreet?
Give me my Ease again, my settled Mind,
And I'le again grow formally Discreet.
Speak fair Tormenter, when will you remit
My burning Pain? not one cheap Sigh or Tear
To cool or quench me?



Wave this wild Discourse,
It strikes like Blasphemy a terrour through me.
Why heaves my Heart? I know my Vertue's strong,
Yet dare not trust the Magick of his Tongue;
'Tis Sweet, but Fatal as a Syren's Song.



Or if you are resolv'd on my Destruction,
Temper at least Reluctance with your Justice,
And seem not to take pleasure in my Ruine.
I wou'd not die with an accusing Thought
Of you, but Bless you while you give me Death!



Ah! how the soft Temptation steals upon me!
Aside.

But I'le not dally with the Smiling Danger,
Nor sport with Fire  Retire my Lord

  17As you regard a Queen's unspotted Honour.



I, like a Miser's Ghost, all the day long
Confin'd to Flames, and having made by stealth
A Mid-night Visit to my Treasure, am
From the dear Wealth untimely summon'd off
To howl Disconsolate in Flames again.



Yet have the wretched comfort of the Damn'd,
Companions of your Woe.



Has then a spark of Love
Toucht that dear Breast? ah lest the Snow that's there
Starve the weak kindling Fire.



I rave, I rave!
And in my Phrensie had almost disclos'd
The dearest Secret of my Soul be gone
Or by that Sacred Tomb 



I goe, and for a parting Lover
Make wondrous haste, howe're you think me slow!
Oh wing'd with Hope I enter'd, but return
Stript of my Plumes, and cumber'd with Despair.



Replying still?  Ingratefull Prince farewell.



Stay Queen! Whirlwind and Thunder snatch me hence
E're I commit so dire a Crime
As t'interrupt your pious Rites;
Yet think not my Approach Rude or Prophane,
Ev'n at the Shrines of Gods we are allow'd
To tell our Griefs, and I design no more!
I crave no more then Piety may grant,
One tender Look, a pitying parting Sigh!
'Tis all my banisht Soul has to sustain her
'Till I'm restor'd to those dear Eyes again!



What can I give, when Charity to you
Is perjury to my deceas'd Argaces?

Who never will remit the Right I gave,
But hoards my Vows like Treasure in his Tomb.



Vows to the Dead are cancel'd when they're giv'n,
And with the Breath that form'd 'em blown away.
My Vows to my Eudemia equal yours,
Nor will her peacefull happy Shade reproach me,
That I from you seek Bliss she cannot give!


  18Ghost of Agaces rises on the one side of the Tomb, Ghost of Eudemia on the other.








Eudemia whom I nam'd!



And my Argaces Image!




Argaces Ghost? a Rival from the Dead?
Journeys ill destiny this way to Night,
And thou its Harbinger? Speak awefull Shade!
What magick bringst thou from the nether World,
To chill my boyling Bloud and freeze my Spirits?
Injurious Spectre, when did I invade
Thy World that thou should'st come to Forrage here?
Avaunt, Descend, and to the Greeks below
Boast if thou wilt that thou made'st Brutus Shake.




Warn'd from the Fates let us Converse no more,
Nor run with open Eyes upon our Ruine!
Alas, how fatal must our Hymen be,
When the Dead rise our Nuptials to forbid?
Exit.




Falsly your Fears interpret their Design!
The Ghosts appear'd to give us their Consent!
What false illusions am I forc't to frame!
What will not Love-rackt Minds pretend, to gain
A Minutes respite from their tort'ring Pain!






At some distance a Fountain with the Statue of Diana.





THis is the dreadfull Sorceresse's Cave,
Where sullen Fiends, Hell's Male-contents con∣spire,
Whilst at the ghastly Board the Hag presides,
Weighs their Debates and sways the dark Cabal.
Ho Ragusa! dread Prophetess appear:
Assist an Heart that labours with vast mischief,
And with thy Spells secure the fatal Birth.





Who interrupts when I'm at work for Hell?
Whos'e'rethou art, I hate the Light and Thee.
Ha! Soziman? thou art a hopefull Son,
A working Head, industrious for Perdition.



Instruct this feeble Arm to shake a Throne,
And snatch a Crown.



Let it be steept in Bloud!
'Twas my initiating Ceremony
To my dire Art, I was install'd with Slaughter,
Nor cou'd I raise me to my airy Rounds,
'Till I had bath'd my Limbs in Infants Gore.

A Horn winded at distance.


Heark, the Game's rouz'd.



So merry!  Well, 'tis odds I marr your sport.
By Contract, Son, I hate all humane kind,
But envy most the prosperous and great;
Thou art devoted to the Queen's destruction,

  20And so am I; this day begins her Ruine.
Take that.
Gives him a little Viol.








'Tis the Queen's Bane.
Thou know'st the Custome when the sports are done
The Court repairs to the Diana Fountain,
To worship there the Goddess of the Woods,
And drink of the cool Stream; the Queen drinks first,
Mark me, Prince Brutus and the Queen drink first,
Into their Bowl see thou convey that Philtre,
It fires the Chastest Breasts with loose Desires.



Speak on, for now thy voice grows full of Fate.



When they have drunk, an entertainment follows,
Then when the Philtre has for dalliance flush't 'em,
I will by Magick pour a Tempest down,
Hail, Rain and Fire, th'ingredients of the Storm;
Scatt'ring the Company to th' Caves for Shelter.
At the same Cell the Prince and Queen shall hide,
Where she forgetfull shall resign her Honour.



Ha! ha! I shall be doubly mischievous,
At once a Traitour to her Crown and Vertue.
But I to Vertue am a foe profest,
And sworn to storm her in her strongest Holds.



Since mischief is ingrafted to thy Nature,
I'le teach thee all the Arts of doing ill;
The surest Spells to work distorting Pains,
T'enfeeble Loves, and breed eternal jarrs,
To blast the hopes of the laborious Swain,
And sink returning Sailers in the Bay,
To poison Flouds, infect the Air, lay waste
Whole Empires: This I'le teach thee, and to thee
I will bequeath my Goblins when I die.
Exit.




Farewell, methinks my Road to greatness now
Is grown so plain, I may discharge my Guide.
This for the Queen; and may the Dose prove strong.
I shou'd have learnt from her the readiest way
To hasten the removal of this Prince
From Syracuse, his Pow'rs may check my Plot
With the Ambassadours I have bethought me;
His Friend Asaracus is bent on Conquests

  21And Crowns in Albion whither they are bound;
I'le serve my ends of his rough Martial Vertue.
He comes this way, as I presume, forsaking
The Chase in discontent, if he discharge
His Followers, I'le attaque him.







Nay, good my Lord withdraw not from the Chase,
You'l disoblige the Queen and Court.




'Tis a divertisement I ne're affected,
My Youth sought rougher Labours, and was taught
To lay a Stratagem, not set a Ginn.




Some deep resentment grudges in his Breast.



That e're our Nations Glory shou'd have reacht
These distant Lands, and we our selves arrive
To contradict the Story of our Fame!
Unworthy of our noble Ancestors,
Unworthy of our former Selves.





Some respite to our Labours must be given.



Dull restive Soul! 'tis this degenerate sloth
Holds our faln State in its sad Ruins still;
Had we been Active, follow'd leading Fate,
Our Standards in mid Albion we had fixt,
Founded th'eternal Monarchy e're now.
But I divert ye from your Exercise.
Return, goe Sirs, and help to fill the Cry:
I have Affairs of weight to think upon,
And seek advantage from this solitude.
Ex. Officers.




O he is just i'th' Tune I wish't to find him.



Not all my Labours of the Seas and Field
Brought half the Terrour of my present Task!
To tempt the Fury of my Prince and Friend,
To rowze him from his ecstasie of Love,
Is the severest Trial of my Duty;
But I must trace my Loyalty through all
Its roughest Paths Ha! Lord Soziman!
What has withdrawn your Lordship from the Chase?



'Tis long since I of Pastimes lost the relish,

  22The publick care preys hourly on my Breast;
More anxious Fears sting not fond Parents Hearts
At mid-night musing on the various chances
May snatch their Off-spring, then ag'd Statesmen feel
For States which their indulgent care has nurst,
How much they dread lest mischiefs from abroad,
Shou'd crush 'em in their helpless tender years,
And when grown up to strength lest Riot drown 'em.



Your publick Trust is large, and this concern
Is worthy of your Dignity and Years.



'Twas rude to press upon your Privacy,
But needfull 'twas for me to find you private;
I have Proposals of much weight to offer,
The blest Result of my long lab'ring Thought.



To honest Motions I ne're shut my Ear.



Know then the circumstances of our State
And yours, seem to invite a speedy Union,
For both lie now expos'd to Foreign Pow'rs,
But join'd, can frame a Realm invincible,
Of strength to awe the neighb'ring Nations round,
To th'outmost Isles and distant Poles give Law.



At last his hov'ring policy is pitch't,
Aside.

And come about to th' Perch where it design'd
To fix, though to beguile me it flew wide.



The Nuptials of your Prince and our fair Queen
Will finish this design, you may perceive
Your gen'rous Master of himself inclin'd,
And will with secret Transport be advis'd
(By you who rule his Breast) to prosecute
I'th' publick Name, what is his private choice.



Nay then 'tis time to rowze him from his Dream
Aside.

They've found his weakness and wou'd practise on't,
But they shall find he had a Friend that wak't
To guard his Glory when 'twas slumber-charm'd 
Sly Lord, how is your Wisedom now o'reseen?
You know me Rash, and shou'd believe me Honest,
And yet have dar'd t' engage me in a Task
That's neither feazible nor just;
Think on your pious Queen's vow'd Constancy
To her departed Lord, and then be mute.



The Rudeness were too gross and past all Pardon
T' engage you in unfeazible designs,
But to encourage your Endeavours, know
That 'midst her pious Vows she languishes
With a resistless Passion for the Prince,
Of which perhaps he is not Ignorant.



Hell! if he once discover her Affection
He's lost for ever   but I'le force him hence
E're the soft charm prevail too far upon him.
Dull Politician, thou hast spun thy Snare
Too gross to catch ev'n cred'lous Honesty!
Yes, I will use my Int'rest with the Prince.
Perswade, prevail, but counter to your Projects.
Exit.




Rash Warrier goe, and in mistake perform
This poor dull Politician's work: ha! ha!
All pufft with fond conceit of a Discov'ry,
He's gone off pleas'd!
Just such a stock of Brain as Heroes need,
Meer Engines of the State in times of danger
By skilfull Artists play'd:
But when War's Flame is quench't, again laid by.
Exit.







Heark, the Stagg's faln, and now the Court comes on
To th' Fountain to perform the Sylvan Rites;
'Tis time we were preparing for the Storm.
Heed me ye Daughters of the Mystick Art,
Look that it be no common Hurricane,
But such as rend the Caspian Cliffs, and from
Th' Hyrcanian Hills sweep Cedars, Roots, and all.
Speak, goes all right? or have ye ought observ'd
Odd and ill-boding? for last night me thought
The Moon chang'd colour, and her Horns grew blunt:

Boötes Wain o'return'd and lost a Wheel,
The Pummel-Star fell from Orion's sword.
Speak Lamiae!




Uh, uh, uh, uh!



D'ye start? I'le charm ye Marble but I'le fix ye.

  24Pronounce, and while ye speak, breath Blasts and Mildews.




The Cricket leaves our Cave, and chirps no more.




I stuck a Ram but cou'd not stain my Steel.




His Fat consum'd i'th' Fire and never smoak't.




I found this Morn' upon our furnace Wall
Mysterious words wrought by a slimy Snail,
Whose Night-walk Fate had guided in that Form;
Th' imperfect syllables our Ruine speak.



Call up my Spirit Daran to expound.





Daran's in hold, poor Daran's pris'ner ta'ne,
In Scylla's Rock ten fathom deep he groans,
With such dire Magick bound, such potent spells,
I fear he'l never be at large again.



Beshrew the Beldame! this was Magra's mischief,
I'll rive the Rock to th' Roots to set him free,
And then on Lightning ride to fire her Cell.
By all the dismal secrets of my Cave
I will not leave her Pow'r for pettiest mischiefs;
No not so much as to breed Must in Fodder,
And make the stall'd Oxe pine at the full Crib,
Not to raise Blanes on Tongues that flout and curse her,
Or silence in her Night-walks barking Currs.




Thou'rt Queen of Mysteries, great Ragusa,

How hast thou stemm'd th' Abyss of our black Science?
Trac't dodging Nature through her blind Scape-Roads,
In her dark Mansions seis'd her, stript her Veil,
And brought her nak'd and trembling to the Light?



Now to our Task, and for encouragement,
Remember that the Tempest we now raise
Will be attended with a mighty Ruine,
The Queen's Perdition, think on that, my Gorgons:

From this malignant hour her better Stars
Their influence shall withhold, her Guardian Genius
Neglect and leave her a devoted Prey.




Fate so decrees, I search't th' eternal Scrowl,
Read smiling the Contents of her black Doom.



Stand off, and crouching Mystick Postures make,
Gnawing your rivell'd Knuckles 'till they Bleed,
Whilst I fall prostrate to consult my Art,
And mutter Sounds too sacred for your Ear.

  25Falls flat on her Face, as she lies two deformed Spirits de∣scend, and whisper in each Ear.

The storm's on wing, comes poud'ring from the Nore,
Rising.

'Thas past the Alps already, and whirls forward
To th' Appenine, whose rifled Snow is swept
To th' Vales beneath, while Cotts and Folds lie buried.
Once more come round me and attend my counsel.
When we have serv'd our ends of Soziman

(Who by our aid pursues the Queen's destruction)
Wee'l ruine him.




Be that my task.




Thou Myrza tak'st to night an airy march
To th' Pontick Shore for Druggs, and for more speed
On my own Maple Crutch thou shalt be mounted,
Which bridled, turns to a Steed so manageable
That thou may'st rein him with a Spider's thread.




And how if I o're-take a Barque i'th' way?



Then if aloft thou go'st, to Tinder scorch
The Fanns; but if thou tak'st a lower Cutt,
Then snatch the Whip-staff from the Steers-man's Hand,
And sowce him in the Foam.




He shall be drench't.
But see the Court are 'lighted from their Coursers,
And walk this way.



Scudd Burrough in your Caves.
All vanish.







'Twas such a holding Chase as did almost
Convert the sport to toil.









His looks and language are of late grown dark.



We are late, and must dispatch the Fountain Rites
With shortest ceremony.



Queen, glut thy Passion, feast on poison'd sweets;
Aside.

  26Enjoy, and perish, Soziman

Wou'd plot thy Pleasure on no other score.


All kneel before the Fountain but Soziman, who presents the Queen and Prince with each a Bowl, having first infus'd the Philtre.



This to Diana's Immortality.
Drinks.




To great Diana's Immortality.



This to the Triple Goddess.



It thunders in the Wind, 'twill be a Storm,
The North Sky low'rs.



'Tis but a flying Show'r,
And shou'd it drive this way, the Caves are near
To yield us shelter. Let the Masquers Enter.


A Dance of Masquers, during which a dark Storm ga∣thers. Lightning and Thunder.


In all our Sea-disasters I ne'r knew
So swift a change of Weather.



All shift for shelter.






I, this is Musick! now me thinks I hear
The shrieks of sinking Sailers, Tackle rent,
Rudders unhing'd, whilst the Sea-rav'ne•s swift
Scour through the dark Floud for the diving Corpses.
Ha! art thou there my melancholy Sister?
An Owl cries.

Thou think'st thy Napp was short, and art surpriz'd
To find night faln already.
More Turf to th' Fire 'till the black Mesh ferment;
Burn th' Oyl of Basilisk to fret the Storm.
That was a merry Clap! I know that Cloud
Was of my Fricker's rending, Fricker rent it:
O 'tis an active Spirit! but beshrew him,
'Twas he seduc'd me first to hellish Arts,
He found me pensive in a Desart glin,
Near a lone Oak forlorn and thunder-cleft,
Where discontented I abjur'd the Gods,

  27And Bann'd the cruel Creditor that seiz'd
My Mullees, sole subsistence of my life:
He promis'd me full twelve years abs'lute Reign
To banquet all my Senses, but he li'd,
For Vipers flesh is now my only food,
My drink of Springs that stream from sulph'rous Mines;
Beside, with mid-night Cramps and scalding Sweats
I am almost inur'd for Hell's worst tortures.
I hear the Wood-nymphs Cry, by that I know
My Charm has took, the Tempter has prevail'd,
'Twas a sure Philtre but the Day clears up,
And Heav'nly light wounds my infectious Eyes.





Now sullen Dame, do'st thou approve our works?



'Twas a brave wreck, oh you have well perform'd.





Myrza and I bestrid a Cloud, and soar'd
To lash the storm, which we pursu'd to th' City,
Where in my flight I snatcht the golden Globe
That high on Saturn's Pillar blaz'd i'th' Air.




I fir'd the Turret of Minerva's Fane.




I stay'd i'th' Cell to set the Spell a work,
The Lamps burnt ghastly blue, the Furnace shook,
The Salamander felt the heat redoubled
And friskt about; so well I pli'd the fire.



Now as I hate bright Day and love Moon-shine,
You shall be all my Sisters in the Art:
I will instruct ye in each mystery,
Make ye all Ragusa's.







Around me, and I'll deal to each her dole.
There's an Elf-Lock, Tooth of Hermaphrodite,

A brace of Mandrakes digg'd in Fairy Ground,
A Lampray's Chain, Snakes Eggs, dead sparks of Thunder
Quencht in its passage through the cold mid Air,
A Mermaids Fin, A Cockatrice's Comb,
Wrapt i'th' dri'd Cawl of a Brat still-born: burn 'em 
In whispers take the rest, which nam'd aloud
Would fright the Day, and force another Storm.



Ho, ho, ho, ho!
Exeunt.









FRom Shades to Court, from Court to Shades I fly,
But bear my Torment with me where I goe,
Thought-rackt and Restless as a Murd'rers Soul!



Unload your burden'd Heart into my Breast,
My active Love may find your Grief a Cure.



Why art thou curious for a sight of Hell?
A Vision that wou'd fright thee to Distraction!



If yet my Duty be not throughly tri'd,
Command me take a Scorpion to my Bosome:
If I refuse, neglected let me live
Defam'd, forlorn, disown'd of Heaven and you.



Thou'rt Brave, and fit to share a Queen's Afflictions!
Sit then and hear the Story of my Shame,
But let the Sun, as from my Crime he hid
His sacred Light, withdraw while I relate.  
Thy Queen for constancy to her first Love
Long Fam'd, and long deserving to be Fam'd,
Is now, ah Torture! a forsworn Adultress!  
My trembling Limbs dissolve at the dire Sound!
Rising.

Believe me not, for I bely my self!
Think'st thou the Gods cou'd e're permit such guilt?
They cou'd, and the Infernals know 'tis true!



Nay, now I must commit a force upon you,
My violence is just and charitable.



Thou'rt wild as I to grapple with my Passion,
That like a Tempest sweeps with lawless Rage,
'Till spent it sighs it self into a Calm.
From Honour's heights which I with toil had clim'd,
How am I in a moment faln
And plung'd in Infamy!
Th' Almighty Pow'rs beheld, and yet created

  29No Prodigy to awe me from the Danger.
My stupid Vertue slept,
My Guardian Genius slept,
The Planets idlely gaz'd,
And all the Starry Host
Sat unconcern'd Spectators of my Fate!
My struggling on the Rack
But Tortures me the more;
I'm stabb'd with thousand Deaths, but cannot Die!



Ingratefull Prince that cou'd so ill requite
A gen'rous Queen that hid thy impious Head
From Heav'ns pursuing Vengeance!



Oh, He's too foul to be a Victim made
To Heav'n, no he shall bleed my Sacrifice:
Shews a Dagger.

My wrong'd Argaces waits for his Descent,
To seize th' Adulterer at th' Elysian Bounds
And sink him yelling to th' Abyss of Fire!





Weeping? those Eyes rich Nature's choicest Gems
Shou'd sparkle, not dissolve.



Ah Hypocrite! Hell rages in his Breast
And Heav'n smiles on his Brow.



Your Sorrow racks me, from those Eyes I feel
A cold Damp shot into my conscious Heart,
Suppress those Sighs and call to Heav'n for Thunder.



Why chills my Rage? that soft deluding Tongue
Sooth'd me out of my Innocence before,
And oh I fear 'twill sooth my Justice now!
Delay slacks my Resolves! with open Eyes
I cannot wound him but I'll wink and strike.



Oh Madam you to Tyranny pursue
Your Conquest, and a yielding Heart oppress!
Kill me and cease to grieve, let my Life's Bloud
Compound to save that rich Expence of Tears.



Oh Fate! I have his leave to give him Death,
But now my eager Rage has seiz'd its Quarry,
Pants o're the Prey, and wants the strength to Kill.



My Eyes Distill! like wounded Duellists

  30I strive in vain to hide the pressing Stream;
Madam, You see my Frailty, how I melt
T'effeminate Tears, your Sorrow Triumphs o're me,
And boasts the Pow'r to have made a Warriour weep!



At such complaint a Tygress wou'd Relent,
The Furies cast their Tort'ring Engines by.
Throws away her Dagger.
Thus then injurious Prince to my Revenge
Another Course I steer; to Heav'n I make
This solemn Vow 
Kneels.




Hold, hold! by all that's good
Let me conjure you stifle that rash Voice!
I know not what you were prepar'd to Swear,
But fear'd (divert in Heav'n) a Violence
On your dear Life.



'Twas a rash Breath indeed,
All killing as a Northern Blast; but now
'Tis veer'd about into a Southern Gale,
With soft Show'rs waited 
Weeps.

I consent to live.
Rise, I forgive you.



Let me then kneel still!
Rich Fountain of Delight, embodi'd Rapture!
Joy gleams from thee unwasted, while I press
This Hand, I know not how, the subtle Touch
Shoots through each Vein, and tingles at my Heart.



I pardon'd you, and what was harder much,
Promis'd to live, but on Condition both,
Which once Transgrest makes th' Obligation Void,
Resigns me back to Death, and you to my Displeasure:
As therefore you regard my Life and Favour
Be punctual to perform 




Though I should drink dull Lethe dry, let Seas
Forget to Ebb and Flow, the Spheres their Tunes,
The Sun his Roads, the Elements their Duties,
Of you forgotten, let me perish, when
I'm guilty of a first Neglect!




My gratefull Heart for you shall entertain

  31The kindest thoughts that Women's Love suggests;
Each Day's State-task shall give me one soft Hour,
My own intirely, which I will devote
To Solitude and tender Thoughts of you.



I sink, I sink! intoxicate with Joy!
Like Inspir'd Priests I reel with Ecstasie!



All I exact for this I will sum up
In one Command, which must not be disputed,
That to retrieve my Honour you'd remove,
And take this Hour a last eternal Leave.



Ha! said you Last, Last and Eternal Leave?
You kindle me into Transport, and then
To Death you chill me in the heat of Rapture!
'Tis Barb'rous, Queen, to sport with wounded Hearts,
And spread a Toil for harmless cred'lous Love:
'Twere Woman's Fraud t' have ruin'd with your Smiles,
But to betray with Tears, the Crocodile's.
Th' injunction seem'd impossible, but now
I shall obey! You have your Wish, for I
Shall ne'r intrude into your Presence more.
Faints.




Help Amarante! gen'rous Prince return.



What mean you by this cruel Charity?
You stretch me on the Rack, and when I faint,
My drooping Spirits with Cordials you Restore,
Revive, but oh! to hold me still in Pain.



And cou'd you then believe my Rigour, ha?
Blind Pitty leads my Piety astray! 
'Twas cruel to tax me with Cruelty:
If you must needs accuse, charge Fate I wou'd
If Destiny 'tis false, I never will 
Tormenter hence with no Reply but Sighs
He yields to th' harsh Command that mournfull Glance
Darts to my Soul his Grief; I cannot bear't,
Stay Prince, my Love!  I rave, haste Amarante,

Shield me from Ruine, snatch me, bear me, fly!






Thus in Loves winding Mazes we are Toil'd,
Mourn our hard Fate, yet still we keep the Round;
We rave of Wounds, yet still indulge the Pain;
And whilst we curse our Bondage, hug the Chain,
Exit.






To Agrigent my trusty Officer
With these Dispatches to th' Ambassadors;
Tell 'em their last advices were most Welcome;
That nightly I expect their promis'd Forces,
Which wee'l receive to th' Cittadel. Dispatch.
Ex. Capt.

Thus far with prosp'rous Gales my Course I've steer'd,
And now the Port's in view. Come no cross Gust!
My Fears grow with th'approaching Land, for still
The Waves beat roughest near the Shore.

Turning spies Ragusa Entring.

I'm shockt to meet thee here, my Sorc'ress? or
Some Emissary Daemon in her Shape?
Speak briefly the Contents of thy dark Errand.



Soft, my projecting Son, by subtlest Magick
Invisibly I hither am arriv'd.
Think not that to my Cell I am confin'd,
But range the Streets unseen, frequent Assemblies,
And in the sultry Halls infection breathe:
Nay sometimes busie at the sacred Shrines,
With Prodigies t'amuse the zealous Crowd,
With anxious Jealousies enrage their Minds,
'Till in wild Uproar the whole State's embroil'd.



But on what mischief bound arriv'st thou now?



Anon there will be Bloud-shed in this place,
A Deed will much conduce to thy Designs:
I'th' Air I'll hang unseen to Gorge the Steams,
And suck the Vapours from the Vital Gore.



Thou led'st me into Treason, bear me through,
In pensive Moods
I'm tempted to undoe what I have done,
To Tack and seek the safe Point whence I sail'd.



No 'tis impossible, thou'rt launcht too far,
And must resolve to brave the Billows now.



I fear the Throne which I with Bloud must stain
Will prove a slipp'ry Seat, for what shou'd let
But Villany resolv'd and bold as mine,
May take the Path which I to Greatness forc't,

  33'Till by Usurpers the Usurper fall?



Therefore soon as thou art possest o'th' pow'r
See thy Confed'rates bleed, that none survive
T'upbraid thy Greatness with their treach'rous Aids,
And claim like Pirates each his share of Spoil.



I'll sacrifice 'em to the murm'ring Crowd,
With publick Justice my ambition gild,
Show'r Gifts among the Crowd, make Riot flow,
'Till they have drown'd their discontents in Wine.



But that without controll thou maist possess
The Tyranny, my Drudges I'll employ
To frame with their best Arts a Bracelet for thee,
Which whilst thou wear'st it lock't on thy left Arm,
Treason shall ne'r annoy thee, Sword and Poison
In vain attempt; Nature alone have pow'r
Thy Substance to dissolve, nor she her self
'Till many a Winter Shock has broke thy Temper.




Medea for her Iason less perform'd!
My greatning Soul aspires to range like thee,
In unknown Worlds, to search the Reign of Night.
Admitted to thy dreadfull Mysteries,
I shou'd be more then Mortal.




('Mongst circl'ing Rocks in Form a Theatre)
Lies a snug Vale.



With horrour I have view'd it,
'Tis blasted all and bare as th' Ocean Beach,
And seems a Round for Elves to Revel in.



With my Attendants there each waining Moon
My dreadfull Court I hold, and sit in state.
And when the dire Transactions are dispatcht,
Our zany Spirits ascend to make us mirth
With Gambals, Dances, Masks, and rev'ling Songs
'Till our mad Din strike terrour through the Wast,
Spreads fair and wide to th' Cliffs that bank the Main,
And scarce is lost in the wide Ocean's Roar.



Thou sooth'st my black Bloud with a horrid pleasure,
That through my dark thoughts darts a gloomy Joy.



Here seated by me thou shalt view the sports,
Whilst Daemons kiss thy foot and swear thee Homage.

  34But hush!   Our male-content with lowring Brow
Draws near, resolv'd on the dire generous Deed'
Away; the mischief now is grown so ripe
'Twill work it self t'an Head without our aid.
Vanishes.




Farewell, remember the enchanted Bracelet!
Not more the Crown I covet then that Chain.


That gloomy lowring Brow presages well.
His Discontent at th' amorous Princes stay
Is grown too troublesome for his blunt Soul
To bear conceal'd the Prince himself draws near,
I'll leave them and expect the wish'd event.
Exit.




Why should I stifle my resentment longer?
I can at worst but give him bloudy proof
Of my sincerity, if he impeach
The freedome I assume, of rage or rudeness,
If to perswade, Friendship and Reason fail,
I'll bleed, and with my dying Breath prevail.






What would my Friend?



You lov'd me once.



Religion has no greater truth, and when
I love thee not, perish my life and honour.



Bold in your friendship then I warn you Sir
To summon all your Temper to receive
What he that loves you best fears to deliver.



Thou labour'st with my Fate, for what pale tidings
Am I thus cautiously prepared?



I come Sir to accuse to you your self,
To inform you how your dearest Fame lies sick,
Your Foes insulting while your Subjects murmur.
Excuse Sir your plain dealing Friend 







Our last dear Stake lies in your hand to play,
Which managed wisely may recover yet.

  35All we have lost to Fate,
And raise our sleeping Glory from the Grave.



Gently my Friend, I feel each wakening Pulse
Start and beat nimbly at the name of Glory.



Ripe Glory waits us in proud Albion's Plains,
And withers whilst the season we neglect,
And give our Harvest Suns to slumber.







Each gentle breeze that o're your Navy breaths,
Sighs as it flies, and Murmurs at our stay.



'Tis too severe! cruel Asaracus

Has my firm Soul but one weak tender part,
And your keen censures level'd all at that?
Why are these Arms that oft have swept the Files,
Return'd with Standards fill'd, and bloudy Bays,
Deny'd the transport of a short embrace?



His tender passion starts at my approach;
It bleeds, but I must pierce it deeper yet:
Boldly the needfull caution I will utter,
As in a treacherous Labyrinth you stray,
Lost in delight, and pleasantly destroy'd,
Whilst lull'd asleep in your false Circe's charms
In vain Fames Trumpet sounds you to the Field.



Die kindling rage! like Thunder struggle, yet
I'll stifle thee, and choak thy lab'ring Fire.
'Tis dead draw near Asaracus, and give
A heedfull Ear to what thy Prince delivers;
Embracing him.

If any dark disaster or mistake
Tempt thee hereafter to suspect my Friendship,
Call to remembrance this eternal Proof 
Thou didst revile the Queen, her Brutus heard
And yet forgave the Blasphemy, at once
The best of Friends and most ingratefull Lover.



My Heart dissolves But nature sink e're I
Aside.

Indulge his Frailty and permit his Ruine.


But though your dear-bought Lawrels you permit
To fade, slight courting Honours, yet consider

  36This noble Spirit defrauded by your stay



Of Empire, though by Nature form'd to Reign.



Dread Sir 'tis in my Bloud and I must Reign,
Can brook your sacred self alone above me:
Hourly I'll thrive in Fame, increase in Glory,
To fill your Throne when you remove to th' Gods.



Excuse this Heat, a spark of your own Fire
That once glow'd bright, though now in Embers hid,
But fann'd with such Breath needs must blaze again.



Ev'n when a Child and under Womens care,
Whilst through the Casements I beheld our Youth
By Prince Cleanthus muster'd near the Palace,
I view'd 'em o're, gaz'd on their dazling Crests,
Their wond'rous Scarfs and Javelins tip't with Gold,
Then sigh'd and swell'd methought as big as They!
But when their Squadrons join'd in sportive Fight
I flam'd, and turning, in the Arras spi'd
A glaring Panther wrought to th' Life, then drew
My Iv'ry Sword, and tilted at his Breast.



This growing Gallantry with Pride I view,
But must conceal my Joy Retire Locrinus.
Exit Locr.

Friend, press no more thy lost Advices, for
I'm sworn to live the Queen's and can't desert her.



Ha! so resolv'd! then to my last Reserve.
Sir, be not so enamour'd on Perdition,
Your stock of Fame is large, but judg'd declining;
The Purchase cost you dear, the bloud of Heroes
Is sold too cheaply for a Woman's smiles.



And have I then through Flouds and Fire sought Glory,
Follow'd the glitt'ring Guide through Death's dark Passes,
To be at last charg'd with declining Valour?
And too, the black Reproach shot from a Tongue
That has sworn Friendship to me I am wrapt
In Phrenzy, help Asaracus! the Storm
Grows Mad, nor can I ruleth' undsteady Helm!



To your excess of Passion for the Queen
We wou'd impute the fault you make in Glory,
Not that you fear the Arms of Albion.




Are these then the surmizes of my Slaves?
Whose vile Necks from the Grecian Yoke I freed,

  37And is Asaracus o'th' Faction too?
I'm pleas'd that their Allegeance they've abjur'd,
Giv'n me pretence to shake off their vile Empire;
I'll condescend to Rule this Herd no more,
Nor with such Refuse tempt the Albion War,
By great Iulus's Soul I will not.




By great Iulus's Soul you must confess
More then a Woman's weakness.




Hell! said you weakness?  and meant Cowardise?
Villain, be mean, recall that inf'mous Breath,
Recant, forswear't, Lie for thy Life or perish!



It works, and the more swelling now his Rage,
Aside.
He will retreat t' a lower Ebb of pity.



This stubborn silence is a plain confession!
Base as thou art I spare to spill thy Bloud
'Cause thou wert once the sharer of my Breast,
And my too cred'lous Soul believ'd thee Brave.
With much content my self I flatter'd long,
Thought my Breast rich, possest of a true Friend,
But oh 'twas Fairy Wealth, a dream of Treasure,
That waking leaves me destitute and poor.
Traytour, the meaning of that threat'ning Steel?
Here, strike the Breast thou hast so long deceiv'd.



Yes Prince I'll strike your Heart that Heart of yours
That's in my Bosome lodg'd.
Stabs himself.





Wrests the Dagger from him.

And e're thou fall'st unriddle this dark Action.



In vain you wou'd prevent a second Wound;
This Arm in Brutus's service never struck
And fail'd to kill.



Who wait? Physicians hither, fly.



Draw near my Lord and let me bath your Feet
In the remains of Bloud spent in your Service!
We have e're now waded in Gore together.
Can you forgive my bold presuming Language?
I shou'd not have indulg'd my Tongue that freedome
Had I design'd the Rudeness to survive.

  38Since nothing cou'd Divorce you from the Queen
Pardon your Souldier's Zeal, that cou'd not live
To see your Tide of Glory at a Stand.



Insult not o're thy wretched Master's Guilt,
My shame's so Monstrous that to shun
Th' opprobrious Spectacle, my Friend
Withdraws disdaining to eternal Night.
Enter Physicians.
Now Emp'ricks muster your best Arts to save
A Life more precious then the World's great Soul;
Know Slaves you have no middle Path to take,
Restore or wait my Heroe to the Dead.



Vex not dear Friends my Wound in vain, 'tis Mortal,
My Heart works slowly and my Pulses sleep.
Your Hand my Lord with this cold Kiss I seal it.
May't prove resistless as the Thund'rers,
Snatch Crowns from Europe's Monarchs, grasp their Scepters,
Knit in one Empire the divided World.



Live my Asaracus to see me Vanquish
My Conqu'rer Love, I'll rage and break the Toil.



Speak, how shall I report of our Affairs
To your departed Heroes where I goe?



Bear not to th' other World my black disgrace;
Wee'l force our way from this enchanted Coast,
Wee'l sail to Night.



Our Countrey's Gods protect you.
Your Fleet's refitted, by my care prepar'd,
The Wind presents, the Full Moon gives a Day,
And swells her Tides to waft you from the Sound.
Farewell my gen'rous Lord! my Friends farewell!
Thus far your Toils I have accompani'd,
Fate part us here.
Dies.




Spare him ye Deities for one hour more!
And then t' Eternity he's yours!
One tender word more my Asaracus,

Do not so tamely yield! grapple with Death
And break from Fate to your lost Friend's Relief!
Oh let me breathe my Soul into that Wound,

  39And quicken thy cold Clay! I'll tear my Heart
To fill the fatal Breach! oh, oh, oh!
Withdraw and leave me to compose my Thoughts.
Ex. Physicians and Attendants.
Give notice to the Fleet we sail to Night.
Said I to Night! forsake the Queen to Night!
Forsake! oh Fate! the Queen! to Night forsake her!
My word is past, 'tis giv'n, and those pale Lips
With silent Oratory plead my Promise.
Enter the Queen.
She's here! I never shunn'd those Eyes before.



D'ye fly me Prince?  but 'tis not strange
To see the happy shun the wretched but
Unhappy as I am you made me so,
And may dispense to view the Griefs you gave.



You call him happy whom the damn'd wou'd pity;
Despairing Ghosts that yell in lightless Flames,
Wou'd stand agast to hear my suff'rings told,
Reflect, and grow more patient of Damnation.



Can you have any cares conceal'd from me?
Repeat to me the story of your Grief•,
And I'll recite the tragick Tale of mine.
Thus wee'l beguile the Time with mutual Plaints,
Together Mourn as once we Smil'd together.



My Pain is but prolong'd whilst I dissemble
The struggling Secret, for it must have Birth!
In my wan Look the fatal Message reade,
Whose horrour like a Spell ties up my Tongue:
Madam, Our Destiny's implacable,
We must Oh 'tis Impossible! and yet
We must 







 Die, like our Ancestours.



Your pardon Prince, this might have been exprest
With less Formality.




To be reduc't to Earth, to sleep in Dust
Without one dream of Love?  it will out.



These broken Sounds have meanings of Importance.
For, like a pensive Ghost you labour with
Some Secret which you seem prepar'd to tell,
But when my expectation's rais'd withdraw.



It shall have passage though it rend my Breast!
Rackt to confess, Fate's summons I pronounce,
A sound more terrible then Death, Divorce,
For we must part to Night and meet no more.



Ah! Prince this mirth was cruel and ill-tim'd,
The sportive Fright too deeply might have pierc't
My tim'rous tender Breast; it was not prudent,
Suppose I had believ'd you and Expir'd.



Now Fate confess, was ever Man of Woes
Distrest like me? forc't to accuse my self
Of broken Faith to her whom I deceive.
Oh! Madam, 'twas a fatal Truth I utter'd,
See where my gen'rous Friend self-slaughter'd lies
'Cause I had quitted my pursuit of Arms,
Which he conjur'd me with expiring Breath
To re-assume, then to the Gods convey'd
My Vows Irrevocable.









Convey her gently to the Bed of State.
Confusion! Furies! how am I opprest!
One kind Pang more, kills me and gives me Rest.








MY Lords, you are arriv'd though unexpected
Most seasonably: Fortune her self conspires
In our Design, and Fate is of our Plot.




Our King conceiv'd new flames at our return,
His slighted Love converted to Revenge,
For having work't him into thirst of Bloud
We told the Circumstances of our Project,
How you on just resentment had engag'd
To render us the Cittadel by Night.



And he approv'd of the Conspiracy?




By all the Memphian Deities he swore
'Twas such an exquisite Design,
That e're these Calends pass we should effect it,
Or forfeit our projecting Heads.




Wee'l do't e're cold Boötes fetch his Round;
The Day-star shall rise wondring at the Change
This Night creates i'th' Syracusian State.
The Conscious Moon smiles on our Enterprize,
And guilds our dark design with her best Rays:
Beside, the Prince is from the Queen divorc't,
And with his Pow'rs sails off at the next Floud.
Speak Lords, where have you lodg'd your Ambuscade














Beside three Manipli cull'd from our Libyan Squadrons.



Pass'd ye the Fenns secure?




We took the upper Marches by the Cliffs.



Unseen by the Scouts on our Frontiers?




Our last was a Night March.



At the third Watch lead up your Forces
To Saturn's Gate on the North side,

  42Which wide with drawn Percullis shall receive you.
Be punctual.









My thoughtfull Head is with projecting pain'd,
But when I've bound my Temples with a Crown,
I shall have ease: i'th' Registers of Fate
I am writ King already, but I've yet
A stream of Bloud to ford e're I assume
Th' Imperial Robe;  be that then the distinction
'Twixt Soziman and vulgar Potentates,
To wear his Ermyns of a scarlet Dye.
Exit.







Off Loose me or I'll scatter ye to Air!
Must I be fetter'd? stop an Earthquake's shock,
Not Typhon's Load shall press my fury down;
I'll toss the burning Mount inverted up,
And with ascending Thunder fright the Spheres.



O check this Rage or 'twill ferment to Madness.



Where dwells despair? shew me the way to Fate,
The readiest Road! O for a Precipice
Whose hanging Brow o'relooks the foaming Floud,
There, deckt in Robes of State, Scepter'd and Crown'd
I'll plunge, and bury in th' unfathom'd Deep
Each glittering Badge of wretched Majesty.



Where will this Passion drive? hear me dread Queen
For Syracuse's sake, your own, the Gods,
Temper this violence, and shun distraction!



Prov'd false? 'tis slander and can never be!
No, he has sworn and wept, and wept and sworn,
The List of Deities was for his Oaths
Too scant, the Years, Days, Hours, and Minutes, all
Were number'd out in Vows!
If false, he's perjur'd by the whole Creation.







And he is false, as Iason false, forsworn,
Teach me Medea's Arts! for my Revenge
The Globe shall Wreck, and Nature be in Pangs.
He Sails! see, where the Fugitives proud Barque

  43Cleaves the curl'd Wave, steddy afore the Wind,
They scudd, and leave the Dolphin's Leagues behind.
But there are Gods! there are!  the Surges rise,
And Boreas posts to th' Fray, they toss, they toss,

Erynnis fires the Stern! now Floud or Flame!
They burn, ha, ha, how looks th' Adulterer now?



Thus with my groveling Limbs I'll stop your way,
Indulge your Passion, give your Fury scope,
But tread me first to death, then glutt of Grief,
And rave without Controul.





Thy Love pursues me, though forsook of Heav'n.
Forgive my Rage, too slight for my Distress.
Oh Heavens! no intermission of my Pain?
I can sustain no more, Oh my sick Soul!



Stop, as you prize your Amarante's life.
She dies, if you relapse again to Rage 




Ah! spare that Breast and I'll compose my Griefs,
Give me a moments space to hush the Storm.
Look, now I'm tame, calm as frozen Floud!
Nay I can smile And yet a Tear will steal.
Let's talk my Girl, for now I can discourse;
Begin Or wou'dst thou that I give a Theam?
Then descant on the Perjuries of men.



I wou'd prescribe a Cure, not feed your Sorrow.
Forgive my busy Love that has contriv'd
Without your knowledge to redress your Griefs.



Redress my Grief? 'Twas busy Love indeed!
Call back the darted Cane, restore
The forc't Spark to its Flint, unite again
The gather'd Rose to its stock and make it grow.



I've sent for the fam'd Prophetess, that keeps
Her dark abode in the Diana Vale:
With her I will advise of your distress;
Aw'd Nature truckles to her Mystick Arts,
Her Spells controul the Winds, rebuke the Spheres,
Her Tyranny to th' inmost Soul extends,
She sways our Passions, and to love or loath
Is in her Gift but see she has surpriz'd us.






Our Houshold Deities be first Atton'd
With Pray'rs and Incense, then wee'l prove her Art.
To the Distress'd one Refuge still remains,
None are extreamly wretched that dare Dye!



Ragusa with her Women comes forward.



With halting Pace at length we are arriv'd,
Nor wou'd have been at pains, but t' introduce
Confusion, Famine, Drought, Infection, War;
The blasted Grass will shew where we have Journey'd,
And point Destruction out the readiest Road.




The Batts before us in the Twy-light play'd,
And wanton Meteors tumbled o're the Lawns.




A stately Pile!  Megera's Torch set fire to't.



To work, to work, our Sorcerie's Master-piece.
Now quit ye well, or ne're ply Furnace more.




Our first Task is to Desecrate the place,
And drive the Tut'lar Genius from his Charge,
That nought defeat our Charms.




As through the Portico we pass'd,
With Scorpion's Bloud the Lares I defil'd,
And on their Necks hung Chains invisible.




I fixt a cross Spell at the Palace Gate,
And Conscious of its force the Statues fell.



To East and West, North and South Points disperse,
And puff th'Enchanted Powders from your Flasks,
Whilst here i'th' Center I reside,
And from my hollow Breast pour Mystick Rhimes
That wake the slumbring Daemons into Yells.


The four Women disperse to each corner of the Stage blowing black Powders from Boxes, Ragusa in the middle.




The Ground's unhallow'd, and our Art works free,

  45But ha! Why droops the Mistress of our Spells?



Thou'rt sad and clouded with a suddain Gloom.




Daran long since forewarn'd me to expect
An end of my dark Reign, when I should meet
Two snowy Kids milking a jet black Damm,
Which fatal Omen I beheld this Morn'.
Beside, our Caldron where our Drugs we steep,
At Mid-night fell to boyling without fire;
Our Cell of late has oft been hung with Dew,
And seem'd to weep at our approaching Fate.




They're vain Portents, our Magick still holds good.




Last Night a Village Shrew in Labour fell,
With a slight Charm I check't the hastning Birth,
In vain Lucina was invok't, till I
Dissolv'd my Spell, and then the Blouze was Laid.




A Wood-man as I gather'd Herbs, revil'd me;
But I observ'd him while he fixt a Ginn
Of steel indented to intrap the Wolf,
At first Cock-Crow I drew him from his Bed,
I'th' Engine lock't him fast and left him yelling.




As from Elorus Cliffs I view'd the Floud,
Two Rival Tritons rose with Lances arm'd,
And fiercely at each other ran a Tilt;
They bled, and with their Gore the Sea-weed stain'd,
Which at low Ebb I gather'd, a choice Drugg,
Whose vertue future practice must discover.




Whilst pensive near a Pathless Vale I sate,
A sportive Vapour rowl'd along the Glin,
Its wild Capriches caus'd me to suspect
Some frolick Daemon acting in the Mist,
Which summon'd by my Art t'appear, came forth,
Taught me new Spells, and hid i'th' fog again.



Proceed we then to finish our black Projects.
View here, till from your green distilling Eyes
The poys'nous Glances Center on this Bracelet,
A fatal Gift for our projecting Son;
Seven Hours odd Minutes has it steept i'th' Gall
Of a vile Moor Swine-rooted from his Grave.
Now to your bloated Lips apply it round,
And with th'infectious Dew of your black Breaths

  46Compleat its balefull force.









Now to your several Charges each repair,
E're second Crow expect me at the Cell;
But look you charm the Desart as ye pass:
For if Wolf howl, Fox bark, or Badger yelp,
You shall be Tenter-stretcht and hung i'th' Sun.











O Expectation! Torture of the mind!
Two hours, no more, divide me from my wishes.
But oh, how many minutes make those hours?
Time's sand falls grain by grain to him that waits
For Empire I'm inform'd the Queen has summon'd
The Sorc'ress to consult She's here.




Gives him the Bracelet.

The King of Shades no richer Present drew
From his dark Store t' appease his Ravish't Bride:
It makes thee for seven Lustres more Immortal.



I am confus'd with Joy, but when I wake
From th' Ecstasy 



Wave thy vain thanks, and heed
The Charge I give; to Night at the third Watch
A pow'rfull Constellation Reigns, till then
Forbear to fix it to thy longing Arm.
Away, the Queen returns.



'Twere a mean mischief and below my Art,
To ruine him till in close view of Empire,
But to prevent him in the Nick, just shooting
With the last stretch on his hard hunted Prey,
Is worthy of my Skill, and can almost
Provoke me 'gainst my Contract to a Smile.






In vain we ply the Gods with slighted Incense!
Some Prodigy lurks in each Nook to fright me;
Ev'n now the Altar shook as I approacht,

  47As from the Lavar to bedew the Floor
I heav'd a Bowl, the Crystal Element
Converted in my Hand to putrid Gore.


O Prophetess powerfull in Mystick Rites,
Be kind, and with thy sacred Art assist
A suppliant Queen, and thou shalt be my Goddess.



How, Lady Venus, is your Mars prov'd false?
Drought on my pois'nous Drugs if ought I doe
T' oblige thee Queen, but for the dear Delight
Of mischief, I'll assist thee, teach thee how
To mould his form in Wax by Art prepar'd
Of Viper's fat, and Gumm of Stygian Pines,
Which on a slow fire with due Rites dissolv'd
Shall waste his Entrails, melt his Reins t' a Gelly,
For Magick uses Sovereign Ingredient.







Or if this Method like thee not, I'll teach thee
With bloud of Dragons to inscribe his Name,
And stabb each Letter with envenom'd Needles.
That shall t' his thinking wound his Body o're
With Hornet's stings, there's sport, ho, ho.



I seek not thee to enforce his Love,
But quench my own.
And therefore I entreat thee set a Spell
To keep him Port-bound, till I shall have wean'd
My froward Passion.



Port-bound shall he be!
I'll lash the Coasts with such fierce Gusts from Sea,
'Tis odds I wreck his Navy in the Bay:
Nor without hope by th' by to endanger too
The Towers of Syracuse, that guild the Clouds;
But to my Charm Thus Circ'ling on my Staff.
Daran be'est thou far or near,
Approach, I summon thee t' appear.
A Tune of horrour play'd, after which a Dwarf Spirit rises.
Ha! what art thou? a Spirit of Earth or Air?
For size thou shoud'st be one of Oberon's Train,

  48A Fairy Elf; but I remember not
T' have seen thee in the Ring on Rev'ling Eves,
Nor at the general Banquet in the Vale
By Moonlight; Dwarfin speak thy Name, and why
Thou dost usurp the Office of my Spirit.



I'm sent t' inform thee that the Pow'rs below
Demand thee, for thy Reign expires to Night.



Poysons and boiling Sulphur! heark the Spirit,
The Season's drawing on, permit me Live
To blast one Harvest more.







To force at least an Earthquake when I sink
To lay this stately Cittadel in heaps.



You may not, but this Night it shall become
A Scene of Treason, Rapes, and Massacres.



I shall not perish Singly then.




And to my Charge return: at the third Watch
Expect me.
Descends.




Queen glorious tidings! bless the lucky hour!



What says thy Art?



This Night compleats thy Ruine keep the Secret.



Pernicious Hagg! a Guard here, seize the Witch.

Guard Entring, Ragusa vanishes.

Vanisht? each minute of this dreadfull Night
Teems with some Miracle; where-e're I turn
Fate looks me in the Face.










To your Posts Sirs, and make ready to weigh off
With the young Floud, expect me soon Aboard 
I've sworn, but dare not venture to her presence
Till with repeated Vows I'm arm'd a new.
Moves up to the Queen, they sit gazing a while.
Madam 



Why in this Garb my Lord?



Agues and Feavers! she seems ignorant
To put me on the Torture of repeating
What with more pain I have already told,
Then raving Sibylls utter Oracles 
Think it not rudeness that I seize this Hand.
Queen gives her Hand.

How I adore this Goodness yet I wish
I had not 







O there's Magick in't.







No, for you snatch my life too with it.



Why do you then complain?



It fires my bloud!
Revives the dear remembrance of those Joys,
That never! never Oh my Heart breaks.
Rising in a start.




You are discompos'd my Lord, please you retire
And rest?



'Twas a light swimming in my Head,
And to divert it I was forc't to move.
Your pardon Madam.
Both sit again.




But my demand my Lord, why in this Garb?



Excuse and pity me the Drudge of Fate,
Fate wantonly our Alban State o'rethrew,
And then with the vast Ruines cumbred me;
Seven tedious years have I the weight sustain'd,
And must sustain till on proud Albion's Shore
I pour the Load and shake the burd'ned Soil.



My swelling Passions crowd each other's way,
Aside.

And pressing all for utterance, all are mute.



Empire cou'd ne'r have drawn me from your Feet
Were I the sole Adventurer i'th' War,
But thousands run the fortune of my Play,
And giving up the Game I break them all.



When will the striving Thunder break and roar?




Long have I stray'd from the rough Tracks of Honour
To revel in the looser Vales of Love,
Caress't like soft Endymion by a Goddess,
But now my glorious Toils I reassume;
Once more in Arms, new Listed under Fame,

  50And with as many Oaths stand re-ingag'd
As Heav'n has Pow'rs for I invok't 'em all.



Goe then Ingratefull, False, Inhumane, goe,
Rising in rage.
Seek, search your Fairy Kingdoms through the Flouds;
Trust the false winds as I have trusted thee,
And perish by 'em as by thee I perish.



If like the Rocks relentless I must stand.
Aside.

Make me, indulgent Gods, as Deaf as they!



Curse on my ill-tim'd Hospitality,
I should have join'd with th' angry Gods, and Fir'd
His Pirate Fleet, when storm-driv'n on my Coast,
And Massacred his Legions in a Night.



Now Heav'ns your Aid to fix my wav'ring Heart 




Yet perjur'd Prince at least I will detain
This living Copy of your dear false Self



To sooth my sorrows with the sad remembrance
Of fatal pleasures past.




I cannot lose my share i'th' Albian War;
Th' Inhabitants are all of monstrous Size,
Like those huge Sons of Earth that storm'd the Heav'ns,
I long t' engage a Foe above my reach,
And dart my Rapier at a Giants Heart.



Your Father's wrongs will end me soon, and then
My Crown shall fall on you.




Let dull Heirs watch th' uncertain fall of Pow'r;
I'de force my Fortune, win the Crown I wear.



Think'st thou the Gods, if thus I am deserted,
Will wink at such ingratitude?




We take no final Farewell; when we have fixt
Our Reign in Albion, wee'l invade the Gauls,

Then scowr th' Hesperian Borders to this Isle,
Till Conqu'ring back we visit you again 
Steals off.




Lost Queen! both Gods and Men to thy requests
Are deaf Once more I will attempt this Rock.



  51The Neighb'ring Princes for your sake rejected
On my forsaken Realm will pour their War,
And 'mongst their Trophees Lumber drag me chain'd,
With whose bright presence once they coveted
To grace their Thrones, and honour at my Feet
Their Crowns But let 'em come, for to preserve
My Dignity I'll die immur'd with Fire,
These Golden Roofs shall burn my Funeral Pile;
Then as you sail in dead of Night, survey
From your tall Stern our flaming Syracuse

Relentless, make advantage of our Fate,
And by our blazing Temples Steer your Course.



Away thou foolish Utensil of War,
Throws away his Truncheon.
I'll give my scatter'd Lawrels to the Wind,
Nor dy me more in slaughter Fame can boast
No Charms like these, nor with such bliss reward.



The gratefull Brutus meant not to desert
His hospitable Queen in her distress;
My conscious Heart told me 'twas but Pretence
Yet Trust me Prince, 'twas cruel to pretend!
A mournfull voice from behind the Scene.
Whence that sad Cry?



From your Argaces Cell;
Thrice has his discontented Genius groan'd.



'Twas to reprove and summon us to part.
Ah Prince, in vain our Loves with Fate contend;
Let's tack and stemm the stormy Tide no more.
Improve this Season to oppose your Passion,
And bank against it now whilst 'tis i'th' Ebb.



I'th' Ebb? witness the o'reflowings of my Heart,
Witness the Labour of each panting Nerve,
My glowing Art'ries and fermenting Bloud,
My Dreams all Night, and Musings all the Day
Th' innumerable Deaths of ev'ry hour 



No more! I am convinc't you Love too well!
Yet want the pow'r t' enjoin you Love me less.



O Rapture! killing Sweets and bleeding Joy:




More Prodigies! then Destiny's resolv'd

  52On our Divorce And I at last resolve it too!
I'll take the Courage which this minute gives,
And while my Heart will serve me, say Farewell!



Stay Queen, oh turn! Love's Farewell cannot pass
So smoothly off! a thousand thousand sighs
Shou'd interrupt and break the killing Sound,
Kisses should stifle it, Tears drown it, oh, oh!  
Think not when banisht from your sight, I'll toil
For Empire, no, to the utmost North I'll roam,
Where no kind Sun shall thaw the Congeal'd Brook
To humour with soft Murmurs my Complaints;
Stretcht on its Bank I'll knit to th' Ground I press,
By the neglected Locks Frost-bound to Earth!



You must not leave me with such dire Resolves,
You must my Brutus promise to part hence,
And live remov'd from your afflicted Queen,
Yet promise to Live happy too, you must,
'Tis all I shall enjoin you for my sake
In your Eternal Absence.




I am distracted such another Sound
And then your wretched Brutus is no more.


Ghost of Asaracus rises.



Shield me ye Pow'rs, turn Prince and view your Friend,
Threat'ning and pointing to his blushing Wound.




Asaracus!  that e're that Form should fright me!
Pronounce, what means this Visit from the Grave?
Was then our Friendship of so strong a Tye
That Death could not Divorce? Approach cold Shade,
And in my Bosom's warmth I'll cherish thee.
Ghost Descends.

Dissolv'd, withdrawn disdaining from my sight
E're Fates important Message was Deliver'd!



His speaking Frowns his Embassy exprest,
And the sad Summons I've sworn t' obey.



Ha, sworn? recall inhumane Queen, recall
The wing'd Oath, e're it reach the Gods.







Must then a rash Vow interpose
'Twixt me and Life? Love spreads a Feast, but you
Fix Harpy Vows to drive me from the Dainties!



Now sacred Pow'rs if e're you will assist
Aside.

Poor lab'ring Vertue, my resolves secure!



Permit at least your Slave the priviledge
To breathe his last Groans here!
Nor shall the dolefull Cry offend you long,
For groveling at your Feet his Griefs and he
Will rage themselves into eternal sleep.



Never was such a Spectacle of Woe!
Time's self must stand surpriz'd at our Distress,
And stop his Course to gaze on us as Wonders!
Rise Prince, for we must yield to Destiny,
Scatter'd and driv'n by an Head-sea of Fate;
Again I swear, that Sun shall be my Last
That next beholds your Navy in the Bay,
Take a quick Leave, or you resolve my Death.











With what Regret I leave these Hills of pleasure!
Leaning on the Queen's Breasts.
Mysterious Worlds where all the Seasons meet,
The warmth of Summers, and the Winter's Snow.



Enough! dismiss me from the Rack Adieu!



One dear last Tast of Bliss.



Take, snatch it and away.



Yet one more Everlasting Last.



I dare not for my Soul farewell.



Kind, Cruel Queen Eternally farewell.
Exit.




Racks, Daggers, Poyson,  Lead me Amarante.




Compose this Passion: whither?




To a Desart, Death, Eternal Shades, Oh Torture!
Exeunt.






This is my Dawn of Pow'r, th' approaching Glory
Dazles and wraps me into Ecstasy.
The lucky Minute's come, now for my Bracelet,
Which whilst I wear it lockt to my left Arm
Treason shall ne'r annoy me, thus I bind
Puts it on.

My safety to me My Ambassadors
Shou'd now arrive 



Thy hasty looks prevent thy speech,
And tell me they are come.



They wait with all their Troops at the North Gate,
Where I have plac't thin Guard, and those made privy
To our Design; the rest will be surpriz'd
And yield to unequal Pow'r.



Haste and admit them.
Conduct 'em to the Cell, where they may seize
Their Royal Prize. I'll meet ye there.
Exit Capt. o'th' Gua.

Now comes my Transport! Ha, what suddain Cramp
Distorts my Nerves? I burn! my Heart bodes Death!
Hell, am I then mock't with a dream of Empire,
A Pageant Prince? the Monarch of an Hour?
Pernicious Beldame! 'tis the Bracelet! Oh
I'm poyson'd! wrapt with hissing Snakes about,
Stung in each Pore Furies and threat'ning Fiends
Around me glare The Stars shoot madly down,
It Thunders, the o're-charg'd Clouds break, break and hurl
A show'r of Sulphur on my Head! Fire, Fire!







Room, room, or I shall burst, my Breast will rend
And scatter Wild-fires! ha, who nam'd the Prince?
Spight of our inauspicious Stars he's brave,
Warlike and Soft I cannot breathe without him.
Fly Amarante e're he reach the Port,
And die to hang the Heavier on his Feet.
Bid him return, the Queen has given him leave 
Rash Maid come back! Is Amarante grown
So base as to officiate in my shame?
O raging misery! when shall I have Rest?
My sorrows sleep? they'l never, never sleep;
Why this unkind Delay? did I not charge you
Fetch back the Prince?



Yes, and he shall return.
Rather then Sail, his Fleet shall burn i'th' Bay.



Stay, I conjure you stay What cruel zeal
Prompts you to stab afresh my bleeding Honour?
Convey me to some distant Desart shade,
Where I may rove through th'unfrequented Gloom,
And fright the list'ning Satyrs with my Cries.



Soft Musick, and complaining Songs may calm
This Rage, I've known it a successfull Charm.
Song.Written by Mr. Wright.

Bid the sad forsaken Grove
To sigh for ever, sigh as much as I.
Bid the Dew fall, and the Skie weep apace,
Weep like the Queen of Love:
It cannot be more show'ry then her Face.
Ah hapless Deity,
And still more wretched 'cause she may not Die.
Can there be further joy in the Celestial store,
Now my best Heav'n Adonis is no more,
He is no more, no more!


Hark, methinks I hear each Tree
Murmur in Parts as sighing Breezes rise
And make (whilst Time their nodding Branches keep)
A mournfull Symphony.
The Skies too find a thousand Eyes to weep.
Ah you deceitfull Skies,
When my Adonis fell where were those Eyes?
Can there be further joy in the Celestial store,
Since the sweet Youth Adonis is no more,
He is no more, &c.






Treason, Treason! the Cittadel's betray'd,
Our Guards by th' Agrigentines are surpriz'd,
Part are corrupted and assist the Foe,
The rest in vain resist and Loyal die.



Your Cheek's rich Purple fades, your sick'ning Eyes
Threat'n a fatal Change! Heav'n save the Queen!



My malady at last has prov'd my Cure,
My Griefs at last have swell'd to that degree
To break my o're-charg'd Heart and give me Ease.
Death thou hast shun'd me long, long fail'd my hopes,
But now I've seiz'd thee, and I'll hold thee fast!
Dies.




Still pale ha, speechless too? Cold! Dead! ah Queen
Unkindly hast thou stoln from life and me!
But I'll pursue thee ev'n to th' other World,
Stabs her self.

And if Fate's malice can extend so far
Partake thy miseries there.
Dies.






Let slaughter cease, all sheath your Conqu'ring Swords.




Prostrate? Expir'd? then let the Conqu'rers blush!
Whilst we so busily engag'd i'th' Fight,
Death snatcht the Spoil and bore the Prize away.




O costly Pomp of horrour! none stand forth
T' interpret this dumb Scene?






Here! here it heaves, but thus I give it vent;
Ha! how the Poyson trickles!  What a Crack
Was there? Again? the Icy Region breaks,
Falls clatt'ring down, the frozen Ruines tumble,
And dash the Seas to Heav'n.
Sev'n Suns dart through me with their scorching Rays!
My Sinews crack! my Bones in Splinters break!
Mists, Sulph'rous Mists confound and choak the Day!
Comets and fiery Spectres the Earth yields,
We sink, plunge Head-long to Eternal Deeps.
Falls dead.










In Confusion I am lost.
For their Enterments we will first provide,
Then back to our expecting Court
With mourning Trumpets in slow Marches move,
Sad Cypress for Triumphant Lawrels wear.
And Fun'ral Flags for Conqu'ring Ensigns bear!

