



TIs certain then the Armies joyn'd this Morn.



There's no Intelligence from either Camp,
But by the joynt Report of Cottagers,
That from the Mountains viewed the distant Fray.
The Rebels have the Royal Troops in chase,
Whose broken Squadrons make a Flying ight,
And much disdaining to the Woods Retr eat.



They were the Kings last stake.



This is the day
That crowns the hopes of our designing Queen,
Or sinks her Projects ever; for if now
The Rebels prove the Masters of the Field,
Conqu'ring Argaleon strait Usurps the Throne,
And Weds Edraste Partner of his Pow'r.



The Slaughter of the Field will scarce suffice,
Or effect an Enterprize so great and dangerous;
To finish it, the Princes too must Bleed.




Edraste through their Blood to Empire sails,
And we the Pilots hir'd to steer her thither.
The Queen to serve her high Designs preferr'd us
To the Dignity we hold, and dearly made
Our Loyalty the Price of our Preferment.



When with bright Honours to her Plots she drew me,


I snatcht at the rich Wages, and ne'r weigh'd
The dangerous Task;   but I rec〈…〉te,
I'm sold to her Commands, and 〈◊〉 perform.










Unhappy Greece! Escalus, Pisander!



There's Terror in that Voice; how fares the King?



How brooks he the suppos'd Defeat?



So various are the Transports of his Rage,
That with each minute his Resolves are chang'd:
Sometimes desies aloud the Rebel Pow'rs,
Threatning swift Vengeance; then despairs agen,
And cries all's lost, the Fates are Factious too!
Thus tost with Doubts, and starting from his Chair
He grasps his Scepter, cries I have thee still;
Nor shall the Furies wrest thee: then o'th' sudden
Disdaining casts it from him; thou'rt a Serpent,
Away infectious Rod, thou fir'st my Hand.



The Kings last hopes depend on your Sage Councils,
Say, what will you advise in these extreams?



The growing ill past Cure he neglected,
And now blames his Physicians want of Skill;
Because we cannot from the Dead restore.
I'll haste, and with dissembled hopes support
His drooping Spirits, and prevent Despair,
Which yet in my own Breast I cannot quell.




How temperate is this Politician grown!
The publique Troubles seem t'afflict him now,
Though most industrious once t' embroil a State
In Civil Jars; till Ages Winter chill'd
His Factious Blood, congealed his working Brain;
And now the Dotard's Loyal for his Ease.
Enter the Queen with Letters.



See, Lords; th' Intelligence of Conquerors,
Like Victory comes wing'd: the King as yet
Has no Particulars o'th' Fight.
Whil'st from Argaleon's Camp I am inform'd
That in the general Rout and hot Pursuit
O'th' Royal Forces, both the Princes fell:
Now then Arviola alone remains


The Obstacle of my Edraste's Glory.



We are your Creatures, Madam, by your Favour
Possess the height of Dignity we hold.



And shou'd be proud to perish in your Service.



Experience, Escalus, has prov'd your Truth;
And for Pisander, my new Servant (in
His sparkling Eyes, his active Zeal I read)
I dare pronounce him resolute and bold,
By Nature form'd t' engage in glorious Ills,
T' embarque in a rough Sea of Court-Designs,
And share the Fortunes of a Plotting Queen.



New Servant; Hell! New Favourite, she meant.
Ah Myrrhoc, thy Conjecture's true, I am
Supplanted by this Partner of my Projects;
Dull that I was, not to suspect before:
'Twas not to serve her Pride but Lust, she drew
This new Confed'rate in; and judg'd his years
More sit t' advise of such Affairs than mine.



Conqu'ring Argaleon now will soon advance
With all his Pow'r, and close besiege these Walls;
The Fort is in your hand  





I travel with thy Fate in greater Pangs
Than when my Womb unwillingly resign'd
The Treasure of thy Beauties to the Light.



The Life you gave, I offer at your Feet.
By my dear Fathers shade 'tis nobler far
To die forlorn, than by your Guilt to Reign.
Your Life, which I, of all things hold most dear,
You prodigally stake to win for me
A Crown, which I of all things least esteem.
My private Cares alass! have too much weight
For my weak Mind to bear; how can I then
Sustain the Troubles that infest a Throne.



Cou'd I give Being to a thing so Tame!
Rouse, rouse, thy self, Edraste, nor permit
My active Blood to freeze within thy Veins;
If thou want'st Heat, come, to my Bosom fly,
For I have yet enough of Warmth to spare.



The rightful Crown at best uneasie sits,
But sinks the crusht usurper to the Ground.



These Thoughts wou'd more befit the Cell than court.



To me there is no Palace like a Cell.



What serves the Cloyster for, but last Retreats
To such as have without success aspir'd;
Where having fail'd of glorious Action, they
Hush froward Age with the dull Joys of Ease.



Heav'n has been pleas'd t'indulge my humble Thoughts,
Giv'n Heirs to th' Crown, which you wou'd wrest for me;
And I must hold it in two Princes Wrongs,
Both grac'd with Royal Gifts and form'd to Reign.



Suppose these Lets remov'd, the Princes dead?




Arviola, their Sister then succeds.

Arviola, to whom I have sworn Friendship.

Arviola, that loves me as you do.



Fond Girl, 'twas to your Loss you did contract
That Friendship, and must conceal it or perish.



I but comply'd, in this, with your Commands,
You charg'd me love her.




As I pretend Affection to the King;
And counterfeit so well, 'tis real thought.














Instruct my Vertue Heav'n in these Extreams,
I must unnat'ral or disloyal prove!
Dissemble Friendship! O ye Pow'rs! Dissemble
With the open-hearted true Arviola,

That has not for her Foe one thought of Guil;
Hard Mother! cruel Fate! most cruel Love,
To watch the hour of my Distress, and then
To wound a Heart so much opprest before!





Dispise not Myrrhoe, my threat'ning Dream,
The Scene presented both my Brothers slain;
I saw their Royal Blood mixt with the stream
Of Common Gore; then as my Theocrin

Rusht on to Death; I started from my sleep
And lost th' unfinisht Vision   dear Edraste.









I sought thee to redress my Griefs, and find theo
As much opprest as I; 'tis some new Grief
That now usurps thy Breast, and I suspects
More Tyranous than ever rag'd before.



Ah Princess! in this tempest of Affairs,
Nothing remains untroubled but our Friendship;
All other things are from their Channel stray'd.



Yet since our Breasts are open to each other,
Let the Storm drive, we have one Harbour sure;
Heav'n so be-friend me as I love Edraste.




And were Arviola my happy Rival,
I cou'd (I think) still prize her as I do
Heav'n knows I flatter not, she is my Rival;
Yet then my dearest hopes more dear!




Let's stop a while the current of our Tears,
And piously dissembling our Dispair,
Divert the pensive King; that Fate shou'd heap
Upon his feeble Age such weighty Ills
As Youth cou'd not sustain.



Th' event's uncertain; yet, the sudden storm
As soon may scatter, and the Clouded King,
Set glorious as the Rose.



Ah! Myrrhoe, thy Love wou'd flatter us,
As ours impose on him.











Now Brother you are sad.



Your late suspicion of the Queen proves true.
I cease to please, and her regard to me
Grows hourly Cold,
Whil'st all her kindness on Pisander streams.




Despond not Brother, there are Joys in Pow'r
To Charm dull Age, when Beauty fails to please:
If Love deserts you, bend henceforth your thoughts
To Nobler Cares; convert that cunning now
(That hitherto has so successful prov'd,
I'th Queens designs) to your own Int'rest.




Wee'll watch the Fate of this tempestuous Realm,
And make our Fortunes of the gen'ral wreck.





Why was my Life stretcht out to this black day?
Death might have come long since, and sound me ripe


With all my Honours flourishing round my Head:
But now to Winter blasts I'm left expos'd,
Stript of my Leaves, and with'ring on the Bough.

Argaleon come, and press thy Conquest home.
This is our last Retreat, besiege us here,
Sack, Burn, Destroy, and finish my Disgrace.



Your suffering, Royal Sir, this Glory brings,
That from your goodness, your distresses sprang.
For having Conquer'd i'th pitcht Field (ensnar'd
By your own Vertue; which refus'd to spill
Your Subjects Blood) you treated with the Rebels,
Who su'd for Peace to keep your Forces husht,
Till with recruited Pow'r they might oppress you.




Argaleon rais'd by your too liberal Favour,
Seem'd ev'n to cope with you on even Ground;
And wanted but the Crown to match your Height.
Were you as quick to punish a Delinquent
As to reward the smallest Worth, your Throne
Had still been fixt,
And proud Argaleon's Blood.




Too late your tedious Lectures you begin:
Where slept your Counsels whil'st these Mischiefs grew
And might be ravisht by the tender Root;
Then you indulg'd my Ease, beheld my State
Float loose, whil'st I in soft Retirement slept;
Now rak'd me to the Helm, till the Storm fell.









Look, I have Homage paid me! Theron, Diphilus.

Behold, two Princesses kneel at my Feet:
Ha! ha! speak Sirs, am I not yet a King?



Most Sacred Sir  



'Tis false, ye Sycophants, I was a King,
A prosperous Majesty;
But now my Empire shakes,
Opprest with its own weight.
Th' unwieldy State falls on the Founders Head.

The Queen! must She be conscious too of my Disgrace!
O Aribell, How is my Fate relaps'd
Since first we met? Those Lawrels now are blasted


Which in my Myrile Wreath I did •••sert.
When I espoused thee, Triumphs grac'd our Hymen,

And Captive Princes at our Nuptials serv'd.



Nay Sir, be just still, tho' unfortunate;
Nor think the transitory Charms of Pow'r
Endear'd you to this Breast; this is a season
To excuse such active Love as mine,
That like the Dolphin shews it self in Storms.









Att. A Souldier from the Camp.
Enter Messenger.



I read thy Message in thy drooping Brow,
Thou bend'st beneath my Fate, hurl it on me,
And crush me with the Burden; Thou hast Wounds,
And may'st with Honour speak of Vanquishment.



Fly, Royal Sir, all's lost, O fly and save
Our Empires dearer half, your Sacred Life:
Nor think these Walls secure against the Shock
Of Rebels, with Infernal Rage possest:
Your strongest Fence, your Loyal Old Battalions,
Taught by your self to Conquer, in Pitcht Field
Are by these Troops of Furies driv'n and scatter'd;
And what I fear will shake your Temper most,
Your Royal Sons, by whom our Wings were led,
Turn'd in the Chase t' oppose th' unequal Foe
Till spent; on Heaps of slaughter'd Files they fell.



My Sons both slain, my Legions too o'rthrown;
My Sons, my flourishing Branches both lopt off,
And I the useless Trunk left standing yet
For Passengers to descant on my shame:
Rend me consuming Lightnings Earth divide,
Till thy unfathom'd Centre be my Grave;
Nature her self should Shake when Princes Fall.



Dread Sir, restrain this Transport, and resume
Your Reason now in your extreamest Need.



Lord Theocrin, who in the Fight perform'd
What the Beholders scarce believed (and must
Despair of Credit when they shall relate)
Gather'd our scattered Stray, a poor Remain,
That scarce a Limb of the Old Body seem;
Which in the Clifts he posted, where they hold
Spight of the Foe, that scale the Rock in vain.



'Twas well perform'd, we'll march to their Relief;


Get me new Forces rais'd, a sudden Host,
Like that which sprung from the dire Serpents Teeth:
Arm'd with Necessity and steel'd with Wrongs,
We'll rush at once on these fierce Savages,
And ravish from their Mouths the panting Prey.



Forgive me, Sacred Sir, that I disswade
Your Fury from unfeazable Designs.
You must create the Forces you wou'd levy.
Your Loyal Cities, your thin Fields to fill,
Long since were glean'd, the rigid Press scarce spar'd
Decrepid Age, and weeping Infancy.



Peace Dotard, hast thou worn thy Sable Locks,
To wither'd Gray, and even that Gray to Baldness.
And art thou still contriving to Inch out
Insipid Life? the gen'ral fright shou'd cure
Your Agues, and ferment your freezing Bloods:
Hast and Proclaim our Will, lest all our Males,
From lisping Infancy, to Bed-rid Age.
Set free th'imprison'd, bid the Sick discharge
Their Maladies; the Storm comes thundring on,
And in our sinking State all hands must work.



The Good Old Man, that like an Infant slept
Till now, at last wakes froward; let him Brawl,
He'll quickly Rage himself asleep agen.



Be it further publisht, to enstame our Youth,
That yet survive from the Consuming War.
If any dare so far tempt glorious danger,
To force the Enemies Ward, and bear away
Th' Arch Rebels Head by our last hopes I swear;
My Crown, and fair Arviola are his:
Empire and Beauty, Valour's Noblest Prize.
Our self in Person will Command and Dazle
The factious Host with full-beam'd Majesty:
Thus your Ag'd Monarch draws his Vengeful Sword.
Our Flame shall snatch the Foe that thinks us Cold,
There's none destroys like Time, and none so Old.







Pisander brought in by an Attendant.


HIther the Queen injoyn'd me to Conduct you,
And you must wait her here:







My Charge was only to admit you hither,
Where none approach without her special Orders;
And We, Th' Attendants on her Private Hours,
Are sworn to strictest Secrecy.




Sure I am charm'n into an Extasie,
And this a scene by Fancy's cunning form'd;
Pictures of Nature drawn beyond the Life.
Remove from hence, and the declining Year
Looks sickly and deform'd; the wither'd Leaves
In Search of the retreated Sap fall down,
And from the Root seek what the Bough deny'd:
But here the Summer blooms, in all its Pride,
The Sun darts in with kindlier Warmth, the Winds
Breath softer, and the Brook complains less loud.
Hail blest Retreat of Nature happy Shade;
Soft Musick. 
My senses fail, this is some sacred Grove:
And that the bright Divinity o'th' Place!
Where are the Cupids that shou'd hover round,
I Feel'um here! th' are div'd into my Brest!
Forgive me Goddess  








The Queen! forgive my dazled Eyes their Error!
I come by your Command to know your Pleasure,
And trust you judge so truly of my Zeal,
To' think me worth some Enterprize of danger.



Yes, you shall find how I esteem your Zeal,
By the important service I enjoyn,
Indeed 'tis an Affair of so much weight,
I know not how to word it   You must Guess.



Instruct me what I am to undertake,
And if I fail t' attempt  




So bold t' engage, and slow to apprehend?
How like Conspirators at their first. Meeting,
With caution we gaze silent on each other,
Expecting who shall start the Business first!
Since then I must speak first in the Design,
Draw near and on my Hand swear Secrecy.

Repeat your Vow   Oh Love! the quickning Touch,

Through my pleas'd Veins, runs tingling to my Heart.



My Warmth is fled, I've sworn my Life away!
My Soul cleaves to that Hand  



How soft is Youth!
How soon dissolv'd into an Extasie!

Pisander Rise   now sure you well can guess,
For what I summon'd you to this Retirement?



I know it; you'd engage me to perform
A dangerous Task, to blast the Kings Succession,
And settle your Edraste in the Throne;
I'll do't.



Still you are wide of my Design,
I'll Plot at leisure hours for my Ambition,
But Love's my great Affair, th' important Business.
Come, speak boldly Youth,
Thy free Conjecture of these private Bowers,
Where I so oft retire, while all is husht,
Silent and close, as Ceres's awful Fane?



Tis said, that for Devotion you repair
From the Court's Crow'd to these secluded Shades,
Where you consume successive Nights and Days,
In Abstinence and Penitential Tears.



Ha! ha! the World retains its old perversness still,


To scandalize the Vertuous, and to Saint
The Libertine; but 'tis no fault of mine,
If Rumour will lay Vertue to my Charge!
What, mar these Eyes with Penitential Tears,
Fond Youth? They have too much of fire to weep.
Their glances cou'd Create a Day in Cells,
And kindle freezing Hermites into Dalliance.
Why this Reserv'dness Sir? Has Majesty
So little Charmes? Or do's its Splendour dazle?
Then I'll divest me of my Royalty,
And love upon the Square. Still fixt and senseless?



Think not I have no sense of such full Bliss,
But like Young Prophets from thei: Visions Waking;
I fear to stir and loose the Charming Dream.




What means those Shouts?



Th' are Sounds of Triumph not of Terrot.
Enter Attendant hastily.



Lord Escalus in haste desires Admittance.



He comes unseasonably, but let him Enter.

Pisander hide a while within that Bower.





Forgive me Madam, that with so much haste,
I bring unwelcome Newe, our Plot's Defeated.
The Subtle Web which with such Toil we wrought,
Is quite unravell'd to the very Loom.



Dispatch, cut short the Story of my Fate.




Argaleon's Faction which with so much Cost
And Secrecy, you nourisht to that Growth.
That they cou'd grap le with the Kings whole Forces,
Ev'n they, so late the Masters of the Field,
Are now in shameful Rout disperst and broken,
And their bold Leader, on whose daring Vertue,
Our Hopes depended, shares the Vulgar Fate,
And Headless Bleeds amongst the Common Slain.



'Tis false and shall not be.






The Gods have your Resolves fore-stall'd.



Did they from Heav'n war with my Officer?
The Loyal Forces were cut off intire,
Except a Despicable Remnant posted
I'th' Clifts by Theocrin.




From thence broke forth
The flame that thus laid waste Argaleon's Trenches.
For Theocrin by night forsook the Clifts,
With his small Train, and Coasting wide Attaqu'd

Argaleon's Camp, with Shouts as of full Legions,
And Num'rous Trumpets to increase the Terror,
Which so prevail'd on the surprized Host,
(Confus'd, twixt Wine and Slumber) that at last
Half-arm'd they took themselves to general Flight,
And more opprest by their own Numbers fell
Than the Pursuers Swords.




'Tis but an Army and a Project lost.
And Wee'll contrive anew,
Anon Expect my Orders to await me.




So unconcern'd, so fill'd with her new Love,
T'Exclude the Darling of Her Brest Ambition?
Methought Pisander glanc'd by as I enter'd;
For his delight she's dec•t as she was wont,
When loose she wanton'd with my Vig'rous years;
On her young Paramour she shows her Favour,
Whil'st a Sapless Trunk neglected fades!
But Age that lessens me in her Esteem,
Has taught me Cunning timely to provide,
And seek elsewhere the Favour she denies.








The Gods, the Gods at last, have own'd the Cause,
Of injur'd Majesty; We have o'recome!
Summon the Priests to speedy Sacrifice,
Crown every Altar, heap the Spicy Piles,
Till the vast Fanes be hid in Smoaking Gums;
No Pensive Look prosane the Gen'ral Joy,
Not Orphan'd Matrons be allow'd to Mourn:


Nor Virgins Widdow'd on their Brldal Day!



When Young in the Rang'd Field you first appear'd,
You Charm'd Success, nor had She now forsook you,
But, like a Mistress with Discretion kind,
Withdrew a while till absence made her priz'd;
Then with Surprizing Kindness met your Passion.




Hail best of Kings! Fall ev'ry Traytors Head,
Like this, and Flourish all Crown'd Brows like yours.

The Savage that so long had Lawless Rang'd,
That slew our Youth, and laid our Vineyards Waste,
Lies Bloodless, now by this Successful Hand.



Rise Theocrin, Cast not to Ground, those Limbs,
That Cou'd support a Sinking Monarchy.
Now I am King indeed, my Shaken Throne
Again takes Root, and my Decaying Scepter
Buds in my Hand anew.

Arviola, Edraste, both draw near;
And pay him with your own the Publick Thanks.



My Dearest Theocrin, how greedily
Do's my impatient Love snatch this Occasion
T'unlaid it self unseen into your Brest!



O my Arviola, I'm Lost in Joy!
I am too Blest! Indulgent Pow'rs rest rain
The Flowing Bliss, or I shall Die of Rapture!




Arviola was proclaim'd the Prize o'th Valour
That brought Argaleon's Head: 'Tis Theocrin's,

Brave Youth, my Crown is Hers, and She is Thine;
Thou merrit'st Both: Though not from Kings descended,
Thou art by Vertue to the Gods Ally'd!



Your Goodness, Royal Sir, o're rates my Service;
What I perform'd, was but a Subjects, Duty.
But Oh! I feel a warmth t'attempt such things,
As shall (is merrit sound not too prophane)
Deserve a Princess, and Oblige a King.



By all the Powers that sped thee in the Fight,
Thou art our Son, and this thy Nuptial Day.


Lo there thy Royal Bride, and too compleat
Thy Happy Fortunes, Thou shalt Tryumph too.

Bellona once shall be with Myrtle Crown'd,
And War's loud Voice in Rev'ling Musique drown'd.




Fortunate Princess, Happy Arviola,

Forgive me if I Envy now ev'n Thee!
How long have I been tost in Storms of Fate,
And still the Tempest darkens round my Head.
The restless Queen's Ambition still projects
To Load my Temples with a Hated Crown.
And to effect her Plot, Aviola

Must bleed, and Theocrin be lost; to Him
My seoret Love long since I have devoted.
To her long since my open Friendship sworn:
Something I will perform in their behalf,
Worthy the Chastest Love and Noblest Friendship;
For from the Court I'll wander in disguise,
No matter where; for one distrest like me,
Can no where loose her way: When I'm remov'd,
The Queen's Designs will rest, and Theocrin

Possets Arviola, and the Crown in Peace:
And I my self have all the sad Relief
That my Forlorn Condition will admit;
To Mourn retir'd in Caves and Glut of Sorrow.





Madam the Princess beggs your Presence:




My Griefs will make me rude, and check her Mirth:
Thou Myrrhoe ever lov'dst me,
Now like a Dying Miser I'll reveal
A Secret, the dear Treasure of my Soul!
I love this Theocrin ev'n to Distraction:
And for his Quiet, and more private Reasons,
I wi•l for ever hide me from the Court:



Oh Heav'n th' Eternal Powers!




But Treasure still this Secret in thy Brest:
For by th' Eternal Pow'rs you meant t' invoke,
I am resolv'd, and if prevented, swear


To act a speedy Violence on my Life.



Your dire Resolve alas! Has Charm'd my Tongue;
But my Swoln Eyes will take their Liberty.




When I am gone, give these to Theocrin,

The short sad Accents of my Dying Passion.
He may afford my Memory a Tear:
Nor ev'n Arviola her self Repine.
And so Fare-well to Hope and Thee for ever.





Enough my Dear Companions of the War;
Nor think these Honors all addrest to me:
But hold your selves large Sharers in these Tryumphs.
My Courage was more fortunate then vours,
Not greater: Trust me then I Triumph most,
When I the Honour had to Lead such Worthies
To Reap an Host, not now I Head this Pomp.














Not to Accompany our Nuptial Rites.



Behold the Silver Moon shot from her Sphere,
With all her Starry Train! Divine Arviola,

Not Victory her self can Charm like Thee.



Ah! Theocrin, my old Griefs still pursue
And haunt me, even upon my Nuptial Day!
A Sumptuous Feast of Joy is spread before us,
But I suspect it as a Poyson'd Treat,
And fear to taste; I see you, hear you talk,
Clasp fast your Hand; and yet methinks w'are still
As far divided as the distant Poles,
And shall unite as soon.



Our Joy's a Feast of the Gods own preparing;
Permit not then imaginary Fears
To poyson your Delights; suspect no Storm
In such a Halcyon Skie, our tender Love
Long nourisht covertly, till grown to an Head,
Is now expos'd to th' Air, and dares the Weather,






Dread Sir, the Queen desires you to excuse
Her Absence from the Pomp; she's indispos'd.



It was a rude Distemper to intrude
At such a season   Bid the Masque begin;
Come to your Monarchs Arms, ye happy Pair,
Supporters of my Age: Thus let me joyn you;
This Knot I have begun, the Priest shall finish.
Look down ye Spirits of my slaughter'd Sons;
Behold the Avenger of your Royal Blood;
Behold our gen'ral Mirth; then summon all
Your Brother Stars and Revel in your Spheros.





The Flamen waits, and the preparing Rites
Are finishe; thrice has Hymen been invok'd,
And Iuno's Altar thrice perfum'd.




Move on, lead to the Temple.
Enter a Messenger hastily.



To Arms, to Arms! a Forreign Fleet invades
Our frighted Coast, and brings a floating War:
They spread their Streamers as secure of Conquest;
With Shouts and louder Trumpets rend the Air,
And seem to Triumphe'r the Fight begin.



A Forreign Navv! What new Turn of Fate?
Must then our dear-bought Peace so soon be ravisht,
And Wars green Wounds be launc'd and bleed anew?



I thank ye Gods, I have not yet deserv'd
This charming Princess, am too poor in Fame,
And kindly you provide for my Renown.
Permit me, Royal Sir, forthwith to head
Your Troops, whil'st their last Lawrels still are green,
T' engage Breast-deep this bold invading Foe:
Our Blood shall snatch their Legions, nor permit
Their Corosea once to touch our threatn'd Soil.



Fly swift as Light'ning, and destroy more sure.



Weep not Arviola, but bade me Conquest;


I go to bring thee Honours from the Flood,
Richer than all the Gems the Deep contains;
From Conquest late we mov'd to Triumph, now
From Triumph to new Conquest, to return
Triumphant, in an endless Round of Glory.




'Tis so! our Halcyon Day is overcast,
And all the smiling Prospect snatch'd already:
My troubled Heart presag'd its own Distress:
And gave dark symptoms of the rising Storm,
That parts, I fear, my Theocrin and me,
To meet no more but on the Coast of Souls.



Canst thou inform us nothing more particular?



A Barge before the Fleet arriv'd the Bay,
As I presume, with speedy Embassie
And full Intelligence.




Sent from the newly arriv'd Fleet.








Health to the Sacred Majesty of Greece;

Prince Abardanes from the Thracian Coast,
By free Commission from his Royal Father,
With Seven Arm'd Legions, and full Fifty Sail
Now Anchors in your Port, t' assist your Cause,
And quell the Rebels that imbroil your State:
Partly our Old Alliance to this Crown,
Oblig'd our King t' engage in your Relief;
But most t' uphold the Rights of Majesty,
Whose Dignity's the Common Cause of Kings.



Our Cause already has restor'd itself;
Bear to your gen'rous Prince a Monarchs Thanks:
And in our Name invite him to our Court;
Our Self will meet our Royal Guest half way,
Doubling our Pomp with his illustrious Train,
Whil'st spight of blazing Noon, the waken'd Stars
Start from their Cells, our Triumphs to survey,
And joyn their Glories to this wond'rous day.










IAm now on my Pilgrimage, when the Nuptial Ceremo∣nies are over, at your leisure give the Inclosed to Theocrin, from Yours Edraste.
These Letters speak this Princess ignorant
O' th' sudden turn in Theocrin's Affairs:
A queint Device was forming in my Thought
And these come seas'nably t' assist the Project.
Lord Theocrin your pardon   (opens and reads)   'Tis right.
Penn'd to my wish; a hopeful Policy,
But time must ripen it. Edraste drew not
From me her Ruin, nor am I unjust
To play the Game which she gave o'r for lost,
And sweep the Stakes.


Brother you'r-are well return'd, and as I wisht
With busie Brow; How went the Salutation?



The King and Prince, like Old Familiars, met,
And having thrice in close Imbraces joyn'd,
Admitted to their Hand each others Nobles.
Th' Officious Flamen at our Western Gate,
Perform'd short Sacrifice; mean while the King
And Abardanes joyn'd in solemn League
Of Friendship, and before their Entrance hail'd
The Genius of the Place.




Shou'd Abardanes with such costly Forces
Arrive our Shore?



T' assist the King to o'rthrow


The Rebels, was the plausible Pretence.
A slight disguise   but hark! they come.




The Pomp seems clouded with a sullen gloom,
The King looks sad, Arviola's Cheek's are flusht
With such disdainful Rage; her flashing Eyes
Struck bold Argaleon at the Treaty dumb.



Dissention, wrecking Discord is broken loose,
And we must cast our Net i'th' troubled Tide;
It must succeed  



Speak, feast my greedy Ear,
That wou'd devour at once the charming Tale.



This Prince with Passion has beheld Arviola,

Which yet his haughty Mind seem'd to disdain,
And with a Lions Fury shook the Toil:
At last to th' King, his Grief he did unfold,
And with a haughty meen (befitting more
A Conqueror than Suiter) mustring up
His Titles, he demanded her in Marriage:
The King reply'd, 'twas an Affair of weight,
And in regard of Theocrin's just claim
Of fatal consequence.




Th' impatient Prince took for Consent.



His Pride resented it as flat denial,
And scarce contain'd its Swellings within bounds.
And now near Hella's Grove, Lord Theocrin,

Attended with light Horseman, met the Pomp,
Forward we mov'd, when in a sudden Feud;
The fiery Rivals drew; but first the Prince:
Both mad as Winds contesting for the Main,
And scarce the thund'ring King their Fury quell'd.



A promising Disaster! What ensu'd?
And why return'd not Theocrin?




Scarce was the Fray compos'd, when there arriv'd
Intelligence that the Disperst remains
O'th' Rebel Troops, had gather'd since the Rout,
And garison'd within Eipercte's Towers:
The King seiz'd this occasion to dismiss
Chaft Theocrin to th' Army, with strict charge
To block Eipercte's Walls with speedy Siege:
An exquisite Device of State, at once
To keep the fiery Rivals at just distance,


And compass leisure for the best Resolves.



Soft, he returns with pensive Diphilus








Pisander in the Queens esteem supplants me;
What then remains but that I shift my Sails,
And seek some richer Port: the King's Esteem,
And Wind and Tide conspire to waft me in!
The Tempest is on Wing, sink Theocrin,

'Tis on thy Ruins I must build my Hopes,
And mounted on thy Ship-wrack make to shore.


Re-enter King, Theron, Diph.



Now Lords as you do prize your Countreys Peace,
Your Ages ease, your Wives and Childrens Safety;
Ply your best Skill and Bank against the Deluge!
Methinks I see our Greece again embroil'd
And Slaughter's bloody Sluces drawn anew;
Our Laws disarm'd, and holiest Rites profan'd,
Our Streets alarm'd with Tumults, Rapes and Fire,
And all the Terrors of Argaleon's War.



Whence can you fear, dread Sir, Events so fatal?
Not from the Prince, he is your Friend in League.



My Friend in League! Friendship's the priviledge
Of private Men, for wretched Greatness knows
No Blessing so substantial.




I see not why your Maiesty shou'd take
An anxious Thought! What can the Scruple be?
What better can secure the Peace of Greece,

Then that Prince Abardanes Wed Arviola?




And my late Vows to Theocrin be revok•••




Your Int'rest, and the present Exigence
Of your Affairs require it.




For Earth's more false, and Fiends to Men are Angels;
O hard Estate of Empire! wretched Kings;
How are we snar'd in Errors not our own,
And hood-winkled to th' Crimes we most wou'd shun?
Hence 'tis our Names stand Black in Chronicle,
When impious Councellors betray our Reason;


With Eloquence and Sophistry ensnare us,
And make Injustice necessary!



Prince Abardanes aws us from the Bay,
Threatens to pour his Legions on our Coast,
If fair Arviola refuse his Love.
His Rival Theocrin's grown Popular,
And Heads our Army; what if he resent
His Disappointment, seek by Force his Claim?
Shall we permit him take by Arms his Right,
And to a Subjects Tyranny submit?
Or call the Princes Forces to our Aid,
And trust the Courtesie of Forreign Pow'rs?



The Siege will hold him for a while employ'd;
The Prince and he, fierce as they are, may yet
Burn harmless as dire Planets do; whil'st distant:
But meeting hurl swist ruin on our State.





My Business Royal Sir, will justifie
My bold Intrusion; give me leave t' impeach
Your Favourite of Guilt, which true as 'tis,
Will scarce meet your Belief; of Treason.







Lord Theocrin, he Courts the Popular Fame,
And forms Designs against your Life and Empire.



Say, speak'st thou this on thy own Knowledge or
Conjecture? If no more, on what Presumption?



The cause, his jealousie of Abardanes,

And your deferring his expected Nuptials:
With blood shot Eyes I view'd him in the Pomp,
Whil'st diving low from his Triumphant Chair,
The Rabble at each Hault he did salute,
Then eagerly inclin'd his Lawrell'd Head,
To catch the buzzing Praises of the Crow'd;
Whil'st on his Youth (his Active Youth they call'd it)
And (as they term'd it) your neglectful Age
They descanted, wounding each Loyal Ear!



I must have Evidence more positive,
Till then suspend my Judgment, make it clear,
And know that on the Proof depends thy Life.



Good Gods, that I were Earth! forgotten Dust;
Th'oblit'rate Marble mouldring o'r my Ashes,
And this Black Charge a Slander: Heaven! My Life!


Your Empire's Life depends on your Belief.

So now I'm Plung'd, and must dash through or Perish:
Three Factious Stout Repiners at the State
(Of Bank'rupt Fortunes) I have Brib'd already.
To swear this Charge, a Circumstance or two,
Neatly devis'd and plausibly alledg'd,
Will make th' Impeachment pass.
Now to my She consed'rate to confer
Of my Designs: She's a Projecter too,
Lur'd on by Interests resistless Charms;
The vig'rous Spring that sets all Plots adrist,
From Womens Projects to th' Intrigues of State.






Ha! Visit you disguis'd, too Night?




My Theocrin, I but ev'n now discharg'd
The welcome Messenger he sent to inform me.
No tidings of my dear Edraste yet?
'Twas sure no small Resentment that cou'd move
Her temp'rate Breast to such a rash Resolve!
My Fate in all its past Severities,
Allow'd me that dear Partner of my Cares;
But now the Charmer of my Griess is gone.



Your sorrow never shall complain alone,
Whil'st I have Breath to eccho to your Sighs.




Myrrhoe, thy Truth deserves a better Fate,
Then waits thy wretched Princess! O my Heart  
My Theorcrin!   but that's too harsh a string
And I forbear to touch   Say Myrrhoe,

How does the Queen resent Edraste's Absence?



Her Women fear'd t' inform her of the Truth,
And forg'd a formal Tale  







Desires Admittance; when I crav'd his Business,
He enjoyn'd me to deliver you this Ring.









Lord Theocrin's Signet Madam.



Conduct him privately to my Apartment.

You Myrrhoe wait here, and on your Life,
Permit none t' approach us.






I'm wing'd with Transport, and I tread on Air,
Ha Myrrhoe, what's thero? Lord Theocrin in's Seal?
A prize by Mercury! the Luckiest hit.
Ev'n fortune's self is my Confedrate now,
And Aids me in my jugling: Sister stay,
This Ring must do me present service, but
I'll instantly restore it.








My business is most pressing.




Did not the Queen too night send to invite you
To banquet with her in the Grotto.






Pisander too is summon'd thither;
Some new adventure that requires our Counsel.



Know then you are invited to your death,
The banquet's Poysoned.







The Queen perceives you are jealous of Pisander,

And to prevent your just revenge, conspires
With her Young Paramour to take your life.









Attendant on the Queen in her Retirement,
Who persecutes me with his whining Passion,
And to oblige me made this dear Discovery.



Ev'n this shall give a Lift to my Designs,
For Fencer like I'll Ward and Strike together.
The Queen and I too Night draw Stakes for Life;
The Lots are hid, now for a flight of hand,
To pick the Prize and shift the •lank to Her.






So hasty were my Orders for the Siege,
That I was forc'd Disguis'd to make this Visit
Arviola!







The last days Sun
Was to have seen our Nuptials celebrated:
The busie Priests for us prepar'd their Temple;
Nor cou'd attend the Morning Sacrifice!
The pompous Streets with Bays and Palm were strew'd,
And Legions blest us as we past along,
Hail Conqu'ring Bridegroom, Royal Bride all Hail,
Enrich our Empire with a glorious Race.
Die Ag'd and Happy! Thus our Loves were greeted:
And now we meet, we meet (Oh Gods!) by stealth!



Dear Theocrin, believe me still your Bride,
For Souls can wed without the Formal Priest:
Why are our Loves, that prosper'd when conceal'd,
Like Faiery-Wealth, curst since they came to light?
Ah! had you ne'r aspir'd at fatal Glory,
We might at least have given the Night to Love,
Tho we, like Glow-worms, hid by Day our Fires.



Divinest of thy Sex, 'its past the powr
Of Thought to rate my Love!   Arviola!




What wou'd my Theocrin?




Dismiss me to my Grave, whilst thou art kind;
And hurry from the World this useless Life,
Which if prolong'd, must prove to Thee most fatal.



Alas, my Lord, your Griefs talk wildly now.



The haughty Prince his Rival once remov'd,
Will prove more mild, nor longer threaten War;
With thousand more Conveniences of thine!


The King will ne'r chide with you for my sake,
Nor trembling Mothers curse your Constancy!
Fate wills, and 'tis expedient that I die!
Enter Myrrhoe with a Ring.



Prince Abardanes, Madam, waits your leisure;
My Lord, your Signet.




The Prince demand Admittance?,
Sure he is well improv'd in his Acquaintance
To seek Admittance here!   Go Myrrhoe

Inform the Stranger better. He mistakes,
These are the Apartments of Arviola

The Princess; Privacy. Haste, tell him so.



My Lord 'tis, with the Princess he wou'd speak;
He comes to Visit  









The Furies send the Princess half so apt
To take th' Infection and my Project's made.










Retire?   by Love I will not understand thee,
Nor wou'dst thou sure be understood   and yet
That angry Brow recalls my Charity!
Is't possible? bid Theocrin retire?
Remove, and give a new Pretender room?



Thank your Distresses that disarm my Rage,
Or my resenting Honour shou'd chastise
This Jealousie; it shou'd rash Man: but now
(Since Fortune treats you ill) I am content
To weigh your Griefs and wink at your Offence.
Once more I do entreat you to with draw,
And humour the perversness of our Fate;
A little Patience will restore our Wishes.



I find my Error, and am dash'd with shame!
Excuse the Ravings of a feav'rish mind;
Nor rate by common Rules immod'rate Love.
Ah Princess, could'st thou dive into my Heart,
And see how absolute thy Form reigns there,
How much I prize the Treasure of thy Love,
Thou would'st at least forgive my wakeful care;
That miser-like I wear a watchful Eye,
And weigh each Grain of the hard purchast Store.



Now by a Virgins Truth, I swear (stand still
Ye flying Minutes, and attend my Vow;)
Whil'st Nature holds her Course and Time runs on,
VVhil'st Night and Day the Night and Day succeed,
VVhil'st Rivers pay their Tribute to the Sea:
And Seas with fresh recruits the Streams supply,
Whil'st Winter strews Hoar-Frost and Summer Dew;
I'm Theocrin's   So Theocrin prove True.



What pittying God, toucht with the sad Estate
Of fall'n Mankind, sent from their bright Abodes,
This Vertue to reform the Savage World!
Bright Excellence, Imperial Maid, farwel;
I go to glean the last Remains o'th' War;
And like Argaleon let me fall accurst,
If once these weary Lids be clos'd in sleep;
Or these devoted Limbs uncas'd from Steell,
Till I've compleated well my task of Honour,
And brought thee Conquest perfect as my Love.





A Lover's Visit if it fail to meet
The best Reception, most unwelcome proves:
But Madam, if my Passion's troublesome,
Accuse the fatal Power of your own Charms;
Unwillingly I put your Fetters on.



With what an Arrogance his Passion sues.




I know I Court on Disadvantages,
And my rough Passion can have little Charms;
But Love dissolves and Moulds me o'r anew:
My Temper gives beneath each Glance you dart.



None sure can be to your vast Merits blind,
But Prince your Court-ship's to a Bride addrest,
And Brides in Heav'ns account are wed already.



It was my Rivall's Fortune, not desert,
T'have first beheld your Charms; which having seen,
He Lov'd of necessary Consequence:
Chance laid the dazzling Treasure in his way,
Too vast to be by any Subject held;
And into Royal Hands must be resign'd.



Now Prince you press too far your Priviledge,
Allow his Worth, as I Dispute not Yours;


Which weigh'd, perhaps wou'd make the lighter Scale.



I'm pleas'd to find his Merit swell so high!
Your Praise has made him Worthy of my Sword:
If wanting Royal Bloud, it prove his Fate
To enrich himself with mine, you are his Prize:
But first we'll try the Forune of the Field.



Ah me! He is rash, and Theocrin all Fire;
What Ruin must attend such meeting Hames.
My Lord, the Prince, Return   Cou'd you Pretend
To Love, and in neglectful Rage withdraw?
Permit my Grief to reason calmly with you,
For you are generous and will be just!
This Love that has surpriz'd your noble Mind,
Is but a vicious and irregular Heat  
Which your severer Prudence will Correct.
You'll be advis'd my Lord, I know you will;
You ought not, must not   and you will not Love.



O my divided Soul! her painted Grief
Darts through my stubborn Bosom to my Heart.



What Triumph is there in a Virgins Tears?
What Conquest to pursue her to her Grave?
I'm sworn to be Lord Theocrin's or die;
And if from his Embrace I am Divorc'd;
Who Courts me after, is my Murderer.



Rise Princess, witness these prodigious Tears,
How much I'm touch'd with your Distress; how much
My lab'ring Heart resists the pow'rful Charm.



So may you speed in War and thrive in Glory,
Nor of your Crowns and Trophies know the Tale;
And if agen you condescend to Love,
With all the soft Returns of Kindness meet,
Which tender Maids, that pine with secret Flame,
Wish, when retir'd, they tell the Groves their Pain!



I yield! you have prevail'd against your self,
Your Tears have quencht the Fire your Glances gave;
I'll force a Conquest on my Heart, I will.



Then Blessings Crown  



O take your Charms away,
I cannot look and with such Treasure part,
But when remov'd, I'll try to represent
Your Form less Glorious, and resign you then.
This Pang, and I'm at ease!   O Sossacles,

I have o'rcome!   'Tis false, I'm still her Slave,
I long, and 'tis methinks an Age already
Since I beheld her! How shall I sustain



Eternal Absence? It can never be,
My Fancy forms her fairer now than ever;
As Colours take in Christal brighter Die.



Your Highness better knows to War than Love;
Presume not Sir to force a Victory
By furious onset here, as in the Field;
'Tis, Patience and a formal Siege must win,
The Fort which you in vain attempt to storm:
Bribes must Corrupt, where Force and Valour fail.



Speak plain, my Oracle, thy Conduct here
May speed my Love, as it has done my Arms.



The Princess Heart's already taken up
With Theocrin, and if you press for Entrance,
Must sink all Three: Plot first to dispossess
Your Rival.



'Tis a Task for Hercules.




I'll work the self-same Engine to dislodge
Your Rival, and to fix you in his room.



'Tis past the pow'r of Wit; but I can trust
Thy Cunning for Impossibilities.






The Queen Confed'rate too with Theocrin?




Your Queen, your pensive, solitary Queen,
Conspires with Theocrin against your Life;
Her Cell, her sacred Grotto, is the Nest
To hatch their Treason; haste and trust your Eyes,
Ev'n now th'are brooding there together.




And force our Entrance.





1.TELL my Strephon that I die,
Let th' Ecchoes to each other tell,
Till the mournful Accent fly
To Strephon's Ear and all is well.

2.But gently break the fatal Truth,
Sweeten ev'ry sadder sound;
For Strephon's such a tender Youth,
The gentlest words too deep will wound.

3.No! Fountains, Eccho's, all be dumb;
For shou'd I cost my Swain a Tear,
I shou'd repent me in the Tomb,
And grieve t' have bought my Rest so dear.





After which Enter King, Esc. The. Diph.



My Eyes have surfeited upon their shame;
Guards seize 'em both:
Dissembling Aribell! false Theocrin!






Ha! Pisander?   Gods!
Then there's a new Discov'ry   who'd ha' thought

Pisander were a Villain.







I blush for thee Pisander! cou'd even weep
To see such hopeful Vertue fall'n away.



I know vour Majesty decrees my Death;
And with my latest Breath I will pronounce
That Escalus a Traytor.




I'll Perish, and involve Thee in my Ruin!
My Lord, the King, I own foul practices
Against your Crown, but was in all seduc'd
By that Arch-Devil.



Hear me Sacred Sir?
To clear my Loyalty, I but demand
Your Majesty compel 'em taste these Bowls.




Drink Slave or Perish.



Hell 'tis Drink and Perish.








Know my Royal Master
The Queen her self broke with me of this Plot;
But having found me firm of Loyalty,
Resolv'd to silence me with Death for ever.
On that Design invited me too Night,
To Banquet with her here i'th Grotto, where
These Poyson'd Goblets were to have giv'n me Welcome.



Guards, bear the Empress to the Cittadel,
Till we resolve the manner of her Death.



Death, doting Monarch, must that witherd Brow
Give Sentence on this Bloom, this Spring of Beauty,
That has preserv'd thy friezing Bloud in Motion,
Cous'ning the Grave of her long due; the Grave
That rivall'd me, and for thy Lumber waited,
When I received it to my Youthful Bed.
Have I sustain'd thy sinking Royalty,
And stufft thy hollow Robes to fill the Throne;


And talk'st Thou of my Death.




Let darkest Mansions hide her from the Day,
That Sickens at her Insolence.




I'll make those Mansions fairer that those Bow'rs,
And in a Scene of thought repeat these Joys,
So oft within these rev'ling Shades Possest.
See there thy Rival, King, how lovelier far
In Death than thou art Breathing? Fear him still,
Be jealous of his Memory, and live
Till ev'ry Subject scorns thee as I do,
And Vermine like o'r-leap their Wooden King.
State, Tempests, shake thee into Dust   Fates catch
My Curse, and stamp it in their brazen Volumns.




This jumps not with my Wish, Tame, Suff'ring King!



But Theocrin  



Is to his Charge return'd,
Too late we enter'd to surprize him here;
These Letters I intended t'have produc'd,
And charg'd him with his Treason to his Face.



To the Rebels? and with Theocrin's Signet seal'd?
See Theron, Diphilus.








He taxes me with Breach of Faith, repents
His Service, and solicites them t'espouse
His Cause, and ioyn their Out-law'd Troops with his;
Which will secure at once their forfeit Heads;
And vindicate his Claim t' Arviola.

My Lords your speedy and most safe Resolves.



'Twere safest to discover no distrust,
But summon him to Court with speed,
As to some sudden Council, then
Surprize and sentence him to present Death.




Mid'st all my busie Zeal, this stupid King,
As yet no mention of Reward has made!
And rates my Service as a Subjects Duty:
Had I imploy'd but half the expence of Wit
To serve the Prince, my Pains had past for Merit:


He claims no Soveraign Right in my Endeavours,
And will with Honours crown my Industry.
The time presents, his Agent Sossacles

With Myrrhoe has been tamp'ring; I'll strike in
And share in the Design; 'twere plausible,
And of good credit, to perswade this Prince,
That for his Interest I have undermin'd
Lord Theocron, his dangerous Rival. Good!
Thus tacking oft to catch the veering Winds,
The skilful Pilot works into the Bay.






King, Escalus, Theron, Diph.


TIs odds, but he'll suspect the sudden Summons
(As Guilt is ever jealous) and decline
Our Orders.



Doubt not, Sir, but he'll appear,
And with as bold a meen as ever.



Thus forward Spirits, howe'r by Heav'n design'd
For State-Defenders, prove their Countries Bane;
For when their active Courage has redrest
The Publique Wrongs; the proud Restorer's self
Next Tyrant proves, and for Reward Usurps
To them Abardanes and Sossacles.

Now Prince to your Desires I can be just;
Your Rival has by Treason forseited
His Right to Arviola and our Favour,
And naught remains that can resist your claim.



Not ev'n Arviola's Divinest Charms
Are more desirable, than to be stil'd


Your Son, not Glory cou'd have charm'd me more;
Glory that drew me forth to share your War.



Free I receiv'd this Crown from Heav'n, and leave

Arviola her freedom to confer
The fortune of her Greece, where she bestows
Her Love; and Abardanes is secure
Of our best Aid t'endear him to her Breast.




Come near, my Sossacles, thou art surpriz'd
To find this Cheek turn'd pale, and see this Breast
Heav'd with unwonted Sighs; I know 'tis mean,
And blush at this Disorder, but bear with me,
Thou only conscious art to my Complaint,
And even to thee I tell but half my Pain.



To me you gave the Conduct of your Love,
And with successful Industry I've won
(What most I doubted) Myrrhoe to our side)
The Princess's confident.




'Twas by her Art that Theocrin prevail'd,
And work'd into Arviola's esteem.



The fittest Engine therefore to dislodge
And work him out agen: She knew t' extol
And dazzle the Young Princess with his Praise;
And doubtless can with equal Art accuse.



By what strange Wiles, my subtle Mercury,

Could'st thou prevail on this demure Deceiver?



With well couch'd Flattery, and pretended Love;
Besides with Gemms and Gold I brib'd her Favour,
Yet with such difficulty, that t' have viewed
The winding Scene, had prov'd no small Diversion.



Methinks I see my Engineer at work.



At first, with such disdain, as wou'd ha' past
For real, with the unskill'd in Womens Wiles,
The Present she refus'd; in passion told me
That she had much projected for your sake,
And by degrees intended to encline
The Princess to accept of your Address,
But was prevented by those hated Gifts,
That rendered her free Service Mercinary.







No! paus'd, and with a sigh
Confest, though you had justly disoblig'd her,


Yet since it was the Princess Interest
T'slight fall'n Theocrin, and approve your Suit,
She'd still proceed to serve you, and engag'd
(By whāt Device I know not) instantly
To render her Averse to Theocrin,

And then of course you seize her vacant Breast.



Thou shalt have Altars rais'd thee.









My Lord, I come to check your lavish Bounty,
That leaves no place, for gen'rous and free Service,
But turns my best Endeavours into Hire.



Think not those trivial Presents were design'd
For more than Earnests of Rewards to come;
'Tis in your pow'r to enrich me with a Treasure,
Beyond the Wealth of my expected Empire;





Know my Designs on that account were ripe,
Before you shar'd your Bounty: a few hours
Is all I crave to perfect your Request.

Arviola comes, with-draw Sir, and expect
My Promise.


To Theocrin, comes in play; now all the Fraud
That injur d Lovers charge upon our Sex
Inspire me; Tears, Oaths, Swoonings, changing Blood;
And all the seeming Pangs of wildest Rage,
Assist my Cous'nage.




Ha! the Gods forbid!
Stop thy rash Arm, or turn thy Steel on me,
Distracted Myrrhoe; speak what means this Fury.



Where am I? What unkind Hand has disarm'd me!
O my asslicted Heart! Arviola?

Fly Princess, for I have resolved on Death,
And shall depart in Pain if you are by.



Speak, I conjure thee, and unfold thy Grief;
Or by our dearest Friendship I'll bleed first.



As you regard your Peace, permit me die
In silence, nor reveal a fatal Truth,
Which you of all the World shou'd last discover.



Thy tender Bosom takes too quick a sense
Of my Distresses; but of me learn temper,
That can survive at once Edraste's Absence
And Theocrin's Disgrace.





Was it not I that kindled first your Breast
With Love of Theocrin, and fann'd the Flame
With hourly Praise? Unfortunate Zeal.




And I adore thee for't.




And with that Ponyard meant to act
A Justice on my self for doing it;
Tho to the expecting Fates I will appeal
I was abus'd, and more deceiv'd than you!



Wreck me no longer with tormenting doubt;
If my full Griefs can yet be capable
Of fresh Disasters, let me know the worst.



Swear then to bear it as a Princess shou'd.



Perish my dearest hopes, but I will do
As shall become my Sex and Royal Blood.



Peruse that Letter then.





And in Edrastes Hand? Her NÃ me subscrib'd?
Most strange Contents!   Yet she concludes more strangely!

   Forgive my Griefs this Trespass; they shall never offend you more; for I have not the heart to complain of you, tho the Author of my Ruin.
Edraste.
The Author of her Ruin! Theocrin

The Author of Edraste's Ruin! Speak!
Confess, or dear as 'tis, I will rip up
That reverend Breast, and tear the Secret forth.



Take then the fatal Story (Sighs be husht


And give me Breath)   th' unfortunate Edraste

(As I have ever been her Confident)
Inform'd me of the Cause why she with-drew;
You thought her Absence unaccountable;
So little you surmis'd that she retir'd
To hide her growing shame!







With Cheeks now pale, now blushing, she confest
She had resign'd her sacred Virgins Treasure,
And in close dalliance wanton'd, till at last,
Her amorous Theft no longer wou'd be hid,
But forc'd her to retire.



I'll mourn for thee Edraste, and lament
In thy Offence, the Fall of Womankind!  
But   Myrhoe   Thou seem'st not yet discharg'd
Of half thy Tragick Tale   Thou fear'st to say
With whom she did offend; and I to enquire!
Why art thou rackt my Heart with fond mistrust;
For 'tis impossible that Theocrin

Shou'd prove so false   and as impossible
That any other Tempter shou'd prevail!
I dare not   will not   yet I must suspect



Now Princess call to mind your solemn Vow,
You swore to act as Honour shou'd advise,
And Honour will inspire you with disdain,
For this ingrateful, most forsworn of Men.



Sink me to Death! Plunge me in streaming Fire,
Heap Mountains on my Head,
And bury my Disgrace,
Abus'd Arviola.!

Deluded, credulous Maid!   Oh Perjury!



Rise Princess and compose this dang'rous Passion.



No! to this Earth I'll grow,
Out-rave the Winter Sea,
Out-rage the Northern Wind,
And with my loud Complaints alarm the Gods,
Till they resent the Wrongs
Of flatter'd Virgins, and confound Mankind.



Then curse thy self rash Tongue for thy discovery!
Perish these idle Hands, that had not first
Sheath'd this preventing Ponyard in my Heart;
But 'tis not yet too late  





Thou art more rash than I;
Think, think how much I lov'd!


How much I was abus'd!
And thou wilt say I have a Turtles tameness!
False! perjur'd Theocrin!

I can almost excuse thee Lost Edraste,

When I recall the smooth Deceivers Charms;
He'd sigh his Passion in such soft Complaints;
Courted with such a winning Modesty,
Even in his Silence reloquent, his words
So Artfully disorde'd, as might move,
Devoted Vestals to a living Grave!



Your Anger do's him too much Grace; forget him,



Where then is my Revenge? I hear he's charg'd
With Treason too, and I believe him guilty;
For false in Love, and false in ev'ry Trust:
Yet once agen I will repeat my Vow,
And Heav'n and Earth refuse me if I fail
To execute the strictest Laws of Honour.
I'll meet him in spight of my relenting Heart,
(For inwardly I fear I shall relent)
Yet I will meet him with a scornful Brow,
And to his Face disdain him, though I die.










Now, what fresh Discovery, whence those Letters, and
Of what Concern?



From our imprison'd, discontented Queen;
Here she solicites me to close afresh
With her Design; already she has urg'd
Her Brother of Epirus to revenge
Th' affront of her Confinement on the King.
These are t' oblige me to betray the Fort
Into his Hand, when he by Night arrives,
And my Reward the Crown.



Be not too credulous,
Nor trust offended Majesty too far.



With caution I'll resolve, in the mean time
Seem to comply; I'll shun no path to Greatness,
But wou'd seek it in the Jaws of Death.







Leave me my Friends, and of your Jealousies
Take leave; the gen'rous King
Has no dishon'rable Design upon me:
Some sudden Council of the State requires me.



There is no trust in States-men, and in Courts
'Tis dang'rous to excell allow our fears,
We know your worth, and wou'd not see you fall.



Meet I the Death of Cowards, the Renown
Of my fam'd Ancestors expire in me,
E'r I grow vain, and trumpet my own Deeds;
Yet must this King confess,
That what I have for him perform'd,
Within the Sylvan Courts of Savage Moors,
At least wou'd have procur'd me my Lifes safety:
I've seen a Lion from the Toil set free,
Yet famisht, as he was, spare his Deliverer.



Shou'd the ungrateful Senate dare to call
Your Worth in question; we that know how deep
Your Merit's rooted in your Armies Hearts,
Shall soon reform the Abuses of the Bench,
And teach the ermin'd Doatards Justice.




Degen'rate Damocles, how art thou fall'n,
That Breath has blasted all thy early Glories!
Beware, brave Youth, the least disloyal thought,
That like a Canker will destroy thy Lawrel.



Be not betray'd by your Credulity;
Your midnight Summons brings no small suspicion!
The Prince makes open Love to Arviola;

You know his Fleet rides still within our Bay,
And on his least Resentment can pour forth
Their Legions on our Shore; consider then
How this may work on the defenceless King,
To sacrifice you to your Rivals Rage.



My safety's grounded on the Eternal Truth
Of my Arviola; may she desert me,
When once I prove so mean to fear she will;
She's constant as the Diamonds standing Light:
Once more, my Friends, I beg you wou'd retire,


And will not be deny'd.



We go, but shall be near to watch your Danger.




Spight of my forc'd neglect, a sullen fear
Intrudes it's terror on me; first it seiz'd
My Slumber, since pursues my waking Thoughts;
A mourning Venus stript my verdant Bayes,
And on my Temples dropt a Cypress Wreath,
Whil'st weeping Cupids lean'd on slacken'd Bows,
Shrouding their Faces in their sable Wings.
Dreams I regard not, but this Vision leaves me
Gloomy and Dull, as sated Ravishers.

Theron, Diphilus, passover the Stage.
These Lords once knew me, fawn'd and kiss'd my Knees,
When from Argaleon's Conquest I return'd,
And now the Doatards pass neglectfully by!
But change in States-men is most natural:
Th'are Weather-cocks of time, and face about
To ev'ry veering Wind!
But here comes Myrrhoe, and her I'll seize.


Tell me kind Patroness of all my hopes,
Thou that hast known my Passions secret growth,
Brought'st kindly warmth, and hatcht it with thy Beams §.
How fares my bright Arviola?

How mindful of her Pining Theocrin?

How many Sighs has scapt her balmy Lipp?
(For Myrrhoe I will know Particulars.)
How many Tears?   Reserv'd, and silent Ha!
What means that wrinkled Brow? Dishonour blast me,
But thou hast struck a Chilness to my Heart,
A Death-like Cold.




I am in haste, on Business to the Prince.



The Prince! Confusion! Business to the Prince?
What Business bear'st thou to the Prince? Whose Business?
I know thou wilt not say Arviola's.

Thou wilt not let me know that killing secret,


Tho it were true.



My Lord; I'm no Dissembler,
When I inform'd you that the Princess lov'd you,
'Twas true!   she did   at present I affirm
She thinks of you no more.



And that true too!
Wer't thou an Oracle to tell me this,
Id slight it as a black malicious lie,
Tho thunder struck me for the misbelief.



Your Lordship's discompos'd, I take my leave.




Go then, and like a Sorc'ress blast thy Walk,
How have I prun'd my Fortunes till they bleed,
To fill this Mercenary's Coffers:
But this rich Prince's weightier Gold, I find
Has turn'd the Scale against me; be it so,
I'll give the World the lie, e'r I supect:
None but Arviola her self shall e'r
Perswade me that Arviola is chang'd:
Here comes this Pageant Prince! Down swelling Blood,
I must speak to him, and wou'd do't in temper.


Prince, by your Favour, turn; a Souldier calls.



Ha; who art, that with so bold a freedom
Retards my haste?



I am one whom thou hast wrong'd,
Demand'st thou further?   One whom thou must right;
Forbear that frown, I wou'd not move thy Passion,
And wou'd much less that thou should'st wake my Rage:
As therefore calmly I my Grievance tell,
Do thou as calmly promise to redress:
Thou seek'st to rob me of my Valour's Prize,
My Right by chance of War and Royal Grant,
My Mistress   more   my Bride Arviola.




Ha! Theocrin? stand forth, let me survey thee;
Dar'st thou, poor Sprout of obscure Growth, presume
To be ingrafted to the Royal Stock,
And stain with Peazant Blood the Race of Kings?



Thus far I bear with thee thou barbarous Prince,
Less disciplin'd then those rough Winter-gusts,


That scourge thy barren Clime. This is the Palace,
The Mansion of the King; the Place protects thee,
Thou art too vile a Sacrifice to fall
On Sacred Ground.





Now thank the Gods that thou art rankt beneath
A Prince's Vengeance; I forbear thy Life,
And will not stoop to take the worthless forfeit:
Thou art hedg'd in with double Infamy;
For as a Subject I disdain thee much,
But as a Traytor more.











This Insolence within our Palace Walls?
Guards seize the Tyger.



O my Lord the King,
To Heav'n and you I will appeal.




I'll hear thee nothing till the Bench is sate,
And then thy Practices shall have fair Tryal.
Guards he's your Charge.




Are these then the Rewards of Loyalty?
To bind these Arms 〈◊〉 set their Countrey free?
My Vertue shot too 〈◊〉, and shaded all
The Bramble Courtiers; therefore I must fall
As one that rob'd 'em of the Royal Beams!
But Winter Storms will fall again, and then
They'll wish their Shelter standing   O my Heart!
Those Beauties must belong to Arviola!


Arviola! Hast thou forgot me too.






Nor am to blame,
Y'are so much alter'd now from what you were;
An Angel fall'n cou'd take no change so fowl.



Yes   I am fall'n indeed! most strangely alter'd!
A few days since I triumpht, was proclaim'd
The States Deliverer; Virgins wreath'd in Flowr's,
Sung Hymns of Conquest, Insants lisp'd my Praise;


The King, the King, smil'd on me, Fortune smil'd,

Arviola smil'd   Where's now the dazling Pomp?
The bright Scene's chang'd, the Heav'nly Dream with-drawn;
My Flags disperst, and all my Streamers drown'd.



Dispense with me thou nice and rig'rous Honour,

This Penance is too much for Flesh to bear!
False as he is, I cannot see his Pain,!
Yet am condemned to be his Torturer!




Like Venus thou wer't wont to scatter Joys;
But now those Eyes have lost their healing Pow'r,
Shoot Pains, and like Malignant Planets strike!



Take on your self the Blame, if I disturb you;
I wou'd have past in Silence by.




I'll justifie thee, ev'n against thy Self!



To prove what I affirm, I'll leave you now.



Then fickle Maid, thy Love was all a Mock!



The Gods will be my Witnesses, how much
I priz'd the brave, the valiant Theocrin;

The Conscious Gods will be my Witnesses,
How much the Traytor Theocrin I scorn.



Forbear, my Fame, rash Beauty! O take heed
How thou revild'st a Souldiers Loyalty!
Least Light'nings fall and singe thee Black as Moors.



This Conference is our last, and our Discourse
Has shot too far already   I have done.



What mute? This silence tortures me beyond
The sting of Slander; speak, though it be to curse me,
Arviola! Arviola! Arviola!
O deaf as storms, to sinking Mariners!
Speak, I conjure thee by the spotless Joys
Of our stol'n Visits! by the friendly Bow'r,
Whose Shade was conscious to our mid-night Meeting.
Whil'st from the Jess'mine Roof the Dew distill'd,
And trickling from thy Brow perfum'd thy Tears!
Whil'st to correct the Vapours of the Night,
Officious Loves Celestial Perfumes breath'd,
And fann'd the Moon-beams, with more shining Wings:
By all those Nights! and that most friendly Night,
When to my ravisht Ear you first confest
Your Love, and shot me through with trembling Joy!
The Stars flam'd brighter, and the Flow'rs breath'd forth
A warmer Fragrancy; the gloomy Grove
Approv'd our Vows, and at our Contract smill'd.







Relentless still? What shall I say?
What sad Complaint assume t'extort thy Pity?
This posture can re-call the offended Gods!
Hear cruel Princess; 'tis not yet too late!
One balmy Tear and I am whole!  
With-drawing? - Can it be?
Ha! Wilt thou, can'st thou part and leave me thus
Grov'ling in Agony! - Turn, turn, at least
To view my dying Pangs, and glut thy Sight
With the last Pantings of a broken Heart.

Ev'n yet thou art not quite with-drawn! turn yet,
And leave with bleeding Love, the Charity

Of one relenting Sigh! - She's gone! retir'd,
Vanisht for ever from these closing Eves.
Come Chaos now! Resume thy horrid Reign;
Blend Earth with Heav'n, the Elements confound,
And quench in Seas the fall'n Etherial Fires!
When Vertu's dead, 'tis time that Nature die;
Wake Theocrin! forsaken as thou art
Of all; thy Innocence stays with thee still!
Guards, to your Office, wreath me o'r in Chains,
And in the gloomiest Dungeon shroud me fast;
When this is done, if my escape you fear,
The Grave's the safest Prison, lodge me there.





Scarce can I credit what I've heard and seen;
Approach thou subtl'st of the subtle Sex:
Say, what Return, what Off'ring shall I make
To thy immortal Wit   Sossacles.



The change is wrought, a change more wonderful
Than of black Chaos into smiling Day.



Your Servant Aribert, from Thrace arriv'd
With Letters of Importance.





Fly Myrrhoe, foment the Princess rage,
That no relenting Thought for Theocrin

Surprize her Breast, and mar the noble Project.

Confusion! Torture! all my hopes are dash'd.
Read Sossacles, my Royal Father's sick,
And I am summon'd home to Thrace with speed:
Aspiring Sythrax waits the Kings last hour,
To seize the vacant Throne; and they inform me
Our speediest return can scarce prevent him:
What shall I do?



Your danger Sir instructs you;
Your Fleet's in readiness, we'll sail to night.



And leave Arviola?  




If thou hast Policy produce it now,
And make a Prince thy Friend; my Father dies
And warns me hence, my Brother Sythrax takes
Advantage of my Absence to Usurp,
Shall I secure my Crown or Love?







How my Apollo? O my panting Heart!



The means are obvious; bear Arviola

By force aboard your Fleet, then sail for Thrace:

The season gives you opportunity,
Too morrow she attends the Sacred Rites,
And Sacrifices at Diana's Grove.
The Princess early with her Virgin Train,
Sets forth to finish the preparing Ceremonics,
Before the Court Arives; then you may seize her,
For Myrrhoe shall seduce her through the Groves,
Where you shall plant your Servants to surprize her.




We'll send immediate notice to our Fleet.







Where thus confusedly Sister?




















Rescu'd from the Guards,
And born with violence from the Town.







'Tis guest by the Offiers, that from the Camp
Attended him to the Court, for all were Masqu'd,
Nor trusted to the Evenings Dusk.




This happens ill; but Fortune do thy worst,
My ripe Designs are past the blasting now;
Sister one day, one busie morrow more
Crowns out Desires: Retire, and I'll inform you.
I toil for Empire, now at Scepters fly,
Resolv'd to force'em or expire;
And tho I perish in th' attempt,
Even in the Grave, my Pomp, my Court I'll keep,
And dream of Crowns in Deaths Eternal Sleep.











THe Storm is husht, the Winds breath out their last;
The Thunders too in feebler Volleys die;
All Night they humour'd my Complaints; but now
The Day intrudes, the dear Confusion's vanisht,
And all the ruffled Elements return


To their dull Order. Shroud thy hated Light,
Thou rising Sun, nor summon with such speed,
Th' o'rlabour'd World to th' Toils of a new day!
Why flatter'd Mortals, will ye wake to Cares,
When Sleep in kind Delusion may divert
Your pensive Minds with pleasing Images.
A Dream sets free the Captive, can restore
Lost Fields to Souldiers, and wreckt Merchants Wealth;
In Dreams the Exile Visits his dear home,
And o'r the sparkling Bowl relates at large
His past Distresses to his wond'ring Friends!
The lover too the sad forsaken Lover,
May dream and feign the falsest Mistriss true.
O for a gentle Slumber, that wou'd thus
Delude my Griefs, and shew my Perjur'd Fair
Constant as once I thought her   Oh I rave,
For Sleep no more must seal these Lids; this Sun
May set and rise agen to his dull Round,
But see me tread Life's giddy Maze no more;
Perform thy work thou deadly Juice   'Tis off.

That Death (by Nature so abhor'd) shou'd be
As easily into our Vitals drawn,
As th' Air by which we live.
Enter Four or Five of the Officers.



I fear his discontent has made him stay,
Regardless of the Storm that rag'd too Night.



We left him near these Clifts.




Rash to trust him with his Griefs alone.



It was his own Resolve, which we
Obey'd with much Reluctance   O ye Gods!
See where he prostrate lies in the cold Dew,
With his bare Head expos'd to th' troubled Air.



Tyrant of Nature, I wou'd view thee near,
Thou Chief of Terrots, Death! a Form so horrid,
As even the Wretched shun: This brittle Glass
Contain'd that awful thing; the fatal Juice,
That turns my working Organs into Clay;
I' cou'd even now have dasht it on the Ground;
But let that pass.




We cometo seek you in the Armies Name.



Nay, now my Friends you are too officious!



O my dear Lord, I grieve to have found now!
Why wou'd you dare the Terrors of this Night?
Such Lightnings, Wind and Rain  





Was't not a merry Night, thou know'st I shou'd
Have been a Bridgroom now, and therefore 'twas
The rev'ling Storm struck up to make me Musick;
The Lightnings danc'd to entertaine me   True,
The Bride was absent, and the Bed was cold!
But 'twas of Natures making, honest Rock,
O'r-spread with Moss.



His Griefs I fear distract him.



Hark Damocles, a Secret, O my Boy,
When I am Earth, remember thou wert warn'd
To trust no Woman when she smiles, and when
She weeps believe her less, least when she swears;
But if she swear thee Love   Oh Wracks and Pangs!
Why Sirs d'ye gaze so wildly on me?   Ha!
The Poison I perceive has touch'd my Brain!
Come Damocles, let's talk no more of Women;
Arms be our Theam, bright Arms   Arviola!

Tell me of Arms, my Boy   Arviola!

Of Battles, tatter'd Ensigns, bloody Bayes;
Trophies and Triumphs   Oh Arviola!




We must divert this Frensie.




My Senses then are going, let e'm go.
O that my working Thoughts were once at rest,
Still as fall'n Stars, or Streams bound up in Frost.



Your Griefs shall be redrest; the Army waits
For your Return, resolv'd to force your Right,
And place you in the Imperial Bed and Throne.



Then you have weighed my Wrongs.



We have, my Lord,
And must resent your Suffring as our own.



Swear then to work the Army to my Will.








Know then 'twill most conduce to my Content,
That you forget my Abuses from the Court,
And spight of all my Wrongs be Loyal still!
Nay Sirs, seem not dissatisfi'd, you've sworn,
Perform my last Request, for 'tis my last;
I've taken Poison.









What Souldiers Tears, a few hours will reduce
This shaken Frame to its first Elements;
Part we like Soldiers without Ceremony:
I must devote my short remains of Life
To private Thoughts, and you must leave me all.




At least permit us wait you to the Grave.
To sling our pining Lawrels on your Earth,
And give the Warriour's Volley o'r your Tomb.



I have my self to took care for my Enterment.
The Hermite's Cave is near, where I'll unload me
Of this dull Earth; they'll decently bestow
This Lumber in some Vault by Nature fram'd;
Wrapt in no Sables, but of deepest Night;
No Pageantry, or more superfluous Trains
Of such as mourn for Hire, no Funeral Dirge,
But what the widdow'd Turtle shall afford me.
The Pomp that I despis'd in Life, in Death
I hold most vain; nor care to rot in State.
Farewel, commend me to our Valiant Troops,
And as ye wish my Ashes rest, be Loyal.






A Tomb discovered, the Hermite's Consecrating it. Edraste in Youths Apparel.



Enough, the Tomb is hallow'd; all retire
To your respective Tasks, your chosen Toil;
Behold my Son this rude unpolisht Marble, (To Edraste.

The common Receptacle of our Dust,
When Fate shall summon our Obedient Spirits.
What Follows Death, the Dead alone can tell;
But to our Life of Rule and Discipline.
We owe at least, this certain Priviledge,
Calmly to wait the change, nor fear to die.




Here all things smile, and in sweet Consort joyn.


All but my Thoughts, that still are out of tune,
And break, like jarring Strings, the Harmony.
Why, cruel Theocrin, do'st thou pursue me
To these Retreats? For still thy Image wounds.


My panting Breast, and robs me of Repose,
Tho lodg'd on Poppies by the murmuring Stream.
Ha! is't the raving of my feaverish Thought
Or Theocrin's appears! Defend my Heart,
Some kinder Pow'r, or undeceive my Eyes.



I feel the trusty Person by degrees,
Spread through my yielding Veins, my circling Blood,
At length, will bear the Cordial to my Heart;
As nearer to Eternity I coast,
The Prospect grows more lovely   Here's the Cave,
And I descry the Hermites working near;
The neighb'ring Vale shall be my Walk,
Till the prevailing Poison summon me
To turn and yield this Earth to their disposal.




'Tis he! the Royal Bridegroom wand'ring here
Alone, Bare-headed, and with sorrowful Brow;
Fortune, I fear, has wrought some dreadful change!
I'll trust to my Disguise, and follow him;
My Heart is on the Rack till I'm inform'd.






Arviola, Myrrhoe: Arviola drest as for the Sacrifice.



Where Myrrhoe, wilt thou and Sorrow lead me?
This Shade is dark, and silent to my wish,
Here let me sit and breath my last complaints!
He was the falsest of the treach'rous Sex;
The falsest, and as such, my just Revenge
Disdain'd his Pangs, when groveling at my Feet.



His Love was feign'd, and so was his Remorse.
Where are these Ravishers, this was the time
Design'd for the Adventure, this the place.







Rise, we are summoned to attend the Altar;
Speak, have ye sung your Mattins, hail'd the Grove,
And with the Victim trod the Sacred Round?
Why stand ye thus fixt on each others Look,
As ye had some dire Message to deliver,
Whil'st each declines th' ungrateful Tale; speak forth.



A better Fate attend our Greece, then what
The Omens of this Morning Rites presage;
Which of us, has with guilty hands approach'd
The awful Ceremonies, is unknown;
But our dread Goddess is displeas'd,
And thwarts our Work with boding Prodigies.



'Tis but the Old Mans Fear, the hallow'd Wine
Has touch'd his feeble Brain, and makes him rave.
Shall we retire, yet farther, Madam?



The Virgin Taper thrice I did apply,
Before the Flame wou'd taste the melting Gums,
Nor then blaz'd prosperously, erect to Heav'n,
But scatt'ring, turn'd his conscious folds to Earth,
And rol'd his smoaky Globes along the Ground.



These Wizzards will mar all; to lose her thus,

When I've decoy'd her to the very Ginn.



The destin'd Bull in Garlands wreath'd, stood bound,
And turn'd his lowring Eyes upon the Attendants;
Nor sooner had the blushing Wine distain'd
His snowy Brow, but rearing high in Air,
He shook the yielding Cords from his curl'd Front,
O'r-threw the Altar, tost the Golden Pile,
And forcing through the scatter'd Priests his way,
Ran with high Nostrils, Bellowing through the Grove.



Return, and Consecrate the Place anew,
With mournful Cypress bind your Pensive Brows,
And prostrate falling on the Sacred Ground,
Each Vow his Innocence before the Altar;
Then cast the Lots to find the Osfender out.

O Virgin Goddess, if this Breast indulge
One secret Guilt, turn all thy Rage on me,
And let thy Priestess bleed thy Sacrifice!
Else let me live with fall'n Edraste's shame;
My sond Heart, be agen seduc'd to Love.
Deceiv'd agen   Assassins, Treason! Help.






Seize her, Confederates, seize your Royal Prize.



Help Heav'n, Rocks, Groves, Diana help!



Soft, Madam, we are Friends, design no Wrong,
But come to bear you to a Lover's Arms.



Off Traytor! Light'ning blast
Thy Sacrilegious Hands.



Quick Sirs, convey her to the Prince's Chariot,
That waits without the Grove, thence to the Fleet;
And in the Court of Thrace expect her Thanks.
Enter from the other side Theocrin's Officers.



The Cry came this way   See! The Princess seiz'd
By Ravishers, ev'n in her sacred Robes.




The Fiends are Vanisht; where's the Princess?



Fled off in Fight.



Disperse we strait; you Damocles return
To the General, and inform him what has happened;
You Phorbus to the King, the rest search for the Princess:





Curse on the Coward Slaves, they fought like Women;
Not Wolves more tamely wou'd resign their Prey
To Lion: How shall I excuse
This soul Defeat, to the expecting Prince?
The Prince? Hell! that's the least Difficulty:
How shall I answer to the King this Treason?
Hard-hunted, as I am, I've one shift yet,
And that a sure one: I'll with speed inform
The King, of this Design to seize Arviola:

Charge all the Guilt upon the Prince, pretend
The Plot was frustrated by my Contrivance;
Then when the Intelligence comes, the King
Shall thank me for my Villany, perhaps


Reward me too; thus cautious Sailers quit
The sinking Ship, and rowing off to shore,
Enrich themselves with the wreck'd Merchants Wealth.





Leave me fond Youth, why wilt thou follow me?
I'm Savage as a Sylvan, and unfit
For thy soft Conversation; prethee leave me!



Forgive a Strangers Rudeness, Sir, excuse
A charitable Crime; say you are happy,
And for some pleasing Contemplation seek
This Solitude; convince me with a smile
And I'll retire.



Believe me happy then
And leave me.



Wherefore then that troubled Sigh?



Pretty Impertinence, no more Inquiries;
But since thy Curiosity is such,
Know I am wretched to that sad degree,
That Fiends might pitty me, and therefore leave me.



'Tis therefore I woud follow.




And Grief's infectious; get thee to Court, and revel out thy Youth; Sorrow will come
Unsought, and poyson thy Delights too soon.
Besides, thou'rt Beautiful and form'd for Dalliance,
Therefore to Court, there practice ev'ry Wile
To charm the Fair; none scape thy Flattery;
But Youth take heed that it be Flattery.
For should'st thou be sincere in thy Addresses,
Give up thy Heart, and trust thy Happiness
To a Woman's Mercy, thou'rt lost for ever.



Then all all my Fears are just, and Destiny

Has play'd most fowl;

Arviola is chang'd, or he abus'd.



Thou weep'd! What mean those Tears, I did but speak.
Of disappointed Love, and thou art touch'd!
Is't possible that thy soft Innocence,
So early, shou'd be Martyr'd by the scorn
Of any cruel she!
Then I am still to learn in Woman's Falshood;
And my fair Cous'ner yet may be a Saint,


Compar'd to the rest of her deluded Sex.
Yes, false Arviola, when I descend,
And to the lower World report my Love,
I'll do thy Fame the Right, to say,
There was one more inhumane Maid than thou!





Your Pardon, my best Lord, that I trangress
Your last Commands, the occasion is surprizing;
Your fair Arviola, with her Maiden Train,
This Morning came to attend the Annual Rites
Of Great Diana's Altar in the Grove:
On our Return we found the Princess seiz'd
By Rusfians, whom we soon o'rcome,
But lost her in the hurry of the Fight  
Behold, my Lord, three of their scatter'd Crew
Flying this way.



False, tho she be, yet some Revenge is due
To injur'd Beauty and a Princess Name.
Stand Traytors.

How fares my gentle Boy.




Has pierc'd my aking Heart, and giv'n me ease.



Ha! Wounded! We have bought the Villains Lives
Too dear; help Damocles

Yo bear him to the Cell.





Disperse and search each Thicket of the Forrest;
And as your for feit Heads shall answer for't,
Return not to our Presence till y'ave found her.

Stand forth, ye reverend Hypocrites, confess
When, where, for what you barter'd, to betray
Your Monarch's Daughter? Hell! I am too cold!
Produce her Traytors, set her in my Sight,
Restore her to my Arms this minute, or
Your pamper'd Flesh shall on the Rack be torn,


And scatter'd piece-meal on this hallow'd Ground.



This is the Musick that I long'd to hear;

King, y'are too tame, rage louder yet; Ha! Ha!
How vain a Creature were the plotting Knave,
But for the credulous Fool?



Slaves, must I twice command, e'r I am answer'd?



By all the Pow'rs, by Great Diana's Self,
And your own Sacred Head, we are innocent.



They sport with my Revenge, quick, drag'em hence
To present Death; nor shall th' ingrateful Prince
Our Vengeance shun: he comes, make ready Guards
To seize him, he shall bleed.




Enter Abardanes, speaking to his Attendants.



O'r-powr'd? Excuse it not, 'twas Cowardise;
Retire, I must to the King, least he suspect.








Basely you have surpriz'd us; give me room,
Slaves know the Prince, nor with your Vassal Hands
Profane my Royalty   What! Servile Chains!
I'll not endur't.



Now the Chast Lion foams.



I charge thee King release me, by thy Sceptre,
Thy Head, thy Empire, which my Thracian Troops
Shall drown in Blood, and waste with Vengeful Fire.



We dare thy worst, ingrateful, barb'rous Prince,
That could'st abuse our Hospitality,
And plot a Rape upon a Royal Maid.



Why then did she not Love? What I design'd
Was gen'rous all; and thou should'st thank me, King,
That of thy Dignity I took such care,
Fo force thy Daughter to my Princely Arms,
That on a Vassal else, a Subject Slave,
Had lost her Crown and Beauty; and corrupted
Th' untainted Blood of Monarchs!




Come to my Heart, thou faithful Escaellus;

With what Return shall I reward thy Vertue!
Our Army we commit to thy Command,
Be thou our Gen'ral in false Theocrin's stead,
And meet the shock of War, this Prince has threaten'd.


Whom bring ye there?



Dread Sir, A Forrester,
That says, he saw but now a Lady fly
In fright to the Hermite's Cave.



'Twas my Arviola, lead thither.






Theocrin and Damocles bearing in Edraste.


Now Damocles Fly and call the Hermites in,
Their Art will bring Relief; take Heart, my Boy.



I Die, my Lord, and with my latest Breath
Will speak of Wonders; now my Stars are kind,
And for my past Griefs make too large Amends,
Since in your dear Embrace I do expire;
I am Edraste.




This indeed is wond'rous.



Deaths Paleness will forbid my Blushes now;
If I confess that I have lov'd you long,
But with a Flame as Chaste as Vestal Fire;
Or may no Pious Garland crown my Tomb,
But Virgins shun it as unhallow'd Ground.
Enter Arviola in Fright.



Where shall I hide? O for an Earthquake now
To sink me from these Ravishers   Whose there?



Speak my Edraste, end thy charming Tale,
For I wou'd Die convinc'd, there can be Truth
In Woman's Love.




Edraste in Disguise with Theocrin,

In close Embraces joyn'd! My Eyes too long
Are guilty, but the sacred Ponyard thus
Shall expiate the Offence; Eternal Night
Remove the hated Object from my view.




She's gone, and in her Cheeks
A scatter'd Purple smi'es,
Like streaks of Sun-shine from a Setting Day:
My Fate comes next, the sure-slow Poison now
Preys on my Vitals - Ha! what Heavenly Form
Sits there? Bright Vision turn   Arviola!




O Gods, those ruffled Locks, and that wan Look,


Against my Honour plead in his behalf;
But 'tis a Woman's Weakness, and I'll crush it.



It cannot be! Not Woman's Cruelty
Can swell to that Excess, to persecute
Her poor forsaken Lover to his Cave;
To tear his closing Wounds, and wake
His slumb'ring Griefs into a fresh Despair.
Is this the tenderness of Beauty, this
The Weeping Sexe's Mercy? Oh! Arviola!




With what divided Passions am I torn!
Stream faster sluggish Blood and give me ease!



That so contemn'd a Thing as I, shou'd e'r
Create your Highness Trouble, were unjust;
But Princess you'll excuse me: that I lov'd you,
I do confess, but wore my Flames conceal'd
And silent, as the Lamps that burn in Tombs,
Sigh'd only to my self and to the Winds,
Gaz'd on your Beauties with the distant Crowd:
Your self at last perceiv'd my drooping care,
And forc'd the trembling Secret from my Breast,
Which with my Life I render'd at your Feet:
Then   I remember   Oh! the panting Minute  



That panting Minute I remember too!




You rais'd me by the bloodless Hand from Ground,
With such obliging Tenderness, secur'd
My trembling Hopes, that next I sunk with joy!
But (Oh the Torture!) this transporting Scene
Was but a gawdy Dream, and wak'd with Storms,
Here on cold Earth the flatter'd Dreamer lies.



Tempt not the Gods too far, those Gods that know
The Falseness of your Love: yet O thrice Happy,
If here your Crimes had fixt, but to Corrupt
A Royal Maid   The fowl Thought strikes me Dumb,
I leave your Guilt t' interpret   Oh Edraste!




Take heed, Licencious Fair! Thy perjur'd Love
Was but thy Sexe's Sin, a Crime of Nature,
But to Blaspheme the Vertue of the Dead,
Will wrest from the forbearing Gods their Thunder.



Ha! Dead! Each Minute draws fresh Wonders on.
Enter Myrrhoc Bloody.



The Princess must perceive that I betray'd her,
Perhaps this Cave will hide me from the Search.



Hast Thou too brought thy Raven's Note t'afflict me?



Gods! Theocrin Pale! Arviola Bloody, and Edraste Dead;
Then Furies lash me with your Scorpion Whips;
Give me the Torments of th' Etornal Damn'd,

Prometheus, Vulture, and Ixion's Wheel.



Alas, what mean those dreadful Execrations?



My Breath grows short, but shall suffice t' unfold
Such Treasons, as will fright the Dephts of Hell,
For whil'st the Plotting Escalus accus'd
This gen'rous Lord of Treason to the King,
As falsely I abus'd his Love to you;
Taxt him of wanton Dalliance with Edraste,

Who from the Court retreated, to divert
Th' Ambitious Queens Designs on both your Lives:
Thus were you wrought to treat him with Disdain,
At his return from Field.



The Truth, the Truth as thou shalt meet the Gods.



For thy Souls sake, the Truth and I forgive thee.



At fast, Brib d by the Prince, I undertook
To tempt you through the Groves, till the Assassins

Might seize and bear you to the Thracian Fleet;
But (unexpectedly engag'd) i'th' Fight
I met th' unluckly Wound that gives me Death,
By the dar Pow'rs that wait for my Descent.
This is most true, as true as I was false,
Or let my Pains, through circling Ages last,
Nor Time expiring, see my Torments done.



Theo. and Arv. attempt to Rise, but (wanting Strength) on their Hands and Knees, get to each other.


O bounteous Pow'rs! O balmy healing Joy!
Pride of thy Sex, Imperial Excellence,
My still Beloved, still Loving, True Arviola.




Can you forgive my Lord my rash Disdain?
You must, for I was punish'd in the Crime,
Ev'n then (cou'd you have seen my Heart)
You wou'd confess that your Arviola

Was ne'r so passionate kind.



Let me in haste  
Devour those Sweets, and load me with thy Bloom,
A Stock to feed on in Eternity.



O that some pittying God wou'd six us thus
(To solid Marble turn'd) Eternal Statues,
Whil'st Pious Lovers flock from farthest Lands,
To hear the wond'rous Chances of our Loves,
And thence be taught whate'r Disasters fall,


Ne'r to despair of Passion that is true.



My Feeling fails, but ah what purple Dew
Distains this Hand that prest thy panting Heart?



Thank the Good Gods, 'tis my Life-Blood, my Lord,
I saint; my Theocrin, but one thing more
Tell me, if we shall love i'th' other World?



'Twill be our Business, 'tis the Land of Love.







Their Paradise knows no such poisonous Weed;
Their Loves are as their Streams, full, calm, and clear!
Secure and free they pass their harmless hours,
Gay as the Birds that revel in the Groves,
And sing the Morning up.








And charms me after.





Confusion! Diphilus see the Princess slain in Theocrin's Arms, more bloodless Corpses too,
To fill the ghastly Scene   Dread Sir, Retire;
Such Horror fills this Cave, as will congeal
Your Aged Blood, and blast your Royal Sight.



Why do your Knees prevent me; sink in Earth
And give Passage: Where's the Goblin now
That should appall me? Ha! My Arviola dead.
And in the Traytor's Arms!
Fate thou hast struck me home, but struck thy last.
Here fell my only Comfort, only Care.
Haste, set the Prince at large.



'Twas my sole fear, least Myrrhoe should discover,
And Death has ty'd her Tongue; there's that breach stopt.



Rob'd of my Heirs; be all my Witnesses
How timely for my Empire I provide;
Behold this Man of Worth, and know him all
For our Adopted Son and Heir of Greece;

Bow all to Earth and do him present Homage.





Thus, gracious Sir, thus prostrate at your Feet,
Your Vassal begs you to revoke your Favour;
I am th' unworthiest  



Rise, our Pleasure's sixt, Slaves is our Will disputed.



Hail Heir of Greece, Hail Royal Escalus.





Way there, a Message to the King.







Great Sir, your Queen disdaining her Confinement,
Took Poison, but enjoyn'd me e'r she dy'd,
To bear these Papers to your Royal Hand.



O Dephs of Villany! Guards seize that Fiend.





What means my gracious Lord.



See here, my Lords, what will amaze you too!
Our Empress, by that Escalus detected,
Liv'd but to take Revenge on the Discoverer;
And to effect it, made pretence of Forces,
Rais'd by her Brother to invade this Empire,
Which this Designing Lord was to command,
And these his Letters in Return; where he
Accepts her Terms! To Death with the Impostor.



That Breath that doom'd me be thy last, weak Monarch;
But King, know thou, and these (but now) my Slaves,
That for that minutes Pride, that single Taste
Of Royal Pow'r, for that one Hail, I'd meet
The worst of Deaths thy feeble Rage can form.




My Lord, I trust your Care to see just Rites
Perform'd to these dead Bodies; my next charge
(And that my last) is, that you summon streight
Our Senate, and by fair Election crown
Our Successor; for my own private part
I have determin'd what the Gods inspire:
Reach me a Hermite's Habit.




His rash Resolve, but durst not interpose.




How light sits this! And thus have I put off,
With the Imperial Robes, Imperial Cares.
Thus after all my Storms of Court, I make
My last Retreat to the Gods and Poverty.
Here as the Sanctions of this Cell, shall bind
By turns, I'll wait, and in my Course be King.
Here Lust wants Fewel, and Ambition starves,
My temper'd Appetites shall here be taught,
T'ask Council of my Reason e'r they crave:
Here just but temperate Meals, short Sleeps and sound,
Shall cheer me for the Labours of the Day:
Thus Life's well manag'd Remant will I spend,
And when the Gods shall lease, resign my Breath
Calmly, as Infants sleep, and smile on Death.



