


AH, Rogues, the business is done,



In a dish I Warrant you,



And thrown out oth' Windows:
The Town's Our own, Boys,



And all the Wealth in't.



And Wenches to boot Boyes.



Boot me no Boots, 'tis Bootless, 'till we
have 'um,



Those are Commodities, I confess I sain
would truck for.



Thou shalt have them by the Belly, Lad.



Rare Recruits after a long March!











The Man of Men and Might.



We were Oppos'd, and even at Push a Pike
for't; though a wet Morning, 'twould have been dry Ser∣vice
had We gon to't.



Dry blows would ne're have done't, some
must have swet blood for't; but 'tis prevented.



The Nail of Providence was in't.



Or the parings rather; but no matter
which, 'tis done.



Leymor was a Stubborn Lad, yet Bertlam
fitted him, and in his kind too, his Rhetorick silenc'd the
Mouth of his Pistol; it had sent a bad Report else, and a
home one: But Bertlam, brave Bertlam, that carries
Charms on the Tip of his Tongue, acted the part both
of a Souldier and a Courtier, an Enemy, and a Friend,
Exposing his Breast to danger, under the Canopy of Secu∣rity;
And all this for Us you knaves. He told 'um a fair
Tale, but means to trust them no further then he can fling
'um:



That's some out of Commission,



Or into Prison, or both.



We may Lads in time grow up to something.



Ill Weeds grow apace, Brother, and thou
art one of them, and in time mayst reach the Gallows.



Speak for your self, Brother, I need not your
Oratory; well, Bertlam has Wit at Will, Woodfleet's
an Asse to him.












And of Courage as cold as a Cucumber.



A Fool in Folio.







A general in the Hangings, and no better.



What think you of Vane?



As of a Vain fellow.



And what of Haslerigge?



A Hangman for Haslerigge, I cry.


2 3 4 Souldier.
One and all, One and all.



'Tis Bertlam for my Money Boys, he is Our
General, Our Protector, Our King, Our Emperor, Our
Caesar, Our Keasar, Our Even what he pleaseth
himself.



If he pleaseth himself, he shall please me.



He is Our rising Sun, and Wee'l adore him.



For the Speakers Glory's s•t



At nought Boy; how the Slave look'd when
his Coach was stop'd?



Like a Dog outlaw'd, the Pallat of his
Breech fell down with fear.



He told Us he was our Generall.



Of what? Bills, Bonds, and Obligations,
or Green-sleeves and Pudding-pies.



And we told him he was an Old doring
fool, and bad him get him home, and take a Cawdle of
Calves Eggs to Comfort his Learned Coxcomb, for he
look'd but faintly on't.



And what said he?



Said he! I prethee what could he say that.
We would admit for a reasonable answer? We were better
principl'd then so, Reason and our business were two
things, what We did We did, that was Our Will, and
the word of Command lodg'd in Our hilts. Alass poor
Worm, Cobbet and Duckingfield shew'd him Cockpit Law,
and O're-rul'd his Rolls, he understood not the Souldiers
Dialect, the searching Language of the Sword puzl'd his
Intellect, the Keenness whereof would have prov'd too
sharp for his Wit, had he been Obstinate or persisted in the
Interpretation; and therefore very mannerly he kist his
hand and wheel'd about



To the place from whence he came,



And e're long to the place of Execution.



No, hang him, he will have his Clergy.



Is he such an Infidel to love them?



Yes, as We do: Barbers, that is, while they
are Trimming Us; hee'd fain go Ala mode to Heaven.



If his foot slip not, but if it do, his sinery
is spoil'd, he will be so sootifi'd.



He that deals with Pitch must expect no
better, black will to black, quoth the Divel to the Collier;
but, dost thou think there is a Heaven or Hell?



Why dost thou ask me that question? I am
a Souldier, and so art thou, let's ne're trouble Our heads
about it, a short life, and a merry life I cry, happy Man be
his Dole.



And so say I, while We are here, We are
here; when We are gone, We are gone, for better or for
worse, for rich or for poor; amongst the good or the bad
We shall finde room I warrant thee Lad, and Our Gene∣ral
can expect no more.



And now you have put Us in mind of Our
General, I mean Bertlam▪ (not Woodfleet) (that Son of
a Custard-maker, alwayes quaking) let us as bravely spend
his this days benevolence, as he Nobly intended it.







Rather a proposition, Brother; but where,
how, and in what?



Not in Rot-gut Beer, I will assure you, or
Muddy Ale, Wine for my money.



Wine is the life of Action, 'tis Decreed and I
obey.
Blood requires blood, then from the Purple Grape
I'le suck my fill, spite of you, Jack a Nape:
There's Poetry for you, Gentlemen.



A Pin for your Poetry, March upon't.


They go out, and come in again at the other end of the Stage,


Bring us Wine there, come who sings?


A Song for the Souldiers.


Though the Morning was wet,
We are merrily met
In a house more dry then Our skin, Boys;
Wee'l drink down the day,
Ne're question Our Pay,
Let them heartily laugh out that win, Boys:



Then drink a full Brimmer to him that intends
For the good of the Souldier to labour his ends.



Let let him flatter and lie,
What is't to thee or I,
And Ape Noll in ev'ry Condition;
If we thrive upon't,
Let all the world want,
And the City kneel down and petition:



Then drink a full Brimmer to him that intends,
For the good of the Souldier to labour his ends.




Hey Boys, come away.














Has Lockwhite been here yet?



Not yet, my Lord, Sir 



What wouldst thou have?



Nothing, my Lord, not I.



Thou hast not thy name for nothing, I see
thy Tongue will keep pace with thy wit, and still be
Trotting, I rethee leave off thy Impertinences, I have
told thee enough on't.



Why my Lord, and it shall please you.



I tell thee it does not please me, 'tis my fear
thou'lt be my shame, I sent thee into France to learn
some breeding, and thou rendrest me the poorest and the
pittifull'st Accompt that ever Porter gave on a sleight
Errant. Dost thou keep Company?







What are they, of what sort?



Of the better, Sir.



'Tis strange! thy knowledge being so bad:
Are they Men of Intelligence?



I think so, my Lord.



You think so! sad, I professe 'tis very sad;
  6
were it my Case as it is yours, and it behoves you, as
you assume the Title of a Secretary;) I'de draw Mens
Souls out by Inspeculation, and in the Inquest of their
Faculties cull out such matter as would yield advantage
to him I had relation to, and without this, thou neither
dost deserve the place thou hast, nor art thou sit for Com∣pany.



My Lord, I have done my Endevour.



A weak one, let Thurloe be your President.



When your Lordship is Translated to your
Highness, and that you have Command of the Publick
Pu•se, I shall be as ready to waste it, as he or the proud∣est
of 'um, but I am but a fool to Explain my self.



That time is drawing neer.


in wrath with his dap∣per
Dagger at his Breech.


In the mean time I have not been idle,
I have done something.



What hast thou done that may
deserve Recording.



Why, I have Endevoured to find how the
Common Cry of the Town goes, as to this days business.



That's something indeed, and how do the
People rellish it?



Rellish it! why truly Sir it is thought 



Thou wilt return to thy Vomit.



Why truely Sir it is thought, and if I may
speak my thoughts freely, the Rump was but a stinking
Rump, and sented so ill in the Nostrils of the People
that they fear'd a sudden Plague attended the Concavity,
and with much Joy blest the Rue and Wormword you
brought to their Conservation.



Dost thou know what thou sayst?



I could say more, Sir.



To as little purpose begon, I would be pri∣vate yet
if Lockwhite come admit him.



Nay my Lord, I warrant here will be the
whole fry presently.



Thou a Secretary, and talk so like a Fisherman;
what Fry, you fool?



Woodfleet and the rest, Sir.



My minde is not at rest while thou art here.
Begon 
Exit Secretary.
I wonder Lockwhite comes not? hee's a Man
Has run all h•zzards, with as good success,
Except Old Noll, as any Man I know;
He was his Creature, and he now is mine,
And hitherto he has perform'd his part
In my Revenge upon that family,
So home, even to their doors, that my disgrace
Enter Se∣cretary
and Lockwhite.

Lies buried in their Infamy How now 



My Lo•d, he's come.



'Tis well Leave Us.
My Lord, how goes Causes?



They cannot go amiss, Sir,
Whil'st you are Advocate.



The Sword thou meanest,
That must decide all Controversies.



It will do much Sir, but Pollicy puts the
best Edge to't.



And that you have, come my Lord be free,
Where shall We set up Our Rest?
We have had Tossing times.



Indeed, my Lord, Time hath been tost in a
Blanquet; but I hope now We shall use time better
then so.







You may Trim him, Sir,
You have him by the foretop.



If I thought so, I'de hold him fast.



Now, or never, If you let slip your hold you
are undone, aut Caesar aut Nullus.



But the Remora to that is Woodfleet.



Alass! you know him, Sir.



True, he's but of a softly Nature.



A fine Commendation for a General, that
should be rough as Warre it self, but he has a soft
  8
place in his head too, and that's worse, how ever
he's a fit Subject for your purpose, and therefore, Sir,
use him as Cataline did Lentulus, drill him along with
hope that all this tends to his onely advancement, fools
are soon perswaded; And believe me (my Lord) that was
the very Engine made him consent to th' blowing up of
his Brother, a Gentleman in some sense better qualified.



I, but a small Nutshel I am confident may
with ease contain both their Courages, yet I know
Woodfleet will sleer (he dare not grin) after Honour, and
is as greedy on't, as a Cat is of a dish of Milk.



'Twill be ill bestow'd, Sir, if it light on him.



Wha•, a Dish of Milk?



You misinterpret me, Honour I me•nt Sir,
If you make him groom of your Close-stool,
'Twill draw more from your goodness then his Merit,
And keep his wife in Smocks too, during pleasure,
That will be (Sir) your Highness pleasure.



It is not come to that yet.



Oliver had it, his time is past, and your time's
coming on, Princes have power o're th' persons of both
S•xes.



Name him no more, I hate his memory.



I confess I do not much care fo•t, yet I hate
nothing brought, or brings me profit. I lov'd the Father
of the Heroicks, while he had a pow'r to do me good,
that failing, my reason did direct me to that Party then
prevailing, the fagg end of the Parliament. What though I
took the Oath of Allegiance as Oliver, your Lordship▪ and
others did, (without the which I could not have sat there?)
yet it Conducing not to Our Advantage, It was an ill
Oath, better broke then kept, and so are all Oaths in the
stricter sense, the Laws of Nature and of Nations do dis∣penle
with matters of Divinity in such a case, for no
〈◊〉 willingly would be an Enemy to himselfe, the
〈◊〉 Beaf•s doe by instinct of Nature seek for self-reservation,
vation, why not Man who is the Lord of Reason?
  9
Oaths, what are they, but Bubbles, that break with their
own Emptiness.



You say very right, my Lord, I am of your
Opinion.



Yet the Pulpiteirs belch forth Fire and
Brimstone against it: But my Lord, how could I have serv'd
my Countrey, by setting the Dane and Sweed by the Ears,
while the Thread for a Protectorian interest was spinning
here? how could I have carried on, or rather promoted the
Design for Iamaica, (though it went in Revilo's name?)
how could I have lopt off those ill branches to the Com∣mon
wealth, the Cavaliers and Essex his discontented
Reformadoes? how could I have shew'd my self loyal to
your Interest, by foolling Fleetwood in the disseating of
Dick, by his dissolving the honest Parliament as they call
it, and bringing in the Odious Rump? how could I in my
Speech at the Councel of State, have raked up Revilo's
ashes, by bespattering him and his family, and told Ireto•,
how Providence had brought things about, and that the
hand of the Lord was in't, when I meant nothing lesse?
how could I (under favour) have advised you to this
days Enterprize, if I should have startled, or scrupl'd at
Oaths, preferred honesty or Divinity before temporal in∣terest
or humane reason? I desire (my Lord) in this case
you will be my Judge.



Nay, my Lord, you are your own Judge in this
Case, but in my Opinion you have done your self but
Justice.



And he that will not do Justice to himself,
will never do it to another.







My Lord, take it from me, He that will live
in this world, must be endowed with these three rare
Qualities; Dissimulation, Equivocation, and Mental
reservation.







How now, the news with you.



The Lord Woodfleet, Sir.







My Lord, he is come, Sir.



Prethee Thy wit and his may walk
together, admit him I knew I should be troubled
with him.




I doubt not but you have prepar'd your self
for the Encounter.





I am pretty well Antidoted 'gainst the Poyson,
He's here My Lord, your most submissive Servant.



My Lord, I cannot Complement, but I am in
heart your Creature, that is, at your disposal.



Seriously, I profess, I cannot reach your
meaning, Gentlemen.



Our meaning's not amiss, Sir,
We know Sir, what we say.



Indeed, I profess I believe so Gentlemen,
I hope things are now in the Lords handling, and will go
on well, and become the doings of Christians.



The Government has been all this while in
the horrid hands of Infidels, Jews, Pagans and Turks I
must make him up a Medly.




Yea, Abhomination hath been in the hands
of Iniquity.



But, my Lord, those hands are now cut off,
and all our Ambition is, that your Lordship would take
the Government into the white hands of your goodness.



Who I, Gentlemen Seriously I pro∣fess Indeed And
by yea and nay law You shame
me So you doe! I can say no more, alass! I!



You Why, my Lord, if you knew your
self as well as I do, you would say more.



Truely, I think, I have been something in
my time,



Something! You have been more then something.



That's stark nought, (my Lord) but it shall
pass.


Within, where's my Lord Bertlam? where's my Lord Bertlam?





What's the meaning of this?



The Lord Stonware, the Lord Huson, Colonel
Cobbet, Colonel Duckinfield, and others, desire your favour∣able
and Courteous Admittance, Sir.



By all means, let them Enter: but my Lord
be sparing of your Speech, for these are Catching fellows,
and will interpret strangely, Our aim is onely to advance
your Interest.



You know my Lord, I can keep my Tongue
within my Teeth, sometimes.



'Tis a high point of Wisdom in you, Sir.



Oddso they are here, I cry Mum 





The less you speak, the better 'twill be, Sir.







Many Benisons lite on you for this days wark
my good Loord.



How do you do my Lord Woodfleet? how
do you my Lord Bertlam, how do you my Lord Lockwhite?
and how do you all? Hah.



The better for your asking, Sir.



Say you so, then I'le ask again, and how?
and how?



And what? and what?



Your Language cannot be Translated, Brother,



Let them take me by the meaning then.



By th' Members, hawd there my Loord, 'tis sere,
and faw pley, Sirs.



My Lords, I have not been backward in this
days business, nor any here I think.



'Tis confest (Sir) what would you infer far∣ther
upon't?



And therefore requisite We should know
how things will go.



As they may Sir, soft fire makes sweet Malt,
you know that Colonel.



And that I know very well too, and you
have said very well, as much as a Man can say, and no
more.







But We are in a Chaos, a Confusion.



A meer Chaos, a Confusion.



And the People expect suddenly something from
Us.



Why Gentlemen, Rome was not built in a day.



Mickle Wisdome geod feath in that, Sirs, there's
Mickle wisdome in that Ise sure yee.



At three a Clock we'l meet at Wallingford-House,
and discuss the business further, what say you my
Lord?



I profess I say so too, at three a Clock bee't
Gentlemen, what say you?




Wee'l waite upon my Lords Your
Servants.




I protest I am glad of this withal my heart, for
I have business in Smithfield where my Horse stands, now
it comes in my mind, on my Conscience the Roguish
Ostler has not given him Oates to day, aud the Knaves
Hay is Musty too; well, my Man is such another Asse,
farewell Gentlemen, I'le see you anon, if I come not
soon enough, pray keep me a place in the Councel, or let
my Vote stand for one, no matter how.
Exit.



Au geod rason too my Loord, he's a braw Mō
this, my Leords yee kenn him weele enough.



And you too, Sir.



Come my Lord Stonware, We presume you are a
knowing Man, to what kind of Government stand you
affected?



E'ne tol what ye plase Sir.



What think you of a Single person? here's
my Lord Woodfleet.



Marry an he's a braw Mon, Sir, bet are ye in
geod earnest Sirs.



What else, my Lord.



Bred a God Ise for him than.



You see, my Lord, how heaven does raise
you friends.



Seriously I profess my Lord you know, 'tis
none of my seeking.




Nor is like to be of your enjoyin My
Lord, a word with you, what if my Lord Bertlam
were the Man?



Reight Sir Ou'z in on word ya ha spoken
aw, Sir, he's a Mon, inded Mon, gif Stonware ha any
braines Sir.



You will live I see Sir My Lord he's
your friend now.



No matter whose, he's a required Property,
and must be used by some body And why so Melan∣cholly,
my Lord?



I profess not I, I was thinking 'twas Dinner
time.



Will your Lordship please to take part of
our small Cheer?



No indeed my Lord I thank you, not I, my
wife I profess stays for me, adue Gentlemen all 
Exit Woodfleet.



Your Servants my Lord.



Nor you my Lord Stonware?



Ne in geod feath, Sir, pardon me, Ise invited
by a gay Mon Sirs, tol platters of bra Capons Sir, and aw
  14
the foles in the Eyre, Sirs, I an marry Sirs, tol oue a my none
Countrey men ta, geod feath noow.



If you please to stay my Lord, y'are welcom.



Gods Benizon and mine lite on you, Sir, geod
feath, y'are like a bra Mon, 'twould berst a Mons hert to part
fro yee, Ise ce'n yar humble Servant my geod-Loord.







I marry Sir, wi yar none sell tol deeth Sir, gif
ye ta plase Sir.



I knew, a small hair would have drawn him
to your Table, without this adoe.



My Lord, lead Lockwhite the way.



Ater yee is geod manners Sir 






That's more then you know My Lord
I am your Servant.



Well I'le break off the Complement then.
















Why, how now Priss? where hast thou
left thy breeding, in thy other Pocket? Art thou not
read in Times and Seasons?



I never was such a fool to put trust in Alma∣nack-makers
yet, Madam.




What a Wench art thou? and why Ma∣dam,
prethee? there's a word indeed, as Common as
the Cries about the Town.



Your Ladyship hath us'd me to't.




I'le break that Custome, 'tis a rude one;
hast thou no wit Wench? canst thou pick out no better
title for me.



Insooth I cannot reach it yet, Madam.




Reach a fools head of thy own, sure
thou art Mad, Wench.



The Secretary indeed sayes I am a Mad
Wench, but I thank my Stars I can make a fool of Twenty
such as he is, Madam.




Agen, can flesh and blood endure this,
I must new Mold thy Manners, Madam! there's a Gam∣mers
title, out upon't.



Seriously I know not by what other Names or
Titles to distinguish you, Madam.




I profess thou art dull, abhominable dull;
dost thou not know upon what Score my dear, and second∣self
is gon to Wallingford-House.



How should I Madam, I cannot Divine?




Lord help thy head, why, he is gon to
be made a made a Man Wench.



Was he not so before, if not, your Ladyship
hath had but an ill time on't.




The Prince of Men, you Baggage; thou
art such a dull one.



I cannot help it, Madam, while I remain in
Ignorance.




I see I must open thy Eyes by way of
Explanation; Then know that from henceforth I will be
call'd her Highness.



Nay, now you tell me what you would be
call'd, I shall Obey your Highness.




It will do well, and 'twill be but your
Duty, prethee tell me, how dost think I shall
Behave my self in't?





Highly well, you cannot choose, you begin so
soon, if it shall please your Highness.




I think I am better shap'd for't
then Iea•, or what do you call her Cromwell.

She survey• her self.


Abundantly, for at her best She was but a bundle of
• Madam Lord, I am so forgetful, Highness I should
have said.




That's the Word, Con it,
and be perfect in't, or I profess you and I
shall part 

Priss repeats to her selfe, Highness, High∣ness,
Highness, Highness. En∣ter
Walker.

What's the Newes with you?
Am I sent for to Wallingford-House?









What a beetle-headed fellow's this.



Highness, you Changling; you
must call her Highness.


Prissilla pulls him by the skirt.


No, and it shall please your Highness.




It pleases me very well,
She struts it, and surveys her self.
What's your business?



Gammer Cromwell would speak a word or two
with your Highness.




Bid the poor Woman waite without,
I'le do her what good I can for her Childrens sake.



Or rather for Husbands sake, if it shall please
your Highness; good turns ought not to be forgotten.




Thou say'st true, One good turn requires
another, he was, I confess, a Man every Inch of him.



I, and though he was out with my Lord
many times, he would be in with you, as the saying is,
and please your Highness.




Well, I care not if I go to her.



Your Highness will decline much your State
then.




Say'st thou so Priss •Walker admit her,
I'le hear what the poor Creature can say for her self.




Enter Walker, and Mistress Crommell the Elder.



I thought I should have staid at the
door 'till Midnight; Marry come up Mrs. Minks. Is there
such a doe to speak with you? No marvail indeed.




Prethee woman, what would'st have?




Thy Husband by the Throat, had I him
here, and I could finde in my heart in the mean time, to
claw thy Eyes out, and make thee wear black patches
for something, thou proud Imperious Slut thou.




The Woman sure is lately come from
Billingsgate: Priss, ask her how goes Oysters there.



She's very quick of hearing, and't please your
Highness.




Highness in the Divels Name, it is not
come to that sure yet, is it? hah! Thy Husband may be
hang'd first like a Crafty knave as he is; Did my Husband
make him a Lord for this? to Ruine our Family? Or as the
Word is indeed, Trapan'um? Curss on the time thy Hus∣band
was born, he fool'd my Son in Law to betray the
Innocent Babe my poor Child Richard, that Our Fames
are now brought to the Slaughter houses, and the very
Names of the Cromwells will become far more Odiou•
then ever Needham could make the Heroicks; Wo worth
the time.




Priss, I pitty the Creature, ne're trust
me, alass it Weeps.




Thou ly'st Baggage; I scorn thy pitty,
my Spirit is above it Let me come at her As old
as I am, I can spoile that fine face, my dear, deceased Lord,
did so much dote on, let me come at her,
Hands off, I'le do't, thou Iezabell.






She begins to rave, send her to Bedlam
among her Consorts.



I promise you, you shall have, clean straw
Mrs. Cromwell.




Out Rogue, Rascal, Vagabon, a fellow
rais'd from the Horse heels, do'st thou upbraid me too?
Ile be the death of thee, if thou com'st neer me.
Oh Dick, Dick, had'st thou had but thy Fathers
Spirit, thy Mother ne're had come unto this
Shame.


She falls back into a Chair.



Priss, a Cordial presently,
Odds so She faints.


Prissilla goes in and enters im∣mediately.


I run, and't please your Highness 
I have it here.




Prethee give it her,
I would not for a hundred pound She
should die here, we should be put to th'
Charge of burying her.

Then Priss offers her the Cordial, She starts up and with her hand casts it on the ground.


'Tis a pretious Cordial-Water
of my own making, Madam,
I hope there's no offence in that.




I need it not, proud Woman, I Divine
this Scorne will be Reveng'd on thee and thine.
Exit.





Th'art better lost then sought.



She has a Notable Spirit of her own.




'Twill get her nothing, She beats a∣gainst
the Wind.



She's Wind fall'n, and't please your Higness.




'Tis an ill Wind they say bloughs no body
good, let her rave, and raile, my dearest second-self will
fare the better for't.



The fox fares best when he is curst.



Priss, Priss, a word or two,
Sweet Priss.

As they are going off, the Secretary pulls Priss by the Sleeve.


Why how now Sawce?
Plain Priss? Am not I her Highness
Maid of Honour?



I know thou art a Maid of Honour, but the
meaning of this, dear Priss?



The meaning of what, thou Novice?



That Madam is so suddenly turn'd to Highness,
Is my Lord made Protector?



No, you Dunce; well, thou art the simpl'st Se∣cretary!
what must I finde thee brains and Understanding,
know then and grow wise upon't, She will be Protectoress
whether he be Protector or not: If he has any Honour
it must come from her, for ought I see; she is before
hand with him, and hath Install'd her self already, I'm
sure my Voyce was Herald to't, thou piteous thing,
question the Pride and pleasure of a Woman? I will have
thee Scribe to know, the time will come I shall have Ho∣nour
too, and be Courted by the better sort.



Have I been wanting in that Duty, Priss?



Wanting, why thou art alwayes wanting,
never provided, still behind hand, never before hand to a
Woman; this I profess, and to thy shame be it spoken: And
therefore walk upon't, I have no more to say to thee.



But I have something to say to thee, oh Un∣grateful
Priss!



Ungrateful? and why Ungrateful, pray?



Hast thou forgot the small token I sent thee.



I was a small one indeed if it came from thee.



The tweezers out of France



Did Travail hither, but were as dull as he
that sent them, they would not cut a feather. Is that your
pretious Present? If thou hast no better, Walk alone for
Priss, She's not for thy Company.



Nay, Dear Priss, shall We be Married.



What are you so hot, Sir? there's a jest indeed,
Marry, before your Prentiship is out.



What dost thou mean Wench? prethee kiss me.



I'le see better Clothes on your back first.



Why, are not these good?



Enough, had not a fool the Wearing of 'um.



Thou may'st say any thing Priss, I may have
better.



When that time comes, and thy Wit is
  20
more refin'd, I may say something to thee.



Oh my Dear Priss, in the mean time, let me
but kiss thy hand.



That you may, but hear me, be not proud
on't, Nor take this as a punctual promise from me, I love
my self better then so.



Yet I may live in hope.



If it were not for hope, the heart would break,
they say: But odds so, I forget my Duty to her Highness.



And so do I, thou hast Transported me.



Not to Iamaica yet.







Good Lady Mother, be patient.




Good Lady Fool, hold your prating;
Was ever Mother so unhappy, or Children so sensles•ly
ungratious?




I beseech you think not so, things will
make for the best.




Oh fond Girl, what hope canst thou cre∣ate
unto thy self can save Us now from sinking? We must
perish, undoubtedly We must; though Ber•lam carry a
smooth Tongue to thy Husband, it speaks not the Lan∣guage
of his heart, for that is rugged. It will deceive
him as it did thy Brother, and the late Idolized Parlia∣ment,
he set up, out of a Malice to thy fathers Memory,
to make it Odious, because he pull'd the Babell down,
yet now he has Usurp'd that Priviledge himself▪ let his
pretence be what it will, it bears no other Weight but
that of his Ambition, to which thy Husband is a Pro∣perty.





Mother I profess I'm glad to see you here,
ne're trust me law, how do you forsooth?




The worse for thee, I wish I ne're had
known the time Occasion'd thee to call me Mother.



Why forsooth Mother, if it please your
Highness?




Oh Monstruous, not to be endur'd!
I have been tame too long, the fool hath found a way t' up∣braid
my Misery, She had a husband dear Ireton, my best
of Sons, had Wit, and by his Councel s•ilted up Our
Honours, which thou pull'st down as fast by thy simplicity.



I profess, ne're trust me, I speak Ingeniously
ne're stur now, I am no such Baby neither, as you take me
to be, Mother.




A meer Stalking horse to Bertlam's Pride;
his Wife, that Minion, doth assume that title, I once, and
my Son Richard's wife Enjoyed; She will be called her
Highness with a horse pox, while I am call'd Old Ioan,
old Bess, old Bedlam, old Witch, old Hagg, the Common∣wealth's
Night Mare; 'tis well, if any have the modesty
to call me Gammer, or old Mrs. Cromwell, and leave out
many other horrid Nick-Names, this Infamy and more
thou hast brought on Us.





Good Mother, do not Weep.




Would I were dead; Nothing Tor∣ments
me more, then that thy Father, who whilst he
liv'd, was call'd the most Serene, the most Illustrious and
most Puissant Prince; (whilst that the fawning Poets
Panegyricks swell'd with Ambitious Epithetes) is now
call'd th' fire-brand of Hell, Monster of Mankind, Re∣gicide,
Homicide, Murtherer of Piety, a Lump of flesh
sok'd in a Sea of blood, Traytor to God and goodness,
an Advancer of Fiends and Darkness; such as these and
worse, could I but think on 'um, are daily cast into my
Ears, by every idle fellow.



I pray take their Names, I profess Mother,
I'le Order them, as I am here.




Thou Order 'um, alass! they value not
so poor a thing as thou art, had Dick continued, he had
  22
kept Our Fame up fair it the World, none durst have
blemisht it. They tell me that the time is coming, I
must make a Stall my Court, and learn to thrive by foot∣ing
Stockings, and if that won't do it, must be (what
I ne'r was) a Woman of Carriage, either for Tubs of
Ale, as Suiting best with my Original Condition, or else
for Oysters; I was made for Burthens, and am too Old,
and Ugly to cry Oringes; If these Trades fail me, then
I must turn Bawd, they think me tough enough t'endure
that Tempest, and tell me there's a place call'd Sodom,
will receive me and my Retinue; I know it not, but thus
I am made a Publick scorn by all Men; And in that, thee
nor thine, nor any other that claim relation to Us are
exempted; And all this by the foolery.



I profess Mother I will be even with 'um,
I know what I know, and there's an end, as I am here.




I would there were an end to Our dis∣graces,
which I do prophesie is but beginning. What
will become of that fair Monument thy careful father did
Erect unto thy memory, before (least none should do't
after) thy death, next to thy Husband Iretons; nay, even of
his, thy Fathers too, and all that living bore a love to
him and Us? The raging Malice of proud Bertlam is so
irrisistible, 'twill destroy all.



I profess Mother, my Lord Bertlam is a very
honest Gentleman, and he loves me well, I profess now to
you; well, I know what I know, few words are best, I am,
and must be the Man when all is done, as I am here.




'Tis very likely, when all is done,
shoul't be the Man will prove their Scorn and laughing-stock.



I profess now Mother, in sober sadness, I scorn the
words, so I do You know what I told you, Sweet heart,
as I am here.




Very well, and do believe't, though
you forsooth are so doubtful.




Doubtful, of what? of that I never heard.



No more words, but Mum, I say, I charge you
Sweet-heart.




My Lord, the Councel waites your
coming.



Why law ye now, as I am here, you thought
I warrant, I should not be sent for neither; I profess for∣sooth
Mother you are very hard of belief Tell the
Lords I'm coming.



I shall, my Lord, most honoured Lady your
most humble Servant. Your humble Servant Madam.
Exit.




I have seen this fellows face before,
methinks he does retain something oth' duty he paid me
formerly.




Be put patient Mother, I'le warrant,
things will go according to your wish.



I, if you'l have some patience, if not, I
profess Mother I cannot tell how to help it, for I must to
Coach, that's the truth on't. Sweet-heart, pray make much
of my Mother.
Exit Woodfleet.




Will you please to walk in, forsooth.




My heart was very heavy when I came
hither, 'tis somewhat now at ease, by the disburthening
of my Oppressing Griefs.




I hope forsooth, you'l have no cause to
Create more of them.







Hast thou Summoned those inferiour
things?



What the Ladies of the last Edition?




Those whose husbands have been Styg∣matiz'd
by Noll and Dick, with the Title of Baronets.



I gave Order to Trotter to Trot about it, an't
shall please your Highness.





The Ladies are coming forth.




They were not bound to their good be∣haviour,
but 'Tis well they Understand their Duties;
set Us Our Chair of State, and then admit 'um.






Gentlewomen, for Ladies We cannot
call you, your Obedience to our Commands is well re∣se•ed,
if you persever in't you will Oblige Our favour:
Priss proceed.



By what Authority, and from whom do you de∣rive
your Titles of Madams, I pray.







What are they? of what standing?



Of no long standing, We confess.



That's a common complaint, and a general
grievance.




And shall be taken into consideration for
a thing we know; Priss, prick that down in your Note
book: Who made your Husbands Knights?








Of horried memory, put that in your Note
book, Priss,







Of Sottish memory, shall I put that down too,
'•is remarkable?




By all means, put it down in the Margin,
as a hand directing to the rest.



Of their foolish Families, 'tis done an't please
your Highness.




What Coares of Armes do your Hus∣bands
beat?












You a Lady, and shew so little manners: For∣get
her Highness!




I pass by their dirty breeding. Woman.
We say, what Coat of Arms does thy Husband give?



He bears Argent upon a Bend Gules, three Cue∣kolds
Heads Attyr'd Or.



Three Cuckolds Heads! Why one is suffici∣ent
in all conscience.



'Tis a Paternal Coat belonging to the Family
of the Wittals.



It may be they were Founders of Cuckolds∣aven.




No more of Cuckolds, Priss, 'tis appro∣brious,
and intrencheth much upon the Honor of our Sex:
Put that down in your Note-book as a publick Grievance,
and it concerns Us to look after, and the Committee of
Safety to Remedy.



'Tis a material and punctual point to a Woman.




And what does thy Husband give,
prithee?



He bears Three Gantlets Dexter Or.



Or again: Your Highness may perceive they
have had Golden times on't.




Dexter Or: Well, we know he has been
an Ambo-dexter all his life time, and he shall now give
another Coat; A Body without a Head in a Field Sable And
what's thine, prithee?



Ours is but Parte per pale.




Parte per pale: What's that?



A Motley Coat of two colours.




'Tis a wonder with what Impudence
those Fellows Noll and Dick could Knightifie your Hus∣bands!
For 'tis a Rule in Heraldry, that none can make a
Knight but he that is a Knight himself: 'Tis Zanca Panca's
Case in Donquixott.



If none can make a Knight but he that is a
Knight, how shall our Husbands receive honor from your
Husband, who is no Knight himself?




Let me alone to Dub him.



You have done that already, and 't please your
Highness.



If Dubbing our Husbands will carry it, we can
do that our selves.




But Ours is of greater Honor and Anti∣quity,
and therefore ought to take place. Receive that
as a Maxime from Us, dispute no further.








Since, being Infranchis'd through our
grace and favour you are become Members of Our Com∣mon-wealth,
Declare your Grievances, and we'l hear
'em, whether publick or private.



Begin with the private first, Sweet Mrs. Priss.



This Lady complains her Husband prays too
much, and it take him off his other business.




There can be no Charity in that Man is
remiss in his Benevolence. Receive that as another Max∣ime Priss,
You mind Us not.



I'm pricking of it down▪ and't please your highness.




But, it may be he prays when's Zeal's on
fire (as Bells ring) backwards.



And then he •ails against the Whore of Baby∣lon,
and then the people think he calls me Who•e.




That's gross, and shews small breeding;
We'l have it rectifi'd, it concerns Us.



And my husband says I talk in my sleep, and
call on Men to come to bed to me, and discover his infir∣mities.




Oh! have a care of that.



Have a care of what? Were he capable of more
care of me, I should have less care of my sel•.



I commend the Ladies resolution.




And, what sayst thou?



Why truly I cannot say much. My husband is
a Man of reason, and is willing I should satisfie my self;
he know the •ailings of Women, and imputes it to the
frailty of our Sex.




He's an honest Man, I warrant him.



Such a Husband for my money.



As you are a Lover of Women, let the Act of
the 24 of Iune against Fornication be repeal'd; Me thinks
it frights as there were a Furnace in'•.




As there were Conveniencies in that
Act, which ty'd up Mens tongues from babling, so there
were destructive Inconveniencies in't, familiarity not so
frequently used between Man and Woman. When know,
Society is the life of Republicks Martin the first, and
Peters the second Indeed, things were rather done in
fear then freedome.



In a Free State who is not Free?



I beseech you in the next place, that the Cavaliers
may not be lookt upon as Monsters, for they are Men.



And that it may be imputed no Crime to keep
'em company, for they are honest.



And men that will stand to their Tackling.




Well, we'l have these amended: What
have you more to say?



Now, Mrs. Priss, to the Publick, I pray.



Whereas several abuses have lately crept in
amongst Us.




That's a small abuse; Love must creep
till it can go.



Her Highness hath the Feeling sense of it, and
gropes out the meaning already, you see.



We could not go to Hide-park, nor Spring-garden
so much as with our own husbands.




Why, what had you to do to go with
them? Could you find no better company?



Good men were scarce; and then to avoyd
suspition.



In my foolish opinion that rather bred it; what
walkt with your own Husbands? How contrary to Con∣science
and high breeding is that?




When things are settl'd, wee'l have an Act
that no Lady or Gentelwoman shal be put to that Slavery,
but shall have liberty to walk or talk, with whom
they please: Now may a multitude of mens blessings light
on you. Priss proceed.



Here's a Lady desires a pa•ten for Painting.




'Tis too great for a Subject, we intend
it for our selves, and to that end, have employed several
persons as our Agents in forraign parts, to find out the
readiest and securest way for making it, that it may not
eat into the Cheeks, beget Wrinkles, impare the Eye∣sight,
or rot the Teeth.



I have found the woful experience of that.




We have Intelligence of a Water that
will in two hours time take the wither'd skin off the face,
and a new one shall supply the place. That no Lady or
Gentlewoman, though she have out-worn Sixty, shall ap∣pear
above five and twenty years of Age.



That makes your Highness look so smooth upon't.




There's no Invention for sleeking,
glazing, or annointing, but we have notice of; and for
Powders and Perfumes, we may be sented a street off.








Then for Attyring, and to find out the
Mazes of Fashions, there's no Lady but must follow Us.



You are at a great charge, sure.




We are so, but 'tis Princely. 




We hope your Highness will remember the
foregoing premisses.




Priss, be it your care to mind Us; We
must to Wallingford House and have um confirm'd.
And in the mean time, let our Musick play
To Celebrate the Glory of this Day.






The Lords are coming.



Are you sure on't?



They are upon us already.



That they are not, Ile assure you, Gentlemen;
However I will attend my charge. Keep back there, keep
back there, I say, keep back there, make room for the
Lords there. God bless your Honours.




whisp•ring, Bertlam Woodfleet and Lockwhit do the like, after a turn or two Bertlam speaks.


It must be done (my Lord) we have nothing
else to take him off.



Scots, we know generally are greedy of gain,
and since we have made him President, and sensible of our
Secrets, 'tis requisite we do something to stop his Mouth.



Lest he No matter, it must be done, my Lord.



Say you so, I profess, seriously, If I thought
good would ensue of it, with all my heart.



My Lord beleive us, all We can serve you in
you may Command.



And you shall find it so when occasion
serves, and the Governments new molded.



Marry Sirs, a•ise sa mold itt, twas neere so
molded, sen the Dam bound the head on't.



I know there are some Ambitious spirits, would
have it setled in a Single person, but we are quite against it.



The few Deel splitt his pipe will be sort than,
for Archibald.



But my Lord Bertlam is a stirring man, you see,



Bertlam, lett Bertlam gang tol Bedlam in the
Deels nam, what ha I to da with him, Ise yeer humble Servant
Gentlemen.



Enter Desbrough and Huson.



How do you, how do you, and how dow do you
my Lords and Gentlemen all, how do you?



And how do you, how do you?



Ah my geod Loords, ken yee me, Sirs.



We shall make up our number anon: Will
you please to assume the Chair, my Lord.



Marry, and Ise your humble Servant, my geod
Loord Bertlam.



Come come, What Government must we have?
what Government must we have?



I, I, I; What Governement? Let's know
quickly: Come, you talk of Conservetat, Conservetat, 'tis
a hard word, hang't; but there's tors in't, I'm sure of that.



Conservetor, my Lord! Conservator.



Conservators let it be then; When shall we have
um, when shall we have um?



My Lord, We'l think on that hereafter.



Hereafter comes not yet then, it seems.



But while the grass grows the Horse may starve.



Howere, Gramercy Horse, though't has no tail
to't.



Geod feath Sirs, and Ile tell you a blithe tale
of a Scottish Puddin, will gar ye aw tell laugh, Sirs.



That Puddin will have no ent •o't, good my
Lord.



I love to hear of a puddin, so it be a bag-puddin.



So do I, if it be a good one.



Bred a goad, as geod a puddin as ere was cut up.



I profess my hair stands an end.



No more Swea•ing, my Lord, 'tis not sea∣sonable
in this place.



Harke yee mee than, Sirs, mind yee me now or
neere: There was a poor woman, Sirs, bog'd oth Karle the Spea∣ker,
Sirs, an heed gee her noought Whilke gard her to let a crack,
Sirs; I marry quo the Woman quo now I see my Rump has a
Speaker too. Haw lick yee my Tayle now, Sirs?







My Lord, I know you have many of e'm, but
pray let's mind our business.



Business, Why there's the thing; I think every
man ought to mind his business: I should go and bespeak
a pair of Mittins and Sheers for my Sheerer, a pair of
Cards for my Thrasher, a Scythe for my Mower, hob-nayl
Shooes for my Carter, a Skreen for my Lady Wife; and I
know not what: My head is so full of business, I cannot
stay, Gentlemen.



Fy, fy, Gentlemen, will you neglect the
business of this Day; We meet to gratifie our Friends.



Nay, then do what you will, so I may rise time
enough to see my Horse at night.



Is that it? Clerk, read what we past the other
Day; I mean the heads of 'em; what Papers and Petiti∣ons
remain in your hands, referring to this Days business.



Forbid we should be backward in rewarding
such have done Service to the Common-wealth.



There's Money enough, Gentlemen.



If we knew where to find it. However,
Clerk, read▪ To Walter Walton Draper 6929 l. 6 s. 5 d. for
Blacks for his Highness.



For a Halter: Put it down for Oliver Cromwel's
Burial. We'l have no record rise up in judgment against
Us for such a Villain.



But first let's consider whether that were
good Service, or not.



However, we'l give him a Paper for't: Let
him get his money when he can: Paper is not so Dear,
Gentlemen, and the Clerks pains will be rewarded.



Geod Consideration my geod Loord; bred
Sir, that Cromwell was the veryest Limmer Loone that ere
cam intoll our Countrey, the faw Deel has tane him bith Lugs
by this time for robbing so rich a Countrey; bred Sirs, I.



I profess my Lord Stoneware you are to blame,
I promise you, you are; Why do you Swear so?



Geod feath I gi you thanks for your chastisement,
Ise sit ye Sir, au professta, an se gif you ha mee.



That may bring you profit indeed. Clerk, proceed.



To Walter Frost Treasurer of the Contingencies,
5000 l. To Mr. Edward Backwel 4600 l. To Mr. Hutchinson
Treasurer of the N•vy, 200000l.



O•nds, there's asum! marry it cam from a
Canon sure. Clerk. To Mr. Backwell more 326 l. 16 s. 5 d.
To Mr. Ice 400 l. To Mr. Loethur Secretary to his 



To Oliver Cromwell say, leave out Highness:
You were order'd so before, where ere you find it.



Secretary to O. Cromwell, 2999 l. 5 s. 7 d. for In∣telligence,
and Trapanning the Kings liege people.



Marry Sirs, an ye gif so fast, yeel gi aw away
fro poore Archibald Johnson.




Oyl the Wheel (my Lord) your Engine will
go the better: Move for him first.



Be it your business, Ile do as much for you.



Content▪ Gentlemen, since we have set this
Day apart from other business, purposely to gratifie our
most concerned Friends, let us consider the Worth of the
Lord Stoneware, a person of eminent fidelity and trust.



Geod feath, and I ha been a trusty Trojan, Sirs.



We know it very well Sir, I profess, my Lord.



And 'tis but reason you should be rewarded.



Ide scorn to let a Dog go unrewarded.



And so would I, he fawns so prettily.



My Lord, you are Witty, I hope we shall have
no more on't. Huson. And performs his Graces to a
Scottish Pipe so handsomely.



You may content your self with that (my
Lord) he is our Friend.



Geod feath Sirs, an sa I am; wha denyes it?



Nay, my Lord, we are not Foes; I am for you.



And so am I, as live.



Geod feath weel sed▪ ye ken well enough Ise sure
Ise a man can serve ye aw, Sirs: Sin ye are so kind Sirs, Scribe
read my Paper to.



You have a Petition then?



Geod feath I had been a very foole els.



Give us the substance of it.



That your Honours would be pleas'd, in consi∣deration
of his faithful Service, and the constant charge
he is at both at home and abroad, to grant him some cer∣tain
considerable summe of Money for his present supply.



Order him Two thousand pound.



Seriously, let it be Three thousand, Gentlem.
You must understand he is much in debt.



God; benizon lite on your saw, my geod Loord
Bertlam.



Three thousand pound! Why, half such a sum
will buy all Scotland.



Bred Sir, ye leoke bett blindly out than.







Well Brother, the time was, a mi•e of it would
have bought all the Shooes in your Shop, I will not say
your Stall for your Honour sake, though now you doe
abound in Irish Lands.



Y'are my geod friend Sir, geod feath y'ave •ene
hit him h•me. Clerk, gang a tyny bit farder.



That your Honors would be pleased to Confer
some Annual Pension upon him.



Gentlemen, I think it but reason; he has been
faithful, and I hold him a good Common-wealths Man,
and the rather because Hazlerigge hath so bespatter'd him;
since you have consented to his present supply, let him not
suffer for want of a future one: What think you of 400 l.
per ann. 'Tis but small; Say, are you willing to it Gentlen.







Are you pleas'd, my Lord?



Bred, thar'es a question indeed; Onnz Sir, ye
ha won my heart.



Then Gentlemen, since my Lord Lockwhit's
Modesty is such he cannot speake for himselfe, give me
leave to become an humble Suitor in his behalf 



That you will be pleased to make him Const•∣ble
of Windsor Castle, Warden of the Forrests, &c.
Lieuten•nt of the Castles and Forrests, with the Rents,
Perqu•sites, and profits thereof. Gentlemen, I need
not instance his faithfulness to us and our Designments
hitherto: No man here (I presume) but hath been, and
is satisfied in himself of his reality; And therefore I am
confident you cannot confer a place of so great honour or
trust upon a person more deserving: But I submit to your
Wisdom.







Bred my good Lord, what can ye ask that we
sall not grant?



I have heard some say, that Honour without
Maintenance is like a blew Coat without a Badge.



Or a Pudding without Suet.



You have made him Keeper of the great Seal;
'tis honor, I confess, but no sallary attends upon't; and
bribes you know are not now so frequent as they were in
Noll's time: Besides, my Lord is a person of that honor.



Well my Lord, let us be brief and tedious, let
us humour one another; I love my Lord Lockwhit well.



I move for a Sallary, Gentlemen; Scobel and
other petty Clerks have had 500 l. a year apeice granted to
them▪ I hope he merits more.



Let him have a thousand pound a year then,
you shall not want my voyce, my Lord.



'Tis a liberal one, my Lord.



I profess soberly with all my heart.



Does that please your Lordship?



Your faithful Servant, my Lord; but if I
may be so bold to know from whence I shall receive it.



Out of the Customes, the best place, I think.



Sure pay my Loord, bred a goad, Ise uphold
you now, ga•g your wayes; on Scribe, let us mind meere
good Warks, wee sall prosper then, aw my s•w, Sirs.



Clerk, proceed where you left off.



Honyleybres 3000 l. upon accompt, Backwell for
9600 l. Worseley Aubrey for 2500 l.



Bred holt for tham, where the Deel sall they ha
aw this siller, Sirs.



Ne're trouble your self for that, my Lord.



These things must be granted, we know the
persons, they are our friends.



I profess, indeed Brotherly love ought to
go along with us all; but when all is gone, when shall we
have more?



Pough, my Lord, the City's big with riches,
and neer her time I hope to be Delivered.



Ile be the Midwife, or what you will call me,
Ile under•ake to do my office as well as Dr. Chamberlyn
can do his.



Well said Brother, what's
the matter there?




goes to the Lord Bert∣lam,
and whis∣pers
him, he ri∣seth,
and goes to her.



Ile wait on you immediately,
Gentlemen.



Is the Lord Bertlam gone?



I profess, I know not.



Why, how now Sweet-heart,
What make you here?




Nay, what make you here then?



This is not a place for Women.




How so, Sir, pray, while thou art here
I have as much right to the place as thou hast, if I am
Iohn Bertlam's Lady, and for ought I know my advice may
do aswell here as thine, for all you perk it so.



Good Sweet-heart, return to thy Coach.




Good Sweet-heart, tell me, am I her
Highness or not her Highness, or what do you intend to
make of me?



Thou makest thy self seem to be a Mad Wo∣man.

She strives, Bertlam holds her.



Do I so, Sir, Ile be madder
yet; then Ile to the Board, and know what
they intend to do with me.



Thou wilt not, sure.




But I will, and hear what they will say
to me; I will be put off no longer.



Be not so loud.




Ile be Louder Sir, and they shall hear
me; If I am not Her Highness, they shall not sit there.



Thou shalt be as high as can be, if thou wilt
be patient.




Patient, I, thou knowst too well I am a
patient fool; pray, when will the time come I shall be
styl'd Her Highness? for that I will be.



Ile tell thee that anon; prethee Sweet-heart
take thy Coach.




I, thou thinkst with thy fine Words to
Work me to any thing, but if you Deser the time too
long, you'l find the Contrary Call my Man there D'ye
hear me? pray make haste home.
Exit.







My Lord, We thought you had been gone.



No, my Lord, I have been better bred then
so, to leave you in the heat and midst of business.



Nay, I think the heat of our business is over
for this Day. Clerk, See, have you any more Papers?







Let us rise then, I think we have sate a pretty
time by't.



And my colon begins to cry out beans and bacon.



I profess my Lord, it is not I think fit to put
you in mind, I hope I need not, I profess.




Oh, to move concerning a Single person.



By all means, for his Lordship.



Seriously, my Lords, I hold it would have
been unseasonable, but at the next Sitting it will fall in
course my Lord, and then my Lord 



We are your Creatures.



Say you so, I profess let it be so then.



Come let us go, I'm mad to be gone; What
should we stay here for?



Marry, an yee speke right, Sir. Scribe, See
aw theise Orders be ready for my hond aneust Morne; meere
especially my none and my geod Loods heere, that they may gang
to the Pattent Scribe, here ye mee.



They shall, my Lord.



Come Sirrah, here be thriving Times, some
men rise with their Breech upwards.



And 'tis very probable may be lasht for't:
How they Divide the Kingdomes Treasure.



I commend them, they make use of their time,
make Hay whilest the Sun shines. I wonder my Lord Des∣brough
mist that Proverb at the Table.



Was ever such Language heard at a Council-Table
before? They are all made up of Proverbs and Old-sayings,
except his tamen semper, Bertlam and Lockwhit.



Oh! those are two precious Divels; but for
a fawning and colloguing Divel, give me the Scotch
Divel.



No more of this, the Dore-keeper has Ears.



I would his Ears were off, they are not worth
the Sense of Hearing: But come, let's put up our trinc∣kets;
a pox on't, I did not think they would have sate so
long.



Thou hast some Baggage or other to go to,
Ile be hang'd else.



Thou mayst be hang'd in time; however weel
goe.



Well, go your wayes, you are a precious
Couple.



a mind to be Murdered in your beds.]
Enter a Corporal and Souldiers after him in a confused
manner, as from their several Lodgings.


What's the matter? Corporal.



The City's up in Arms.



I am glad on't.



And so am I, there's plunder enough, I
am mad to be at it.



The Committee sate all this night about it;
'tis said they are up every where.



I warrant that Dog in a Doublet Has•erigg
i• the Ring-leader.



'Tis likely, the news came but within this
houre, and the danger that lu•ks in't hath call'd the Com∣mittee
together, to morrow the Prentices intend to peti∣tion
the Lord Maior for a Free Parliament.



Let em', 'tis good fishing in troubled wa∣ters.



Must the RUMP come in agen?



I know not, good Lads make haste, the
Captain stays for us.



Pox on't, let's ne'r stand buttoning our
selves, Wee'l leave our Doublets behind us.



No, by no means.



And is't come to that, then hey for Lum∣bard-street,
there's a Shop that I have markt out for mine
already.



You must not think to have it all your self,
Brother.



He that Wins gold, let him Wear gold,
I cry.



Well, we shall have enough, 'tis a rich
City, never came better news to the Souldiery.



Wee'l Cancel the Prentices Indentures,
and bind them to us in surer bonds.



And they shall ne're be made free by my
Consent till they have paid for their Learnings.



Me thinks I see the Town on fire, and hear
the Shrieks and Cryes of Women and Children already;
the Rogues running to quench the fire, and we following
the slaughter. Here lies one without an Arm, and he can∣not
hold up a Hand against us; another without a Leg, and
  39
he shan't run for't; another without a Nose, hee'l ne're
smell us out; another without a Head, and his plotting's
spoyl'd: Here lies a rich Courmogeon burnt to Ashes,
who rather then he would survive his Treasure, perisheth
with his Chests, and leaves his better Angels to wait on
Us, you Knaves.







I know you have all Mettle enough, but our
Captain stays.



Not a minute longer hey for Lumbard-street,
hey for Lumbard-street!



Hey for Lumbard-street, hey for Lumbard-street!






Come boyes come, as long as this Club
lasts fear nothing, it shall beat out Husons tother Eye, I
scorn to take him on the blind side, I'm more a man
than so.



Thou a Man, a meer Pigmy!



Children are poor Worms, I would have
you to know that I am the Cities Champion.



Thou the Cities Champion!



Yes, and will spend life and limbe for
Magna Charta and a Free Parliament.



So we will all, so we will all.



Why then you are my Boys, and true Sons
to the City; Cry up a Free Parliament.



A Free Parliament, A Free Parliament!



Boys, this was done like Men; but do you
hear the News? My Intelligence is good.



What is't Champion, What is't?



There's a Proclamation come from the
Committee of no Safety.







To hang us all up if we Depart not to our
Homes: How like you that, Gallants; how like you
that?



This hanging is such a thing, I do not
like it; well, Ile go home.



Why now you show what a Man you are;
I was a Pigmy as you said but erewhile; but now I say
and will maintain it, Thou hast not so much spirit or
spleen in thee as a Wasp.







Will you like Cowards forsake your Peti∣tion
and have no Answer to't? Rather let's dye One and
All.



One and All, One and All.



Why this is bravely said, now Ile tell you
what you shall do; when the Sheriff begins to read the
Proclamation, every man inlarge his Voyce, and cry
No proclamation, No proclamation.



Agreed, agreed; No proclaamation, No procla∣mation,
No proclamation.


Wavering their Clubs over their heads.
Enter Huson and his Mirmydons with their Swords drawn.


Was ever such a sort of Rogues seen in a City?
Come follow me, Ile so order um.







Cobler, Whoop Cobler, and he pursuing them.


Shoot, shoot; I charge you kill the Rogues,
leave not one of them alive,




Enter Prentices again, crying Whoop Cobler.


Cain has kill'd his Brother, Coll. Cord∣wayner
he has spun a fine Thread to day.



It may bring him to his End.



St. Hugh's Bones must go to th' wrack, and
there let him take his Last, Whoop Cobler.



Whoop Cobler, Whoop Cobler.



their cry, Whoop Cobler; Turnep Tops are thrown at
him as from House tops; Boys run in.


From whence come these? Search that House,
and every House: I vow there's not a Street free from
these Rogues.





Where hast thou been, Champion?



Where none but a Champion durst be.



Where's that? Where's that?



Stand here and admire; You are beholding
to me, I have past the Pikes to meet you, and swet for't:
I tell you I have been at Guildhall, and what I have done
there, let Histories record. Ile not be my own Trumpet.



What didst thou do there?



Do you see this small Engine? 'Tis a good
one, and has been trusty to his Master: I say no more.



Nay, good Champion; What, what?



How Dull you are! With this (I say)
heartily charg'd and ram'd, under my Apron closely hid,
Latit anguis in herba, (There's Latin for you Rogues) I
got into the Yard.



What then, What then?



By good fortune I espy'd a very fine fellow,
some Officer no doubt, he did Ran Dan so.



But prethee be plain and short.



No it was home, the sting of my Serpent
hath either kill'd him or lam'd him downright, I warrant
he troubles us no more this Day. Heark, the
A Drum is heard within.
Rogues are Marching; let them go and be
hang'd they shal not abide here, I have given
them an earnest penny already, and if they come again,
Ile double it. Well Boys, when they are past Weel go
and Drink the Kings health: Say Boys.



Viva le roy, Viva le roy.






My Lord, you will still endear me.



A Duty so oblig'd cannot be paid too often,
my prayers go with you, my most honoured Lord.



If I return, my Lord, Command my Heart;
In the mean time, let not your friendship Cool.



My body shall be Ice first.





My Lord Stoneware, this is a high peice of
Kindness indeed.



Marry, Ise come toll kiss your none hand, Sir,
•re yee gang anenst the limmer loowne.





Your Servant, my Lord Walker, Are you
ready?







Direct the Lord Stoneware to the Blew Cham∣ber;
where Ile attend your Lordship.



Your very humble Servant, my Loords.





I know She's clogg'd with passion, and 'tis not
fit a Scot should understand it.



You have done wisely in that, my Lord.




Have I stay'd long enough, may you be
spoken with yet?








Am I a Wife, or no Wife.




My only Joy and comfort Why dost Weep?
There's not a Tear but Wounds me. Prithee leave, I'm
sure th'ast no occasion for't.




Did Noll do so by his Wife Bess, that Puss?
He had some care of her, and made her what her heart
could wish; but I have nought but empty promises.



Will you believe me? This Gentleman 




He's a Lawyer, and may lie.








'Twas a by-Complement, I confess; but
I believe he knows more then you do. Pray Sir, say, Shall
I be what I will be, as he says?



The power is now in his owne hands, and
Doubtless my Lord's so wise he will not pa•t with't.




Say you so! Then prithee kiss me Iohn,
ne're stir, I shall so love thee.



But we forget the Lord Stoneware.



H'as got a Scottish Fog in's mouth by this time.




Hang him, 'tis such a Boorish stamme∣ring
fellow, I cann't endure him.



But he's a property, if I return Victorious,
I must make use of; Therefore, prithee Sweet, be mode∣derately
sparing in thy language; let it not soar so high,
lest it prevent my Towring thoughts of their fruition, and
clip those Wings should hover thee to Greatness.




Ile not tye my tongue up for no mans
pleasure living: I think I am a Free Woman, no Bond∣slave,
Sir.



But under favour, Madam, when you Weigh
the Advancement 




I Weigh it not a rush, nor shall I Fee
you for your Counsel, Sir.



He's a good Man, Sweet-heart.




Let him be neer so good, Ile have my will,







I trust I have not angred you, Madam.




Again Madam! let his goodness be what
it will, I'm sure, he hath but ill breeding.





My Lord Stonware is going, Sir.



Odds so, indeed, we have been too uncivil,
come Sweet-heart, my Lord, will you please to walk
in.





How now Gentlemen? you are upon the
merry March, I hear.



I, a pox on't, We shall have little cause,
I fear, to call it a merry one.



Well, I thank my Stars, Our Regiment
stays here at the well head, you Rogues, where there is
plenty of all things.



What says Pluck? The Worser knave, the
better luck.



But do you hear me, Sirrah? for all that, your
Colonel may be hang'd for killing his Brother Cobler.



I hear no harm, I'm not to answer for him:
But prethee tell me, D'ye think there will be bloody
Noses?



Those that have a mind to't, let 'em give,
or take 'em, hang him that fights a stroke, for my par•.



Or mine either; Our Company swear they'l
all be hang'd first.



The General is like to be well hop'd up with
such Souldiers.



Why, what would you have us to do? If the
General cannot agree them, let 'em fight it out themselves
and the Devil part 'em I cry.



If they will fight, we'l make a ring for 'em.



They say that General Philagathus is a
gallant Stout Man, an Excellent Souldier, and a Mar∣vellours
honest Man.



Then we have the less reason to fight against
him.



Nor will we fight against him.



But Brothers, let me advise you to have a
Care what you say, lest you make your Words good, and
be hang'd in earnest, there are Rogues abroad.



I, too many, I thank you Brother for your
Advice.



A lack we talk away our time, let's go, let's
go.



Nay, sure Brother Souldiers, we will not
part with dry Lips.



What you intend to do, do quickly.









Now Priss, what think you now?



Why, truly Secretary I think thou wilt be a
brave Fellow when my Lord returns.



You will let me kiss you now, I hope.



No indeed Secretary, I will not make you so
bold yet; If you return safe and sound, and in good plight,
that is, my Lords brows circled with laurel, and people
smell you out to be a Secretary of State, 'tis very proba∣ble
you may have admittance to my Lip, and something
else in a lawful way.




These words have comforted my heart, I'm
overjoy'd, trust me now: Odds so, my Lords upon taking
Horse; ah! ah! Dear Priss.



Sigh not Man, thou shalt have it; come take
Livery and Seisin, and adue.



Oh, So sweet as the Hony-combe!




Have a care you do not surfeit with't.



I must begon, Dear Priss, once more.





Why law you now give you an Inch
and you will take an Ell; I shall be troubled with
you Kisses.



No truly Priss 




Why, you are bold indeed.



Oh Heart! Oh Fates! Why should such Lovers
part?
Exit Walker.



Well, go thy wayes for a Modest Asse, thou
mightst have had something else, hadst thou press'd me
to't; but the Fool will make a fine Husband; when he
comes to taste the fruit, he'l so love the Tree! 'Tis a
sweet thing for a Woman of Knowledge to meet with a
Man of Ignorance, and better to keep him in't. My Se∣cretary
I see never read Arratine, if he had he would
have been furnish'd with more Audacity. Lord, how
Honor Creeps upon me! I shall be Ladifi'd there's no
Doubt on't. How my Ears will be sill'd with Madams!
And, Will your Ladyship be pleas'd? What will your
Honor have to Breakfast? How do you, Madam? I am
come to give you a Visit, Madam. Will you go to Hide-Park
to day, Madam? How does your good Lord, Ma∣dam?
Did you Sleep well to night, Madam? Is your Dog
recover'd of his Fit, Madam? Your faithful Servant,
Madam. Have you any Service to Command me, Madam?
This her Highness despises. I am as proud as She; and
me thinks it sounds very well. Madam! Why, 'tis a word
of State.





Mrs. Priss, Mrs. Priss, You must come away
to her Highness presently.



Why, how now, Sance?



Sauce! Why, what are you, pray? Will you
come away? Ile tell her.



Ile have you boxt anon, Sirrah, for this.







Champion, how now Champion? What
news, Champion?



Nay, what news do you say, then?







The Devil and Iohn a Cumber go with him.
Well, I hope General Philagathus will so pay his Jac∣quet!



He will be forc'd to turn it.



That he hath done often enough already.



The Rogues were well mounted.



May the Horse founder, and the Foot die in
Ditches! My prayers go along 'em.







Come Gentlemen, If you have any Chink
go along with me; Weel drink Philagathus Health. How
they look at one another!







Speak no more, your Countenance betray
your meanings, I perceive your Masters are not so tender-hearted
as mine; He's honest, lives in hope, allows me
the merry Sice a day to spend till better Times come.



Thou art happy, Champion.



You shall participate of that happiness!
'Twere pity such proper Fellows as we are should part
without Drinking a Health to Noble Philagathus his Suc∣cesse.



Well Champion, weel make you amends.



Let the mends make it self; Come away,
begon.






How say you so forsooth Mother? as I'm here.




I say thy folly will undo us all.



I profess Mother, as I'm here you alwayes
harp upon one string: Ne're stir, As I'm here, and like
the Cuckoo, have but one Note, Ne're stir now.




What dost make of me, a Hooting-stock?



No, I profess not I, I know my Duty, as
I'm here.




Thou Wouldst fain seem a Souldier,
and a Courtier, but thou art neither.




Good Mother be not so bitter, he's an
honest Man.




Hang honesty, 'tis meer foolery; thy
Father had more Wit then to be thought one of that
needy Crue; could ever Man have given the power out
of his own hand, as he hath done, and to his Enemy,
a fellow as fierce as Aqua fortis, and will eat into the
very marrow of our families.



I profess Mother, you may be mistaken for
all this, he is in some sense, but my Servant.




And he'l become thy Master to thy
shame, why didst not go thy self?



Why? I profess, Whether you believe it or
not, Mother, I am the greatest Man in the Nation.




Until a greater come; How stupid art
thou? Girle, prithee instruct him.




'Twould ill become me, sure to teach
my Lord, I neer was guilty of that crime yet, he knows
his own Business best.



I profess, Mother, you are such a strange
Woman, I know not what to say to you; had not General
Philagathus (like a fool) made this disturbance, I know,
what I had been this time.




Thou hadst been neither better nor worse
then what thou art, the Common Tavern, and Town
Table-Talk.



Why? I profess, Mother, you are not so
well spoken of, neither, for all you look so.




That's long of such an Ideot as thou art.




Nay Mother, indeed you do not well:
He's my Husband, I ought not to suffer this.




Good Lord! It seems he plays better at
Tratrip with thee then thy Husband Ireton did: Thou
couldst find Tongue enough for him: Or, there's foul lyars
if this March-pane fellow did not Melt in your Mouth in
his life time.




I thank you, Mother.



What's that, what's that she says Sweetheart?




Nothing, my Lord, worthy your notice.




Had not a sool rid thee, thou hadst
known thy Duty better. So much for that, farewel.
Exit.









her go, Sweetheart; the house wil be the quieter, I profess.




She is my mother, my lord.



And I'm your husband my lady, as I'm here I think
so: I profess I know not any body cares for her company.




She does not come to trouble you, Sir.



Yes, She does, I profess, and very much: I
was just thinking of State-Affairs, and She has put all out
of my head: The Committee have no reason to thank
her, to my knowledge.








Why, the Citizens are mad for a Free Parlia∣ment,
the Counties are all up; and is it not time to look
about us, I profess?




Indeed, my Lord, you say right.



If a Free Parliament sit once, what will be∣come
of Us, I profess we must secure our selves as
well as we can: the Rump (as the Wicked call it) must
and shall come in agen, I profess.





will become of your Friend the Lord Bertlam then?



I profess, I care not; your Mother takes me
for a fool, but let me alone to deal my Cards, the Speaker
and I are reconcil'd: But Sweet-heart, I profess I must be
gon, I say no more, Bertlam, Stoneware, and Lockwhit are
Knaves, down-right Knaves, I profess they have fool'd me
all this while, it will now turn to 'em, I profess, let 'em
suffer.




I understood, my Lord, they were your
Friends.



But I have found 'em out; say no more, will
you go in, Sweet heart? I profess I must be gon.




I obey you, my Lord.






I Wonder Priss, that none of the Mo∣dern
Poets have been here with their Encomiums since
thy Lord Went!



It may be Helicon is Dry'd up, or their Brains
are turn'd Addle.




Well, I'm resolved to make Him that
brings me the first Copy Poet Laureat, provided he brings
Victory in't: I will Dispose of my Places my self, and
be Lord Steward my self, or it shall cost me a fall. Lockwhit
for all his art shall never Carry it.



How, Her Highness become Lord Steward!




No matter for that; Profit and Service
will come by't: Ile have the ordering of all Places both
above and below Stairs, and so give out to the people.



And good reason too, bir Lady.




A Counsellor, a foolish fellow, at every
end he calls me Madam.



Truly, there was one call'd me Madam too
tother day. Lord, we Women are so frail! I thought my
self to be a Madam in good Earnest.




I Priss, thou mightst, and be proud on't;
but I, I think am somewhat above that.



A Story, so please your Highness.




I will have Eight Gentlemen Ushers,
that Puss B•ss had Foure; Two shall bear up my Trai•.



Rather Foure, and it shall please your High∣ness;
that Petty-fogger Loethur's Wise had one, and as
I'm a Christian, another foolish fellow went bare before
her, no Countess could have been better Man'd 
  51
Well, it will come to my turn shortly, but that the
Wicked Rump is sat; there lies my fear, Oh Woodfleet!
Woodfleet! thou art stark nought.




What sayst thou, Priss?



I was thinking, and it please your Highness,
what a Canary-bird Woodfleet was, to settle the Rump,
the abominable Rump, and pretended so much love to
my Lord and Master.




His love is not Worth the enquiring af∣ter,
Wench; as for the Rump, I smell 'tis stale already,
and must be pepper'd when thy Lord returns; dost think
Wench it shall have a sitting place then, no I warrant
thee, he that jerkt it when he came out of the West,
will do the like, when he comes out of the North.



I, and it shall please your Highness, if he
return with Victory.




Ne're fear it Wench, I have sent for
Lilly, and Wonder he stays so long, 'tis such a Dream∣ing
fellow.





Here's Master Lilly, an't please your Highness.




How now Lilly, hast thou don what I
Commanded thee?



I have Examined the Zodiack, Searcht the 12
Houses, and by my powerful Art, put the whole regi∣ment
of gods and goddesses out of order, Saturn and
Iupiter are by the Ears, and Venus will he rampant assist∣ed
by Mars the god of Battailes.



This makes for your Highness, I love Mischief
with all my heart.




How stands my Husbands fortune?



In the Alnathay of Aries, or as some others have
it Salhay, being the head of Aries.




Aries, what is that Aries?



A Monster, I Warrant it.



'Tis a signe, and signifies a Ram.




You Rascal, Do you put the Horns upon
my Princely Husband.



It may be a new peice of Heraldry.



He's subtle, politick, and crafty.




Thou hitst pretty well there.



Then in the Allothanie, or (as some have it)
Alhurto, being the Tail of Aries, I find him eloquent,
prodigal in necessity proud, inconstant, and deceitful.




Dost thou abuse me, Rascal.







Alass! he means innocently, for these are
virtues given to most of the Male-kind.



He's there denoted to be fortunate in Warfare.








In Adoldaya, being the Head of Taurus.













Darst thou Horn him again.







A very ill Signe, the Signe of the Bull: But
he does not mean, and it shall please your Highness, the
Town-Bull of Ely.



Has your Lord are a Mark or Mold upon his Mem∣bers?
If he has, he vanquishes his Enemies.




He has that Priss, I'm sure on't.



You are best acquainted with his Secrets.



For Mars being with the Moon in the Sextile
Aspect, incourages men of War, and in the Trine promi∣ses
Success.




Ile love that Trine while I live for't.



I wonder where the Fellow got all these hard
Words.



Lose not an Inch of your State, lest you diminish
the lustre of that Planet predominates.





Why Sirrah, you grow sa•cy. Priss,
Let the Foot-boy pay the Fellow for his pains.



I hope she does not mean to pay me with Kicks:
Is she angry?



No no, you have only put her in mind of her
Majesty, she loves you ne're the worse for't; You must
flatter her.



I have been bred to't. I take my leave of your
Highness.




But take thy reward with thee: Thou
art sure of what thou sayst?



As sure as if I had the Planets in my hand; a man
can say no more.



Well, go thy ways, and if thy judgment •alter,
To second thy gold Chain expect a Halter.




What dost thou think now?



How can I think amiss? He's a notable Man:
Ile get him into the Larder one time or other, and Ile
make him show me all.




Show thee all, Wench! Out upon't.



What, the Lilly and the Rose: I promise you,
for ought I see, the Lilly is the best flower in your
garden.





Here's a Letter from my Lord to your High∣nesse.



Hast ne're a one for me from the Secretary?








So, this Fellow is Saucy, I must take him
down a button-hole lower. Good news, no doubt on't;
and then we shall have such Bonefiring. Ile read my Swit∣ter-com
Swatter-com's Letter anon. But, her Highness
begins to look pale upon't; I do not like this changing
Countenance.




Thy Lord is Murder'd.



Then my honor goes to the Dunghill: A pox
of Lilly and his legion of Devils.




Murdered in his •ame, his honour, the
Souldiery have forsaken him.



If that be all, 〈◊〉 matter Madam.




Even call me what thou wilt.



I should have call'd you Highness, I confess,
but I hope you are not offended; Lilly is a meer rogue,
Ile never endure a Lilly hereafter, 'tis a flattering flower,
and stinks abominably.




He Writes me Word, hee'l be in Town
this Night, he's sent for by the Rump.



Oh nasty Rump! But an't shall please your
Highness, shall I seek out for eight proper Striplings to
to man your Highness and four Spring-cits to trick up your
Train, a French Taylor that has a yard thus long, a Cook
whose Nose will not offend your Sawce by dropping in't,
a Gentleman Sewer that can dance before your Dishes,
an able Carver to cut up your Custards, a Taster that hath
a sweet Breath and no rotten Teeth, a Baker whose hands
is not mangy; who shall be Lord Chamberlain, Groom
of the Stool, your Maids of honour, your Starcher,
your Tyrer, Yeoman of your Cellar, Yeoman of your
Pan•rey, Yeoman of your Pastrey, Clerk of your Kit∣chin,
Clerk of the Roles? Lord, I'm even out of Breath
with reckoning up your Servitors!








Why, seriously I dreamt last night, an't please
your Highnesse, that we have been but Princes in disguise
all this while, and that our Vizors are now falling off;
and who would think that Dreams should come to light
so?




Now could I tear my flesh, all my hopes
are lost.



No, you say there's one a coming.




How? this Woodfleets Wi•e will ore-top
me.



Pull her eyes ont, and then let a Dog lead
her.




Well, Ile do something.



Ile see your second so good, and 't please your
Highness.
Exit.




Hy Boyes, the Noble General Philagathus
lay at Barnet last night.



Say'st thou so, Champion.



And the pityful, dityful Lambert, one
of Donquixott's Lords, is in the Tower. H'as been a
Whipste• all his Life time, and now is become a staid
Gentleman.







No more of that if you love me, Noble
Philagathus must be the Cities Champion, Ile resign my
Office, and yet be Loyal still.



Who will not? who will not?



Then you are my Boyes again; do you
not observe how the Phanaticks are trotting out of town,
some of the Rogues begin to mutiny?



Hang 'em up then, I cry.



So say I, by thousands; noble Phylagathus
enters with love, and they go out with curses, or like
the Snuffe of a Candle, stinckingly.



I'm sure they have eaten our Masters up.



Even to their Bowels, that Trading is
become a meer Skelliton.



Now I hope we shall see better days.



Ne'r fear it Lads. Philagatbus is right, and
sound to the very Core.



What will become of our Exchange.
Merchant.



What? he that turn'd part of the House of
God into a Den of Theeves.



The very same, the very same.



Let him hang himself, and when he is cold
meat, the Divel carbanadoe him for a Break-fast: But
  56
heark they are marching out, and Philagathus his honest Soldiers are coming in. Oh let's
see um! let's see um.



By all means let's see um.









Bless my Eye-sight! what? her High∣nesse
without her Train: Where is that pretious Bird thy
Husband, Cag'd? His Wings are Clipt from flying: Faith
now, this comes of Threachery: Had he been true to my
Son Dick, he might have still continued honorable, and
thou a Lady; and now I know not what to call thee.




Thy rudeness cannot move me, I im∣pute
it to thy Want of Breeding.




My Want of Breeding, Mrs. Mincks.




We Cannot expect from the Dunghill
odorous savours: Were our affections greater than they
are, they merit not half the Contempt and Scorn persues
thy wretched Family, and the Memory of thy abhorred
Husband.




How durst thou name him but with re∣verence:
He that out-did all Histories of Kings or Kea∣sors:
was his own Herald, and could give Titles of Honor
to the meanest Peasants; made Brewers, Dray-men,
Coblers, Tinkers, or any body Lords: Such was his power
no Prince ere did the like: Amongst the rest, that precious
piece thy Husband was one of his making.




Would we had never known these pain∣ted
Titles that are so easily washt off: 
Enter Woodfleet.
But yonder comes the cause of all our miseries.



Ne're go, yonder's my Mother; I profess, as
I'm here, Ide rather meet, ne're stir, a Beggar in my Dish,
so I had, as I'm here.




And, art thou there? Nay, ne're hide
thy face for't, though thou mayst be asham'd of all thy
Actions.



Why I, forsooth Mother? I profess, ne're
go, not I Mother, as I'm here.




C•ll 〈◊〉 not Mother: Thou hast ruin'd
my Children, and thy self too, like a Fool as thou art.




And me and my Husband, like a Knave
as thou art.




Would ever Coxcombe have commit∣ted
such folly!




Or ever Changling done the like! Iack
Adams is a Man to thee.



I pro•ess indeed law, you are strange folks,
I profess, ne're go law: Cannot a man, as I'm here pass the
Street, I p•ofess law?






Hang thee, thou'rt good for nothing,




But •leering and fooling.




And how do you, forsooth? I profess.




And truly, I know what I know, and
there's an end,




Of an old Song, Few words are best.




Ne're go, I'm the greatest man in the
Nation▪ I profess I, ne're stir now: Think you what you
will, forsooth Mother, as I'm here.



I profess, ne're stir, as I'm here, there's no
enduring it, law now▪ as I'm here; and therefore farewel,
as I'm here, for Ile be gone, ne're stir now.





Now Champion, what think you of your
General Philagathus?



A ro•e on't, I know not what to think on't:
Was ever such a Ra•e committed upon a poor She City
before? Lay her legs open to the wide world, for every
Rogue to peep in her Breech. I







Is this the Cities Champion?



Well, On my Conscience he's honest for
all this: The plaguy Rump has done this Mischief: Well,
Club stand stiff to thy Master, some body shall suffer for't:
I say no more.



We shall be Coop'd up shortly for Hawks-meat
in our Cellars, while they possess our Shops, and
Feast upon our Mistresses▪



Well, Ile Warrant the Souldiery will be
honest for all this, and then we'l Sindge the Maggots out
of the louzy Rump, or else Swindge me.









From whence, from Tripulo?



From Guildhall, you Knaves: We shall
have a Free Parliament.








The General and the City are agreed, and
he has promis'd it.



















Now you Infidels, What think you now?
Has your Fears and Jealousies left you, or will you still
damn your selves up with dirty Suspition. You that spoke
even now you should be Coop'd up for Hawks-meat, shall
be Cramm'd up for •apons; your Cellars shall become
Ware-houses, your Shops Exchanges, and your Mistresses
persons of honor.



And, what shall we be?



Squires of the Body: Honor sufficient e∣nough
for men of our rank, Gentlemen.







I tell you, I will have no more of that:
Where is Lilly now?



In one of the Twelve houses.



We'l fire him out of 'em.



How will the Man in the Moon drink Clar∣ret
then?



Clarret is best burnt, Sir, by your leave.



I, but Lilly has Eighteen houses.



A Bakers dozen: we'l fire the odd end first.



A Match, a Match; we'l do't.



But now I think on't, we must have no
fireing of houses, there's a Statute against it: Better once
Wise than never.







We'l be merry to night, I'm resolv'd on't,
or else never let Prentices presume to be honest agen, and
therefore follow me: God bless the General!






Now Secretary, where's your Titles now?
Not so much as a title of 'em remaining, all sunk in the
Sand-box.



I'm between Silla and Carybdis, I must confess;
and thou hast gravell'd me, my dear Priss.



Hang your Dog Poetry, it made my Lord
thrive so ill as he did: I think thou didst infect him; he
us'd to have a Serene brain, and Courage good enough:
Sure the Viccar of Fools was his Ghostly Father: Be beat
without a blow, there's a mystery indeed!



Truly Priss, my Lord could not help it.



Not help it, there's a jest indeed, I'm sure
he has helpt himself into prison for't, let who will help
him out again. What course wilt thou take now, Secre∣tary?



Not horse-coursing Priss, Ide have thee know
that.



Why, thou'rt pretty well Timber'd for such
an Imployment. Canst thou make pens?



Yes, and Ink too Priss, I tell you but so.



There will be a Trade indeed for thee.



Nay, and the worst come to the worst, I can
teach to Dance.




I confess thy Sword is alwayes Dancing.



That's the Alamode is learnt in France.



Come, if thou canst Dance so well, let's have
a frisk, if thou dar'st.



Truly Priss, I have not my Pumps in my
pocket.



'Tis well thy Mother left thee Wit enough for
an Excuse.




That is not all, look here, I can fence too 



What dost thou mean to do! 




Set your right foot forward, keep a Close
guard, have an Eye to your Enemies point, extend your
Arm thus.




Lord, Lord, the man is mad sure.



Traverse your ground sometimes reverse, as
thus: Give back then, come on agen, play with his
point: I• he makes a pass, put it by, make a home thrust
thus, run him thorough, and he falls I Warrant you.




Put up thy Fools-bawble there: I profess Ile
•all my Lady else.




Why, did it fright thee, Priss? seriously, I did
but show thee what skill I had at my Weapon.



Thou wouldst make a rare fellow to fence be∣fore
the Bears, if there were any.



Why, Priss? I dare say I can kill any man living
that can't defend himself.



Ha, ha, ha! I am of thy mind, that can't Defend
himself.



Why Priss, such as fight must take all Advan∣tages.



And I that do not •ight, will take the advantage
to leave thee and thy foolery.
Exit.



Nay, dear Priss, ne're go Ile follow thee.
Exit.



Enter Prentices with Faggots upon their Sholders, they pass
the Stage whooping and hollowing.
Enter again whooping and hollowing with Rumps of Mutton
upon Spits.


Roast the Rump, Roast the Rump.
Exit.


him whooping and hollowing.


Silence, Silence, I say.







Gentlemen all, I tell you plain,
My Rump does itch, and we shall have rain.


A piece of Wood is set forth painted like a pile of Faggots
and Fire▪ and Faggots lying by to supply it.
Enter Prentices and Souldiers.



Come Gentlemen, you are Welcome,
Sit down, bring some Drink there, 'tis a night of Jubile,
we'l want no Drink while the Rump roasts.


Here's a Health to your noble General.



Thank you, young Man.

Racks are set out
one turn•th sp•t
with Rumps on't.






It bastes it self, i• his been well•ed, a D•g
take it: But pray give us some Drink too, we are almost
Dry roasted.





Begarr▪ dis b• very lite night▪ me can •ind my
way to my loging▪ begarr very well if me not take a Cup to 〈◊〉
by the way: Now ga•soone, 〈◊〉 be de matter 〈◊〉 you?



Some 〈…〉 the Bonfi•e 〈◊〉.



Bonfi•es! begfrr me 〈…〉
be in the bonfires: here garsoone, 〈…〉
larshan to de bonsire?







We are Musicians, and will give you a Les∣son
Mounsieur.



A Lesson, dat be very good, begarr me love
itt vitt all mine heart, alle alle vic moy to de bonfire, begarr
furboone Company de Souldate 
dece Angletar, me love dem vitt all mine heart, play a lesson,
or begar me vil brake a your Fiddells.







Furboone begarr now give
me de merry Song, me give you de Larshan.

Musicians play a short Lesson.


Have you this Song? We came from Scotland.







Begarr me vill have a dat.
We came from Scotland with a small force,
With a hey down down a down a,
But with hearts far truer then steel;
We got by my fay,
The Glory oth' day,
Yet no man a hurt did feel:

When Bertlam first our Army did face,
Hey down down a down a,
He look'd as fierce as the Divel;
We feared a Rout,
But he Wheeled about,
The Gentleman was so Civil:

Our General Marcht with the Countreys love,
VVith a hey down down a down a,
All persons to him did address;
Small money we spent,
For we found as we VVent,
Good friends, and here find no less.




Furboone, begar furboone, done moy de toder
Cup burn a de Rump.



That has been often done in your Countrey,
Mounsieur.



Begar me vilt dance about de Bonfire, come
vit me men.

They dance about the Bonfire.








Let my Lady say what she will, I will see the
Bonfire.



Begarr Metress you be a very fine Shentileve∣man,
begarr me dance one time vitt you, nay begar you noe serve
a me •oe.



I cannot dance indeed, Sir.



Begarr me vill have on touch vitt you, Metress.



What, before all this Company, Mounsieur?



Datt me vill begarr.



Well, if I must dance, play Fortune my foe.



No, Sellingers Round, We are beginning the
World again.



Me vill have none of dat, me vill have a de
Corrant of de foot sa saw, come Metress lend a 
me your hand, courage courage Metress.




Well, now indeed I must begon, Sir.



Begar me vill see you to your loging, pardon
a moy.



By no means, I shall be knockt oth' head then.



Mee no care for dat, par ma moy adue Iee vou
remercy pour dis•boone Company, adue petit garsoone.







What are you resolved to do? Every man
to his home, or shall we make a Night on't.



A night on't, a night on't.



Come to the next Bonfire.



To the next Bonfire, to the next Bonfire.






We have played our Cards fair.



I deny it, We have not played our Cards fair.



B•ed Sirs, then yee have plaid then faw, and
thats faw play geod feath, Sirs.



A Fool had the shuffling of them, the game
had gone better else.



The faw deel himself was Trump, Sirs; I think
s•rrs wee ha had nee geod luck, Sir•, this bout.



We are lost Sirs, utterly lost.



No Sir, we are found Sir, catcht in a Net of
our own making.



Thou wouldst give all the Shooes in thy Shop to
be ont of't.



Is there no remedy my Lord Lockwhit?







Bred, 〈◊〉 no 〈…〉, hees my Noble
Lyer Sirs.



Who•e Kee••• of the 〈…〉 now?



Where will you find your 1000. l. p. annum now.



Bred Sir•▪ 〈◊〉 y•e gire▪ do yee gire? hees gatt
rought Sirs, •eit••er of any the gifts I had geen me geod feath.



He••k you Mr. Lawyer, have you e•re a Habu∣lus
Corpulus to remove us from the Storm is coming?



With a Sy••ers, Razer, or what a Divel do
you call it.



You are politick, will you sell a penny worth
of Pollicy, Sir?



Bred, he had meere need buy some to save his
Cregg, Sirs.



Come lets let's leave the Law in the Lurch,
and every man shift for himself? Adue! Mr. Lawyer.












How monstrously have I expos'd my self to
th' dirty Censure of the basest Creatures, things never
mentioned but with scorn, and now I am become the
Thesis unto theirs? The very Cobler reads a Lecture to me
and I'm convinc'd, I should amend my manners, and
  65
become Loyal Dictates long before Divinity discovered!
There's no sin like that we know, and that we surfet in.





Do you want any Pens or Ink, Pens or Ink?
Will you Fence, or will you Dance? What Pens and
Ink do you want, Gentlemen?




Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons▪ fine civil
Oranges, fine Lemmons: Me thinks it sounds very well;
a pox of her Tallnesse for me, no matter, ne're repine
Wench, thy Trade's both pleasant and profitable, and if
any Gentleman take me up, I am still, Fine civil Oranges,
fine Lemmons.



Pens or Ink, Pens, Pens or Ink?







Priss, my Dear Priss.



Why, how now Secretary, thou seest my
words are come to pass, I knew what a Lord thou wouldst
be: But Fortunes a Whore.



A whip take her: But shall we meet now: Priss?



I think we are met Walker, although unhappily.



I mean upon equal terms.



Will you buy a geodly Ballad, or a Scott Spur
Sirs, will we buy a geodly ballad, or a Scott Spur Sirs, any
thing to live in this World? Bred, if I should gang intoll my none
Countrey, my Cregg would be stretcht two inches longer then
'tis: Will ye• buy a geodly ballad, or a Scott Spur Sirs, will a
buy a Line a Iack-line, a Line a Iack Bertlams Line?



'Tis the Lord Stoneware.



No more Lord then thy self, Walker: Let's have
some sport with him, Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons:
Will your Lordship buy any Lemmons and Oranges? Fine
civil Oranges, fine Lemmons.



Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, will your Lordship
buy any Ink or Pens for the Committee of no Safety?



Bred a geod what a Whore and a Knave is this.





Turnips, Turnips, Turnips hoe, did ever
Lord cry Turnips before? But a pox of Lordship, would
I had my old Farm over my head again, Turnips, Turnips
Turnips hoe, Turn-up Mistress, and Turn-up the Maid,
and who buyes my long Turnups ho!



He does it rarely well; Fine Oranges, fine
civil Oranges, fine Lemmons.



Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens for the Lord Desborough.



Bred 'tis he indeed, these are Witches sure, how
does your geod Lady, Sirr?



What my Lord Stoneware?



Ne bred a geod Ime ne meere a Loord then yer
neene self, my Honoor is in the dust, Sirr.





Have you any old Boots or Shoes to mend, I
have helpt to under lay the Government this 20. years,
and have been upon the mending hand, but I fear now I
shall be brought to my Last, & therefore ought to mind my
end; will you buy Shoes for Brooms, or Brooms for Shoes?



Or a Knave for a whip, or a whip for a Knave?
Fine civil Oranges, Fine Lemmons.



Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, how do you my Lord?



Dost mock me fellow? Who are these?







Brother Huson, and how, and how?



And what, and what? and pox o' that, and
that; lets imbrace however.





What Kitchin-stuffe have you Maids?
was ever Princess brought to such a pass? what Kitchin-stuffe
have you Maids?



Gammer Cromwell, our Maid calls you.













You Rogue do you
abuse me? Ile claw your eyes out.

••ings down her Tub
and runs after him.
Exit.



Enter again presently and takes up her Tub.



Oh Dick! Dick! Did ever I think to
come to this? What Kitchin-stuffe have you Maids, Maids
have you any Kitchin-stuffe Maids?



Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons? Will your
Ladyship buy any Oranges and Lemmons?




Dost thou mock me Bag•ge? Ile be at thee presently.



No indeed shee does not, 'tis Priss my Lady
Bertlams Woman, and I am Walker her Secretary.




How? Thou hast walkt fair indeed,
where is her Highnesse now?



They say she intends to cry fresh Cheese & Cream.




She has brought her hogs to a fair market.



And so we have all me thinks.




What art thou there too?



Bred an Ise here ta, and my geod Loord Des∣borough,
bred a geod heeres eene a Iolly Company.




It somewhat palliates my miserie,
That inafflictions yo• like Sharets be.



Come let's mind our business, words are but
wind▪ Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons.
Exit.



Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, will you buy any Ink
or Pens?
Exit.



Will yee buy a geodly Ballad, or a Scott Spurr,
will yee buy a Iack-line a Iack Bertlams line, or a line for a
Iack a Bertlam.
Exit.



Turnips, Turnips, Turnips hoe! Turn-up
Mistress, and Turn-up Maid, and Turn-up my Cousin and
be not afraid of a long, long, Red Turn-up ho.
Exit.



Boots or Shooes, Boots or Shooes to mend?
Exit.




What Kitchin-stuffe have you Maids?
what Kitchin-stuffe have you Maids?
Exit.





I am a poor Lawyer Gentlemen, and can
shew you Legerdemain for your mony, no Hocus Po•us
like me. I have two hands, neither of them disabled
from taking •ees; have you any canses to split? for that's my
  68
Doom, my Bag is a Receptacle for them; I am for that
••use brings me most profit, be it good or be it bad; but
indeed have been better experienced in the bad, and now
would •ain follow the good Cause and turn honest; but a
man shall hardly grow rich then you'l say, and then 'twill
vex a man.
How e're Ile try' •, for to my greif I find
Riches ill got, do scatter with the Wind.
Have you any work for a poor Housell Lawyer, for all
〈◊〉 honest Lawyer, I am your next man, Gentleman.
Ambition and 〈◊〉 Avarice, adue!
How e're your Gl••yes yes seem, they are not true.

