Freeman and Lovel entering.


A Country boy! ha, ha, ha! How long has this scheme
been in your head?



Some time.  I am now convinced of what you have
often been hinting to me, that I am confoundedly cheated by
my servants.



Oh, are you satisfied at last, Mr. Lovel? I always told
you, that there is not a worse set of servants in the parish of
St. James's than in your kitchen.



'Tis with some difficulty I believe it now, Mr. Free∣man;
though, I must own, my expences often make me
stare.  Phillip, I am sure▪ is an honest fellow; and I will
swear for my blacks  If there is a rogue among my folks, it
is that surly dog Tom.



You are mistaken in every one. Phillip is an hypro∣critical
rascal; Tom has a good deal of surly honesty about
him; and for your blacks, they are as bad as your whites.



Prithee, Freeman, how came you to be so well ac∣quainted
with my people? None of the wenches are handsome
enough to move the affections of a middle-aged gentleman as
you are ha, ha, ha!



You are a young man, Mr. Lovel, and take a pride
in a number of idle unnecessary servants, who are the plague
and reproach of this kingdom.



Charles you are an old-fashion'd fellow. Servants a
plague and reproach! ha, ha, ha! I would have forty more, if
my house would hold them. Why, man, in Jamaica, before I
was ten years old, I had a hundred blacks kissing my feet eve∣ry
day.



You gentry of the western isles are high-metled ones,
and love pomp and parade. I have seen it delight your soul,
when the people in the street have stared at your equipage;
especially if they wispered loud enough to be heard, "That
is squire Lovel, the great West-Indian" ha, ha, ha!



I should be sorry if we were splenetic as you northern
islanders, who are devoured with melancholy and fog ha, ha,
ha! No, Sir, we are children of the sun, and are born to diffuse
the bounteous favour which our noble parent is pleased to be∣stow
on us.



I wish you had more of your noble parent's regularity,
and less of his fire. As it is you consume so fast, that not one
in twenty of you live to be fifty years old.



But in that fifty we live two hundred, my dear; mark
that But 〈◊〉 business I am resolved upon my frolic I
will know whether my servants are rogues or not. If they
are, I'll bastmado the rascals; if not, I think I ought to pay
  
for my impertinence. Pray tell me, is not your Robert ac∣quainted
with my people? Perhaps he may give a little light
into the thing.



To tell you the truth, Mr. Lovel, your servants are
so abandoned, that I have forbid him your house. However,
if you have a mind to ask him any question, he shall be forth∣coming.



Let us have him.



You shall: But it is an hundred to one if you get
any thing out of him; for though he is a very honest fellow,
yet he is so much of a servant, that he•ll never tell any thing to
the disadvantage of another. Who waits?  
Send Robert to me.  And what was it
determin'd you upon this project at last?



This letter. It is an anonymous one, and so ought
not to be regarded; but it has something honest in it, and put
me upon satisfying my curiosity Read it.




I should know something of this hand 

To Peregrine Lovel, Esq
Please your honour,
I take the liberty to acquaint your honour, that you are
sadly cheated by your servants Your honour will find it as
I say I am not willing to be known; whereof, if I am, it
may bring one into trouble.
So no more from your honour's
Servant to command.


 Odd and honest! Well and now what are the steps you in∣tend
to take?



I shall immediately apply to my friend the manager
for a disguise. Under the form of a gawky country boy, I
will be an eye-witness of my servants behaviour. You must
assist me Mr. Freeman.



As how, Mr. Lovel?



My plan is this I gave it out that I was going to my
borough in Devonshire; and yesterday set out with my servant
in great form, and lay at Basingstoke.







I ordered the fellow to make the best of his way down
into the country, and told him that I would follow him; in∣stead
of that. I turn'd back, and am just come to town: 
Ecce fignum!




It is now one o'clock.



This very afternoon I shall pay my people a visit.



How will you get in?



When I am properly habited, you shall get me intro∣duced
to Philip as one of your •enants sons, who wants to be
made a good servant of.



They will certainly discover you.



Never fear; I'll be so countryfied, that you shall not
  5
know me. As they are throughly persuaded I am many miles
off, they'll be more easily imposed on. Ten to one but they
begin to celebrate my departure with a drinking bout, if they
are what you describe them.



Shall you be able to play your part?



I am surprised, Mr. Freeman, that you, who have
known me from my infancy, should not remember my abili∣ties
in that way. How I play'd Daniel in the Conscious Lo∣vers
at school, and afterwards arrived at the distinguished cha∣racter
of the mighty Mr. Scrub.




Ha, ha, ha! that is very well Enough Here is
Robert.




Your honour order'd me to wait on you.



I did, Robert. Robert 







Come here. You know, Robert, I have a good opi∣nion
of your integrity.



I have always endeavoured that your honour should.



Pray, have not you some acquaintance among Mr. Lo∣vel's
people?



A little, please your honour.



How do they behave? We have nobody but
friends you may speak out.



Ay, Robert, speak out.



I hope your honours will not insist on my saying any
thing in an adair of this kind.



Oh, but we do insist If you know any thing 



Sir, I am but a servant myself; and it would not be∣come
me to speak ill of a brother-servant.



Psha! this is false honesty speak out.



Don't oblige me, good Sir. Consider, Sir, a servant's
bread depends upon his carackter.



But if a servant uses me ill 



Alas, Sir! what is one man's poison is another man's meat.



You see how they trim for one another.



Service, Sir, is no inheritance. A servant that is not
approved in one place, may give satisfaction in another. Every
body must live, your honour.



I like your heartiness as well as your caution; but in
my case, it is necessary that I should know the truth.



The truth, Sir, is not to be spoken at all times: it may
bring one into trouble, whereof if 




Pray, Mr. Lovel, let me see that letter
again.  Aye It must be so Ro∣bert.







Do you know any thing of this letter?











I have seen the hand before.







I ask you if you were concerned in writing this letter?
You never told me a lie yet, and I expect the truth from you
now



Pray, your honour, don't ask me.



Did you write it? Answer me.



I cannot deny it.




What induced you to do it?



I will tell the truth. I have seen such waste and ex∣travagance,
and riot and drunkenness, in your kitchen, Sir, that
as my master's friend, I could not help discovering it to you.







I am sorry to say it to your honour, but your honour is
not only imposed on, but laughed at by all your servants espe∣cially
by Philip, who is a very bad man.



Philip? An ungrateful dog! well?



I could not presume to speak to your honour; and
therefore I resolved, though but a poor scribe, to write your
honour a letter.



Robert, I am greatly indebted to you Here 




On any other account than this, I should be proud to
receive your honour's bounty; but now I beg to be excused.




Thou hast a noble heart, Robert, and I'll not forget
you. Freeman, he must be in the secret. Wait your master's
orders.



I will, your honour.




Well Sir, are you convinced now?



Convinced? Yes; and I'll be among the scoundrels
before night. You or Robert must contrive some way or other
to get me introduced to Philip as one of your cottagers boys
out of Essex.



Ha, ha! You'll make a fine figure.



They shall make a fine figure. It must be done
this afternoon: Walk with me across the park, and I'll tell
you the whole. My name shall be Jemmy; and I am come to
be a gentleman's servant and will do my best, and hope to get
a good carackter.




But what will you do if you find them rascals?



Discover myself, and blow them all to the devil. 
Come along.



Ha, ha, ha! Bravo Jemmy Bravo, ha, ha!



What wretches are ordinary servants, that go on in the
same vulgar track every day! eating, working, and sleeping,
 But we, who have the honour to serve the nobility, are of
another species. We are above the common forms have ser∣vants
  7
to wait upon us, and are are as lazy and luxurious as our
masters. Ha! my dear sir Harry.
Enter sir Harry's Servant.
How have you done these thousand years?


My lord duke! your grace's most obedient servant.



Well, baronet and where have you been?



At Newmarket my lord. We have had dev'lish
fine sport.



And a good appearance, I hear. Pox take it, I should
have been there; but our old Dutchess died, and we were ob∣liged
to keep house, for the decency of the thing.



I picked up fifteen pieces.







The viscount's people, have been bloodily taken
in this meeting.



Credit me, baronet, they knew nothing of the turf.



I assure you, my lord, they lost every match; for
Crab was beat hollow, Caresess threw his rider, and miss Slam∣merkin
had the distemper.



Ha, ha, ha! I'm glad on't. Taste this snuff, sir
Harry:








Right Strasburgh, I assure you; and of my own
importing.







The city-people adulterate it so confoundedly that I
always import my own snuff I wish my lord would do the
same; but he is so indolent When did you see the girls? I
saw lady Bab this morning; but, 'fore Gad, whether it be
love or reading, she looked as pale as a penitent.



I have just had this card from Lovel's people. 
 "Philip and Mrs Kitty present their compliments to
Sir Harry, and desire the honour of his company this even∣ing,
to be of a small party, and eat a bit of supper."



I have the same invitation. Their master it seems is gone to his borough.



You'll be with us, my lord? Philip's a blood.



A buck of the first head. I'll tell you a secret, he's going to be married.















Yes, he is; and I intend to cuckold him.



Then we may depend upon your grace for certain
ha, ha, ha!



If our house breaks up in a tolerable time, I'll be
with you. Have you any thing for us?



Yes a little bit of poetry. I must be at the
Cocoa tree till eight.



Heigh-ho! I am quite out of spirits I had a
  8
damned debauch last night, baronet. Lord Francis, Bob the
bishop, and I, tipt off four bottles of Burgundy a piece. Ha!
there are two fine girls coming! Faith lady Bab aye,
and lady Charlotte.




We'll not join them.



O yes Bab is a fine wench, notwithstanding her
complexion; though I should be glad she would keep her
teeth cleaner. Your English women are damned negligent
about their teeth. How is your Charlotte in that particular?







Ay the world says you are to have her.



I own I did keep her company; but we are off,
my lord.







Between you and me, she has a plaguy thick pair
of legs.



Oh! damn it that's insufferable.



Besides, she's a fool, and miss'd her opportunity
with the old countess.



I am afraid baronet, you love money. Rot it, I
never save a shilling. Indeed I am sure of a place in the ex∣cise.
Lady Charlottee is to be of the party to night; how do
you manage that?



Why, we do meet at a third place; are very civil,
and look queer, and laugh, and abuse one another, and all that.



A-la-mode, ha! Here they are.









Oh fie, lady Charlotte! you are quite indelicate;
I am sorry for your taste.



Well I say it again, I love Vauxhall.



O my stars! Why there is nobody there but filthy
citizens.



We were in hopes the raising the price would have
kept them out, ha, ha, ha!



Ha, ha, ha! Runelow for my money.



Now you talk of Runelow, when did you see the
colonel lady Bab!



The colonel! I hate the fellow. He has had the
assurance to talk of a creature in Glocestershire before my face.



He is a pretty man for all that, soldiers you know
have their mistresses every where.



I despise him. How goes on your affair with the
baron•t?



The baronet is a stupid wretch, and I shall have
nothing to say to him. You are to be at Lovel's to night lady
Bab,



Unless I alter my mind. I don't admire visiting
these commoners, lady Charlotte.



Oh, but Mrs Kitty has taste.







The duke is fond of her, and he has judgment.



The duke might shew his judgement much better.




There he is, and the baronet too. Take no notice
of them. We'll rally them bye-and-bye.



Dull souls! Let us set up a loud laugh, and leave em.



Aye, let us be gone; for the common people do so
stare at us we shall certainly be mobb'd.



Ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha!


Duke and Sir Harry come forward.


They certainly saw us, and are gone off laughing at
us. I must follow.







I must I must have a party of raillery with them, a
bon mot, or so. Sir Harry you'll excuse me adien. I'll be
with you in the evening, if possible Though, bark ye! there
is a bill depending in our house, which the ministry make a
point of our attending; and so you know, mum! we must mind
the stops of the great fiddle. Adieu.




What a coxcomb this is! and the fellow can't
read. It was but the other day that he was cow boy in the
country, then was bound 'prentice to a periwig maker, got into
my lord duke's family, and now sets up for a fine gentleman.
O tempora! O mores!




Sir Harry, prithee what are we to do at Lovell's when
we come there;



We shall have the fiddles, I suppose.



The fiddles! I have done with dancing ever since
the last sit of the gout. I'll tell you what, my dear boy, I
possitively cannot be with them, unless we have a little 




Fie, my lord duke.



Look you, baronet, I insist on it. Who the devil of
any fashion can possibly spend an evening without it? bu• I
shall loose the girls, how grave you look, ha, ha, ha, Well
let there be fiddles.



But, my dear lord, I shall be quite miserable with∣out
you.



Well, I won't be particular; I'll do as the rest do.
Tol, lol, lol.





He had the assurance, last winter, to court
a tradesman's daughter in the city, with two thousand pounds
to her fortune, and got me to write his love letters. He pre∣tended
to be an ensign in a marching regiment, so wheedled
the old folks into consent, and would have carried the girl off,
but was unluckily prevented by the washerwoman who hap∣pened
to be his first cousin.



Mr. Philip your servant.


You are welcome to England, Sir Harry, I hope you
received the care, and will do us the honour of your company.
My master is gone into Devonshire. We'll have a roaring night



I'll certainly wait on you.



The girls will be with us.



Is this a wedding supper, Phillip.



What do you mean, sir Harry.



The duke tells me so.



The duke's a fool.



Take care what you say; his grace is a bruiser.



I am a pupil of the same academy, and not afraid of
him, I assure you. Sir Harry we'll have a noble batch I have
such wine for you!



I am your man, Phil.



Egad the cellar shall bleed: I have some Burgundy
that is fit for an emperor my master would have given his
ears for some of it t'other day, to treat my lord what d'ye call
him with. But I told him it was all gone ha! Charity begins
at home ha; Odso, here is Mr. Freeman, my masters intimate
friend; he's a dry one. Don't let us be seen together he'll
suspect something.







Away, away; remember, Burgundy is the word.




of a cork.] Your's.



Now for a cast of my office a starch phiz, a canting
phrase and as many lies as necessary hem!




Oh, Philip! how do you do, Philip? You have lost
your master, I find.



It is a loss, indeed, sir, so good a gentleman▪ He must
be nearly got into Devonshire by this time. Sir, your servant.




Why in such a hurry, Philip?



I shall leave the house as little as possible, now his
honour is away.



You are in the right, Philip.



Servants at such times are too apt to be negligent and
extravagant, sir.



True; the master's absence is the time to try a good
servant in.



It is so, sir, sir, your servant.




Oh, Mr, Philip! pray stay; you must do me a piece
of service.



You command me sir




I look upon you, Philip, as one of the best behaved,
most sensible, completest   rascals in the
world.




Your honour is pleased to compliment.



There is a tenant of mine in Essex, a very honest man
Poor fellow, he has a great number of children and they have
sent me one of 'em, a tall gawky boy, to make a servant of;
but my folks say they can do nothing with him.



Let me have him, sir,



In truth he is an unlik'd cub.



I will lick him into something. I warrant you, sir.
Now my master is absent, I shall have a good deal of time upon
my hands; and I hate to be idle, sir in two months I'll engage
to finish him.



I don't doubt it.




I have twenty pupils in the parish of St. James's
and for a table, or a side-board, or behind a equipage, or in the
delivery of a message, or any thing.



What have you for entrance?



I always leave it to gentlemen's generosity.



Here is a guinea. I beg he may be taken care of.



That he shall, I promise you  Your honour
knows me.








When can I see him, sir?



Now; directly call at my my house, and take him in
your hand.



Sir, I will be with you in a minute. I will but step
into the market to let the next tradesmen know they must not
trust any of our servants, now they are at board wages Humph!



How happy is Mr. Lovel in so excellent a servant!




Ha; ha, ha! This is one of my master's prudent
friends, who dines with him three times a week, and thinks
he is mighty generous in giving me five guineas at Christmas.
Damn all such sheaking scoundrels, I say.



Kingston and Coachman drunk and sleepy.



Somebody knocks coachy, go, go to the door coachy!



I'll not go do you go, you black dog.



Devil shall fetch me if I go.




Why then let him stay I'll not go damme. Ay,
knock the door down and let yourself in.




Ay, ay, knock again, knock again.



Master is gone into Devonshire, so he can't be there
So I'll go to sleep.



So will I, I'll go to sleep too.



You lie devil, you shall not go to sleep till I am
asleep, I am king of the kitchen.



No, You are not king; but when you are drunk,
you are sulky as hell. Here is cooky coming she is king and
queen too.




Somebody has knocked at the door twenty times, and
nobody hears, Why, coachman, Kingston, ye drunken bears!
why don't one of you go to the door?



You go, cook, you go.



Hang me if I go.



Yes, yes, cooky, go, Mollsy, Pollsy, go.



Out, you black toad. It is none of my business, and
go I will not.





I might have stayed at the door all night, as the little
man in the play says, if I had not had the key of the door in
my pocket. What is come to you all?



There is John coachman and Kingston as drunk as
two bears.



Ah, ha, my lads! what finished already? These are
the very best of servants. Poor fellows; I suppose they have
been drinking their master's good journey ha, ha!








Yo ho! get to bed, you dogs, and sleep yourselves
sober, that you may be able to get drunk again bye-and-bye.
They are as fast as a church Jemmy.







Do you love drinking?



Yes I loves ale.



You dog you shall swim in Burgundy.







Cook, wake those honest gentlemen, and see them
to bed



It is impossible to wake them.



I think I could wake 'em sir, if I might, heh



Do, Jemmy, wake 'em, ha, ha, ha!








Oh! oh! What! Zounds! Oh! damn you.








Oh, oh! What now, Curse you! Oh







Ha, ha, ha, Well done, Jemmy. Cook see those
gentry to bed.



Marry come up, I say so too; not I indeed.



She shan't see us to bed. We'll see ourselves to bed.



We got drunk together, and we'll go to bed together,




You see how we live, boy.



Yes, I sees how you live.



Let the supper be elegant, cook.



Who pays for it?



My master to be sure; who else? ha, ha, ha, He is
rich enough, I hope, ha, ha, ha,







Each of us must take a part, and sink it in our next
weekly bills; that is the way.








Prithee, Phillip, what boy is this?



A boy of Freeman's recommending.



Yes, I'm 'squire Freeman's boy heh 



Freeman is a stingy bound, and you may tell him I
say so. He dines here three times a week, and I never saw the
colour of his money yet.



Ha, ha, ha! that is good Freeman shall have it




I must step to the tallow-chandler's to dispose of some
of my perquisites; and then I'll set about supper.



Well said cook, that is right; the perquisite is the
thing, cook.



Cloe, Cloe! where are you, Cloe? 









Take that box, and follow me.




Yes, mistress   Who is this?
 He, he, he! Oh This is pretty, boy
 He, he, he! Oh This is pretty red hair He, he,
he! You shall be in love with me bye-and-bye He,
he!




A very pretty amour 〈◊〉 la! what a fine
room is this! Is this the dining room 〈◊〉 Sir?







La! la! what a fine lady 〈◊〉 This is madam I
••ppose.



Where have you been Kitty?




I have been disposing of some of his honour's shirts
and other linen, which it is a shame his honour should wear
any longer. Mother Barter is above, and waits to know if
you have any commands for her.



I shall dispose of my wardrobe to-morrow.



Who have we here?




A boy of Freeman's; a poor, silly fool 








I intend the entertainment this evening as a compliment
to you, Kitty.



I am your humble. Mr. Phillip.



But I beg I may see none of your airs, or hear any of
our French Gibberish with the duke.



Don't be jealous, Phil.




I intend, before our marriage, to settle something
handsome upon you; and with the five hunderd pounds which
I have already saved in this extravagant fellow's family 



A dog!  O la, la! what! have you five
hundred pounds?







I'll tell you what you shall do, Phil.



Ay, what shall I do?



You shall set up a chocolate-house, my dear



Yes, and be cucko•ded.




You know my edu•ation was a very genteel one. I
was a half-boarder at Chelsea, and I speak French like a na∣tive
Comment vous portez vous Mounfi•ur?








One is nothing without French. I shall shine in the bar.
Do you speak French, boy?







Anon O the fool! ha, ha, ha! Come here, do, and
let me new-mould you a little. You must be a good boy, and
wait upon the gentle folks to-night.




Yes, an't please you, I'll do my best.



His best! O the natural! This is a strange head of
hair of thine, boy. It is so course, and so carotty.



All my brothers be red in the pole.




There, now you are somthing like Come. Phillip,
give the boy a lesson, and then I'll lecture him out of the Ser∣vant's
Guide.



Come, Sir, first, Hold up your head; very well; turn
out your toes, Sir; very well; now call coach.



What is call coach?



Thus, Sir! Coach, coach, coach!





Admirable! the knave has a good ear Now, Sir tell
me a lie.



O la! I never told a lie in all my life.



Then it is high time you should begin now; what is a
servant good for that can't tell a lie?



And stand in it Now I'll lecture him 
This is "The servant's guide to wealth, by Tymothy Shoul∣dernot,
formerly servant to several noblemen, and now an offi∣cer
in the customs; necessary for all servants."



Mind, Sir, what excellent rules the book contains, and
remember them well. Come, Kitty, begin.




Advice to the footman.
"Let it for ever be your plan
"To be the master, not the man,
"And do as little as you can.



He, he, he! •…es, I'll do nothing at all, not I.



"At market never think it stealing
"To keep with tradesmen proper dealing?
"All •…ewards have a fellow-fee•ing.



You will understand that better one day or other, boy.




"Never allow your master able
"To judge of matters in the stable:


"If he should roughly speak his mind,
"Or to dismiss you seems inclin'd,
"Lame the best horse, or break his wind.



Oddines! that's good he, he, he!




"If your good master on you doates,
"Ne'er leave his house to serve a stranger;
"But pocket hay, and straw, and oats,
"And let the horses eat the manger.



Eat the manger! he, he, he!



I won't give you too much at a time Here, boy, take
the book, and read it every night and morning before you say
your prayers.



Ha, ha, ha! very good; but now for business.



Right I'll go and get one of the damask tablecloaths.
and some napkins; and be sure, Phil, your sideboard is very
smart.




That it shall. Come, Jemmy




Soh! soh! It works well.




Philip, Kitty and Lovel.


WELL, Phil, what think you? Don't we look ve∣ry
sma•t? Now let 'em come as soon as they will,
we shall be ready for 'em.



'Tis all very well, but 







Why, I wish we could get that snarling cur, Tom, to
make one.



What is the matter with him?



I don't know he his a queer son of a 



Oh, I know him; he is one of your sneaking, half
bred fellows, that prefers his master's interest to his own.






 And why won't you make one to-night, Tom? Here's cook
and coa•hman, and all of us▪


I tell you again, I will not make one.



We shall have something that's good.



And make your matter pay for it.



I warrant, now you think yourself mighty honest, ha,
ha, ha?



A little honester than you. I hope, and not brag neither.



Hark you, Mr. Honesty, don't be saucy.



This is worth listening to.




What, madam, you are afraid for your cully, are you?



Cully, sirrah, cully! Afraid, sirrah! afraid of what.




Ay, Sir, afraid of what?




Ay, Sir, afraid of what?




I value none of you. I know your tricks.



What do you know, sirrah?



Ay, what do you know?



Ay, Sir, what do you know?



I know that you are in see with every tradesman be¦longing to the house, and that you Mr Clodpole, are in a fair way to be hanged.




What do you strike the boy for?



It is an honest blow.




I'll strike him again. 'Tis such as you that bring a
scandal upon as all.



Come, none of your impudence, Tom.



Egad, madam, the gentry may well complain, when
they get such servants as you in their houses. There's
your good friend, mother Barter, the old cloaths woman, the
greatest thief in town, just now gone out with her apron full
of his honour's linen.



Well, Sir, and did you never ha?



No, never: I have lived with his honour four years
and never took the value of that  His
honour is a prince gives noble wages, and keeps noble compa∣ny;
and yet you two are not contented, but cheat him where∣ever
you can lay your fingers. Shame on you!



The fellow I thought a rogue, is the only honest servant
in my house.




Out, you mealy-mouth'd cur.



Well, go tell his honour, do ha, ha, ha!



I scorn that. Damn an informer! But yet I hope
his honour will find you two out one day or other that•s all.




this fellow must be taken care of.



I'll do his business for him, when his honour comes to
town.




here is a fine gentleman.




Ah, ma chere Madamseile! Comment vous, portez
vous?
(Salute



Fort bien, je vouis remercie, Mounsier.



Now we shall have nonsense by wholesale.



How do you do, Phillip?



Your grace's humble servant.



But, my dear Kitty












Come along with me, and I'll make you free of the cellar.



Yes I will But won't you ask he to drink?



No, no; he will have his share bye-and-bye; come
along.








Indeed I thought your grace an age in coming.



Upon honour, our house is but this moment up; You
have a damned vile collection of pictures, I observe, above
  17
stairs, Kitty. Your 'squire has no taste.



No taste? that's impossible, for he has laid out a vast
deal of money.



There is not an original picture in the whole collecti∣on;
Where could he pick 'em up?



He employs three or four men to buy for him, and he
always pays for originals.



Donnez moi votre eau de luce My head achs
confoundedly (She gives a smelling bottle.) Kitty my dear
I hear you are going to be married.



Pardonnez moi for that.



If you get a boy, I'll be godfather, 'faith.



How you rattle, duke; I am thinking, my lord, when
I had the honour to see you first.



At the play, Madamseile.



Your grace loves a play?



No, it is a dull, old-fashioned entertainment I hate it.



Well, give me a good tragedy.



It must not be a modern one then You are devilish
handsome, Kate Kiss me
(Offers to kits her.




Oh oh! are you thereabouts, my lord duke? That
may do very well bye-and-bye; However, you'll never find
me behind hand.
(Offers to kiss her.



Stand of, you are a commoner Nothing under no∣bility
approaches Kitty.



You are so devilish proud of your nobiliy; Now
I think, we have more true nobility than you Let me tell you
Sir, a knight of the shire



A knight of the shire! ha, ha, ha! a mighty ho∣nour,
truly, to represent all the fools in the county.



O Lud this is charming, to see two nobleman quarrel.



Why, any fool may be born to a title, but only a wise
man can make himself honourable.



Well said, Sir Harry, that is good morillity.



I hope you make some difference between hereditary
honours and the huzzas of a mob.



Very smart, my lord; Now, Sir Harry 



If you make use of your hereditary honour to
screen you from debt.



Zounds, Sir, what do you mean by that?



Hold, hold! I shall have some fine old noble blood spilt
here Ha' done, Sir Harry;



Not I; Why, he is always valuing himself upon
his upper house.








But what becomes of your dignity, if we refuse
the supplies?



Peace, peace; Here's lady Bab.
(Quick





Mrs Kitty, your servant. I was afraid of taking
cold, and so ordered the chair down stairs. Well, and how do
you do? My lord duke your servant and Sir Harry too your's







I am afraid I have trespassed in point of time  But I got into my favourite author,



Yes, I found her ladyship at her studies this morning.
Some wicked poem 



O you wretch? I never read but one book.



What is your ladyship so fond of?



Shikspur. Did you never read Shikspur?



Shikspur! Shikspur! Who wrote it? No, I never read
Shikspur.



Then you have an immense pleasure to come.



Well then, I'll read it over one afternoon or other.
Here's lady Charlotte.





Oh, Mrs. Kitty, I thought I never should have
rea•h'd your house. Such a fit of the cholic seixed me. Oh,
lady Bab, how long has your lady ship been here? My chair∣men were su•h drones. My lord duke! the pink of all good
bleeding.








And Sir Harry! Your servant, Sir Harry.



Madam your servant. I am sorry to hear your
ladyship has been Il



You must give me leave to doubt the sincerity of
that sorrow, Sir. Remember the Park.



I'll explain that affair madam.



I want none of your exp•anations.








No, sir; I have observed your coldness of late,
and despise you. A trumpery baronet?



I see how it is; nothing will satisfy you but no∣bility.
That fly dog the marques.



None of your reflections. Sir: The marquis is a
person of honour, and above enquiring after a lady's fortune,
as you mean•y did.



I, I, madam? I scorn such a thing. I assure you
madam. I never, that is to say Egad. I am confounded
My lord duke, what shall I say to lier? Pray help me
out.




Ask her to shew her legs ha, ha, ha!





Here, my little peer, here is wine that will ennoble
your •lood. Bo•h your ladyships most humble servant.




Both your ladyships most
humble servant.



Why, Philip, you have made the boy drunk.



I have made him free of the cellar ha, ha, ha!



Yes, I am free, I am very free.



He has had a smack of every sort of wine, from hum∣ble
Port to imperial Tokay.



Yes, I have been drinking Kokay.



Go, get you some sleep child, that you may wait on
his lordship bye-and-bye.



Thank you madam I will certainly wait on their
lordships, and their ladyships too.




Well, ladies, what say you to a dance, and then to
supper?



A dance, a dance:




With submission, the country dances bye-and-bye.



Ay, ay, French dances before supper, and coun∣try
dances after. I beg the duke and Mrs. Kitty may give
us a minute.



Dear lady Charlotte, consider my poor gout. Sir
Harry will oblige us.




Minuet, Sir Harry minuet, Sir Harry.



What minute would your honours please to have?



What minute! Let me see Play Marshal thing∣umbob's
minuet.
A minute by Sir Harry and Kitty, aukward and conceited.



Mrs. Kitty dan•es sweetly.



And Sir Harry delightfully.



Well enough for a commoner.



Come now to supper. A gentleman and a lady Here,
fiddler,  wait without.



Yes, an't please your honour.





We will set the wine on the table.
Here is Claret, Burgundy, and Champaign, and a bottle of
Tokay for the ladies, There are tickets on every bottle. If
any gentleman chooses Port 



Port! Tis only f•t for a Dram.



Lady Bab what shall I send you? Lady Charlotte,
pray be free: The more free the more welcome, as they say
in the country. The gentlemen will be so good as to take
care of themse•ves.




Lady Charlotte, "Hob or Nob."



Don my lord in Burgundy, if you please.



Here's your sweetheart and mine, and the friends
of the company.




Come, ladies and gentlemen, a bumper all round I
have a health for you. "Here is to the amendment of our
ma••ers and mistresses."



Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!




Ladies, pray what is your opinion of a single gentle∣man's
service?



Do you mean an old single gentleman?



Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!




My lord duke your toast.







Oh no▪ A health and a sentiment.



A health and a sentiment! No, no, let us have a
song; Sir Harry your song.



Would you have it? Well then Mrs Kitty,
we must call upon you. Will you honour my muse?



A song a song; ay ay, Sir Harry's Song Sir Harry's song.



A song to be sure but first preludo 
Pray, gentleman put it about




See how the devils kiss.



I am really hoarse; but, hem: I must clear up my
pipes. hem; This is Sir Harry•s song; being a new song,
intitled and called, The Fell•w Servant; or, All in a Livery.
Come here, fellow servants, and listen to me,
I'll shew you how those of superior degree
Are only dependants, no better than we.
.Both high and low in this do agree,
'Tis here fellow servant.
And there fellow servant,
And all • a livery.
See yonder fine spark in embroidery drest,
Who bows to the great, and if they smile is blest;
What is he, i'faith, but a servant at best;


Nature made all alike, no distinction she craves:
So we laugh at the great world, its fools and its knavee,
For we are all servants, but they are all slaves.

Cho. Both high &c.
The fat shining glutton looks up to the shelf.
The wrinkled lean miser 〈◊〉 down to his pelf.
And the curl pated beau is a slave to himself.

Cho. Both high, &c.
The gay sparkling belle, who the whole town alarm
And with eyes, lips, and neck, sets the 〈◊〉 all in arms,
Is a vassal herself, a mere drudge to her charms.

Cho. Both h•gh, &c.
Then we'll drink like our betters, and laugh, sing and love,
And when sick of one place, to another we'll move;
For, with little and great, the best joy is to rove.

Cho. Both high and low in thus do agree,
That 'tis here fellow servant,
And there fellow servant,
And all in a livery.



How do you like it, my lord duke?



It is a damn'd vile composition.







O very low ! very low indeed!



Can you make a better?







That is very conceited.



What is conceited you scoundrel?



Scoundrel? You are a rascal. I'll pull you by
the nose.




Look ye, friend, don't give yourself airs, and make
a disturbance among the ladies. If you are a gentleman, name
your weapons.



Weapons! What you will. Pistols.



Done. Behind Montague house.











Oh, for shame, gentlemen! My lord duke Sir
Harry, the ladies! fie.





What the devil can that be Kitty



Who can it possibly be?



Kingston, run up stairs and peep.


It sounds like my master's rap. Pray heaven it be not he!
 Well, Kingston what is it?


It is master and Mr. Freeman. I peep'd thro' the
key hole, and saw them by the lamp light. Tom has just
let them in.



The devil he has! What can have brought him back?



No matter what, away with the things.



Away with the wine, away with the plate. Here,
coachman, cook. Cloe, Kingston, bear a hand. Out with the
candles, away, away.




What shall we do? What shall we do?




Run up stairs, ladies.



No, no, no! He'll see you then.



What the devil had I to do here!



Pox take it, face it out.



Oh no; these West Indians are very fiery.



I would not have him see any of you for the world.








Oh the devil he's certainly coming down stairs.
Sir Harry, run down into the cellar. My lord duke, get into
the pantry. Away away!



No, no, do you put their ladyships into the pantry, and
I'll take his grace into the coal hole.



Any where any where. Up the chimney, if you
will.



There in with you.









Coming sir. (Aloud.) Kitty have you never a good
book to be reading of?



Yes here is one.



Egad, this is black Monday with us. Sit down seem
  22
to read your book. Here he is as drunk as a piper.


Enter Love•l with pistols, affecting to be drunk; Freeman following


Philip the son of Alexander the great, where are all
my Myrmidons? What the devil makes you up so early
this morning?



He is very drunk indeed (Aside.) Mrs Kitty and I
had 〈…〉 good book, your honour.




Ay, ay, they have been well employed, I dare say
ha, ha, ha!



Come sit down Freeman. Lie you there (Lays his
pistols down.) I come a little unexpectedly; perhaps Philip.



A good servant is never afraid of being caught Sir.



I have some accounts that I must settle.



Accounts, sir! To night?



Yes to night; I find myself perfectly clear. You
shall see I'll se•tle them in a twinkling.



Your honour will go into the parlour?



No, I'll settle 'em all here.



Your honour must not sit here.







You will certainly take cold, Sir; the room has not
been washed above an hour.



What a cursed, lie that is!
(Aside.








Pox take you! hold your tongue.
(Aside.



You have just nick'd them in the very minute.
(Aside to Lovel.



I find I have, Mum (Aside to Freeman.) Get some
wine, Philip (Exit Philip.) Though I must eat something
before I drink, Kitty, what have you got in the pantry!



In the pantry? L••d, your honour! we are at board∣wages.



I could eat a morsel of cold meat,



You shall have it. Here (Rises.) Open the pantry-door
I'll be about your board wages. I have treated you
often, now you shall treat your master.



If I may be believed sir, there is not a scrap of any
thing in the world in the pantry.




Well then, we must be contented Freeman. Let us
have a crust of bread and a bottle of wine




Sir, had not my master better go to bed?

(Makes signs to Freeman that Lovel i• drunk.


Bed! not I. I'll sit here all night, 'Tis very pleasant
and nothing like variety in life.




Mrs. Kitty Mrs Kitty



Peace on your life
(Aside.



Kitty what voice is that?







(Philip brings wine.) Soh, very well, Now do you
too march off; march off, I say.



We can't think of leaving your hono•r, for egad if
we do, we are undone,
(Aside.



Begone My service to you, Freeman this is good ••uff





(Sombody in the pantry sneezes.


We are undone; undone
(Aside.



Oh, that is the dukes damned rappee.
(Aside.



Didn't you hear a noise Charles?



Somebody sneezed, I thought.



Damn it there are thieves in the house. I'll be a∣mong
'em.




Lack-a-day sir, it was only the car. They sometimes
sneeze for all the world like a Christian. Here, Jack, Jack,
He has got a cold sir, puss, puss.



A cold! then I'll cure him Here, Jack, Jack, puss puss



Your honour won't be to rash. Pray, your honour
don't 




Stand off. Here, Freeman here's a barrel for business
with a brace of slugs, and well primed as you see; Freeman
I'll hold you five to four, nay, I'll hold you two to one,
I hit the cat through the key hole of that pantry door.



Try, try; but I think it impossible.



I am a damned good marksman. (Cocks the pistol,and points to the pantry door.) Now for it! (A violent shrick,and all is discovered.) Who the devil are all these? One, two, three, four



They are particular friends of mine Sir; servants to
some nobleman in the neighbourhood.



I told you there were thieves in the house.







I assure your honour they have been entertained at
our own expence, upon my word.



Yes, indeed your honour, if it was the last word I
had to speak.



Take up that bottle. (Philip takes up a bottle with
a ticket to it, and is going off.) Bring it back. Do you usually
entertain your company with Tokay Monsieur?



I, Sir, treat with wine!



O yes, from humble port to imperial Tokay too. Yes I
love• Kokay.
(Mimicking himself.



How! Jemmy, my master!







Your honour is at present in liquor but in the morning
when your honour is recovered I will set all to rights again.



(Changing his countenan••.) We'll set all to r•ghts now.
There I am sober at your service. What have you to say,
Philip. (Philip starts.) You may well start. Go get out
of my sight.



Sir I have not the honour to be known to you, but
I have the honour to serve his grace the duke of 



And the imprudence familiarly to assume his title.
Your grace will give me leave to tell you, that is the door
and if you ever enter there again, I assure you, my lord duke.
I will break every bone in your grace's skin. Begone.



(Aside.) Low bred fellows!




I beg their ladyships pardon; perhaps they cannot go
without chairs ha ha, ha!






(Sir Harry steals off.


This comes of visiting commoners.




They are downright Hottenpots.
(Exit



I hope your honour will not take away our
bread.



"Five hundred pounds will set you up in a chocolate
house. You'll shine in the 〈◊〉 madam." I have been an eye
witness of your roguery, extravagance, and ingratitude.



Oh, Sir good sir!



You madam, may stay here till to morrow morning.
And there madam, is the book you lent me, which I beg
you'll read "night and morning before you say your prayers."



I am ruined and undone.




But you Sir, for your villany, and (what I hate
worse) your hypocrisy, shall not stay a minute longer in the
house; and here comes an honest man to shew you the way
but. Your keys, sir.

(Philip gives the key•.
Enter Tom.
Tom, I respect and value you. You are an honest servant and
shall never want encouragement. Be so good, Tom as to 〈◊〉
that gentleman out of my house (Points to Philip.) and then
take charge of the cellar and plate.


I thank your honour; but I would not rise on the
ruin of a fellow servant.



No remonstrance Tom, it shall be as I say.



What a cursed fool have I been.




Well Charles, I 〈◊〉 thank you for my frolic 
it has been a wholesome one to me. Have I done right?



Entirely. No judge could have determined bett••
As you punish the bad, it was but justice to reward the good.



A faithful servant is a worthy character.



But what an insufferable piece of assurance is it 〈◊〉
some of these fellows to affect and imitate their masters manner.



What manners must those be which they can imitate







If persons of rank would act up to their own standard
it would be impossible that their servants could ape them. But
when they affect every thing that is rid•culous, it will be in the
power of any low creature to follow their example.

