


HERE, madam, if you please, we'll con∣clude the labour of the day.



Call it rather the pleasure of the day, sir, for such it is to me, I assure you to you indeed, sir, I fear it must be otherwise the instruction of a silly girl, no doubt, is painful and tedious.



Pardon me, madam, I did not call it labour in that sense; so far am I from think∣ing it irksome, the hours I pass in this our every morning's exercise, and the duties of my holy function, are the happiest of my life: for, believe me, were you my own child, instead of my honour'd patron's, I could not love you better!



Nor do I think Sir Thomas's affection (altho' the best of fathers) exceeds the very pa∣ternal regard you have ever been pleased to express for me and I know not why I
  2think I feel not a more filial love for him, than for yourself, sir!



Dear madam, say not so: the many hours we pass together in our delightful studies, beget in you a customary regard  think it no more.



Perhaps it is no more, sir, nay, it cannot for never had a child a kinder parent!



Nor ever had a man a truer friend! Indeed, so general is his goodness, he might be a pattern for mankind: he never saw an infant without a parent's fondness, or a grey head, but, like a child, he honour'd it!

Sir Thomas Richacre enters.



Ha, ha! what, hard at it? What is it? Ethics or mathematics, astrology or the∣ology? 'tis a thousand pities, Doctor, your pupil is a girl, otherwise she would certainly be a bishop in time.



Perhaps not, papa; you see Dr. Goodman, with as much piety, learning, good sense, and, I am sure, as good a heart as any, has hitherto attained to no greater dignities than rector of this parish, your chaplain, sir, and my tutor.



Were I, madam, what you are pleased to say of me, it does not at all follow I should ever be so exalted. There are, no doubt, an infinitely greater number of deserving ministers than there are mitres, or even inferior dignities; but whoever has attained to that of an honest man, will feel, that church or state can never raise him higher!



I think so too, Doctor; and, in that respect, there is not a more exalted character than yourself.







But all this while I forget your boy, Doctor. I made my morning's airing shorter than usual, that I might be in the way when he arrived. He is not come yet, I suppose?







Does young Mr. Goodman come home from Oxford to day, sir?



Yes, madam, I expect him.



Bless me! I thought he was not to have come till next week, sir.



Yes, yes, he'll be here to day, and then you may have a new tutor, for I suppose you have almost tir'd your old one. I war∣rant, by this time, he can speak Greek as well as his father; what think you, Doctor?



I not only think that of him, sir, but, were he not my own, I could be bold to say, he is the most accomplished youth I ever saw, and, add to that the best!



Ay, ay, George is a good boy!  ay, and a clever one too every body says so as well as yourself: but if they did not, the crow, you know, always thinks her own young whitest, ha, ha, ha! Let me see,
 'tis past one, will the rogue be here to dinner, think you?



I expect him every moment, sir.



Od! I wish he was come! I have not seen him this age: and are not you glad he is coming, Emily?



Yes, indeed, sir, very glad for I think him a most amiable young man; and
  4have often thought it a thousand pities he is not heir to a good fortune; as this idolatrous world of ours, still worshipping a golden calf, would value him much more for inheriting a fund of wealth than virtues: and a rich cox∣comb is oftner proposed to us poor girls, than the most deserving of our affections, whose me∣rits are not back'd with that powerful recom∣mendation a great estate!



It's very true, my dear, too often the case, I must confess.



And I make no doubt, but even our ridiculous worthless neighbour, Lord Sealand's addresses, would be esteemed an honour, and plain George Goodman's, an affront, to most great families in the kingdom.



Why, he is a peer of the realm, you know.



True, papa; and there are very few so ill-bred, as to think a coronet may sometimes cover a weak head, or a glittering star, a bad heart!



Ha, ha! well said, my little sati∣rist! We are to be honour'd with his lord∣ship's company to day at dinner, on purpose to see George.



His lordship has been always kind enough to take great notice of my poor boy.



That is the only proof of understand∣ing he ever gave and, but for that, he would be intolerable, with his unaccountable whims and caprices. Now own, papa, don't you think it a strange amusement he has lately taken to, keeping sailing vessels, to be so often tossing about on the sea as he is?



Why ay, child, I think it rather too boisterous to be called pleasure; but he seldom makes a much longer trip than just across to Calais, to furnish himself with some of their knicknacks and fopperies.



Right, papa; for such a finical wa∣terfly is he, that, when on shore, he lays out more money in powder and perfumes in a week, than, I fear, he gives to the poor in a year. I never see him, papa, but I think of beau Mizen in the play. Ha, ha, ha!



Well, but, Emily, my dear, you, of all people in the world, should not be so severe upon him: he's a very warm admirer of you, you know; and has almost ask'd my con∣sent to marry you.



He is not a bit more in my good graces for that, I assure you, papa; for, could he obtain your consent, I believe he'd care very little whether he had mine or not.



But Sir Thomas, I am persuaded, madam, will never grant one without the other.



That I confide in, sir. I suppose I shall be teiz'd to death with his supercilious nonsense to day, which he gives me to under∣stand he means for courtship.



And are not you delighted at the very idea of being his lady? Countess of Sealand!



Not I, indeed, papa; lud! lud! what a character! a foppish sailor! a compound of tar and civet! faugh! I'd sooner marry our honest Old Metre yonder, and be dame to the clerk of the parish.



Ha, ha, ha! here comes the old psalm-singer as fast as he can hobble.



Poor good old man! he's worth a court-calendar full of such lords!





Your reverence! your reverence!  goodlack, I most humbly crave your worship's pardon for my abrupt intrusion,
 but I come a joyful harbinger! As I am a sin∣ner, sir, your well-beloved son is just arrived.








Is he faith, old Sternhold?



Yes, in truth, your worship, or may I never set another stave.



 O lud, ay! he is just stepping out of the post-chaise bless me what a figure I am! I I beg pardon, sir, but in∣deed I can't stay I must go and make myself a little more fit to be seen?





Did you observe the girl, Doctor?



Most heedfully, sir and fear 



He approacheth, your honours, he approacheth!



Ay, here he comes, sure enough.










Heaven grant thee grace!



My honour'd patron! my second fa∣ther!
 I can't resist an impulse that throws me at your feet, and bids me beg your blessing too!



Heaven bless and preserve you, my good lad!



My dear father, forgive this transport  I fear it hurries me into a neglect, I'd sooner die than willingly be guilty of  but this meeting overpowers me! don't be offended, sir,
 at the frankness of a poor lad like me indeed I am very happy to see you, sir! I hope both you, sir, and my dear father, are as well as 



Well? odzookers! who can be ill and look such a ruddy-cheek'd rogue as you in the face? faith, you look bravely, my lad!  and a devilish handsome young dog you are grown! rare work, I warrant, he has made at Oxford, Doctor! how many dozen have you left crying their eyes out, eh, George?



You are merry, sir,



Well, but joking apart have you left ne'er a little tender soul breaking her heart after you; a sweetheart, eh, George? for I'll engage you have got one, boy.



To what end, sir, so young and un∣provided for, as I am? But, excuse me, sir, for interrupting you by hoping Miss Richacre is well.



Ay, Emily is pure hearty, and as reserv'd as yourself She wont confess the power of the little blind boy any more than you.



The longer she is, sir, before she makes her choice, we may reasonably hope the better it will be. But, I believe, sir, she may wait long indeed, before she finds one to de∣serve her.



Odzookers, George, that's a civiler thing than ever I heard Lord Sealand say of her, with all his courtship.




 I I hope, sir, I do not offend in speaking my sentiments so freely?



Offend! no, no, boy I like you the better for speaking your thoughts I wish all mankind did so, they would not be the worse for it.



Then, with your worship's indulgence, I can withhold no longer As I am an unwor∣thy sinner, sir,
 I am more delighted to behold you than a full congregation! and that is the delight of my old heart.



What, my good old friend! nothing but my extreme joy at seeing my honour'd pa∣rent and protector, could have made me over∣look you I am very glad to see you I hope you are well!




In troth, the better for seeing you well, sir!




Ah, my old playfellow, "Thou hast born me on this back a thousand times!"



And a pleasant load thou wert, my ever gentle task-master! he, he, he! and, in like sportful sort, although I am waxen old, I hope to live to bear your tender offspring!



No, my poor Yorick! time will, I fear, bear you away first!



Not so neither, George for, as my mother used to say to me, those eyes of yours will make many a pretty girl's heart ach so, don't be timorous, lad, but look about you; and, if you take a liking to a girl, let her be who she may, attack her boldly I am a
  9whimsical old fellow, and if I take it into my head, may make you worth her having.



Sir, I fear your goodness will 



Pho, pho, be quiet, Doctor you know I am not (like too many in the world) easily talked out of a good design, or into a bad one but, tell us, George, sincerely, now we are upon the subject, have you really ne'er a sweetheart at Oxford?



No, I assure you, sir. I never saw a face there that made the least impression on me.



And you are heart-whole, ha?



As when I left this house, sir!




Why, how have you pass'd your time, lad? always at your studies?



Pretty constantly, sir the only re∣turn in my power for your great bounty to me, was the making a proper use of it. But, if I may be so bold, sir, I think you mentioned something of Lord Sealand's having paid his addresses to Miss Richacre.



Ay, George, I believe I might 



But I think, sir, you said too, that Miss Emily had not hitherto confess'd any particular inclination 



Why, no but he's very rich  and when a suitor is both wealthy and noble, you know 








Not that I believe Emily likes him a jot better for those accidental advan∣tages, as she calls them She and I are much of a mind about him; for, in my opinion,
  10he is but a frothy kind of a spark, like too many of the present age and it is paying you no compliment, George, to say such a lad as you are, is worth a score such as Lord Sealand.




I fear, sir, what you are pleased to say of my poor boy will make him vain.



Vain of what such an old fellow as I say! no, no, If Emily had said as much indeed but, Doctor, I must rob you of George's company a little come, boy, you must go and ask my girl how she is she'll be glad to see you, I'm sure She just saw you alight, and scamper'd away to set her cap strait, or some such important matter Come along, my boy, and I'll promise you a kiss for your pains.





Will you excuse me a few moments, my dear sir, while I pay my respects to Miss Richacre?



Ay, ay, attend Sir Thomas by all means meantime, I'll step and see a poor cottager hard by, who, Metre has just been telling me, is very ill.



You are as humane as ever, sir, heaven bless you!



And you too, my dear boy!






Amen! and heaven be with you both! for such a father and such a son, are hardly to be parallel'd! No marvel his good worship is so well pleased in ye he, whese benignity extendeth even unto my unworthy self, and my poor child, Martha; whom he hath most benevolently reared, as waiting-maid
  11unto his fair daughter, from childhood even unto womanhood and, in commiseration of my forlorn condition, when my loving help∣mate, Rebecca, departed this transitory life, bountifully took me to end my days in peace in his most hospitable mansion!


Emily and Patty enter.



Lord, ma'am, there's nobody here but my father 



Whom seeketh her good ladyship, Martha?



I thought Mr. Goodman had been here.



No, madam his reverence is gone to visit the afflicted.



O, no I don't mean the Doctor, but George Goodman I met his father this mo∣ment, and he said he was this way.



Good madam, I most humbly crave forgiveness for my misapprehension my dearly beloved young master departed hence but even now indeed, to accompany his worship, in order to pay his most dutiful respects unto your ladyship.



Run, Patty tell my papa I came down the other stairs, and am here.



So please your ladyship, I will ac∣quaint his worship forthwith.



Thank you, Mr. Metre.



I long for the sweet young pair to meet methinks!
Would it might be never to part again 
That I devoutly pray, and to it add Amen!






And so, Patty, you did see him, you say?



Yes, ma'am, I just had a peep at him as he passed thro' the hall, and he did look so handsome you can't think.



I wish you are not in love with him, girl.



Ah, madam! if I was as much his betters as he is mine, I'd soon tell him a piece of my mind.



Why really the youth's not amiss  I had a glimpse of him myself, and think him considerably improved, I must confess his complexion more florid, and air more lively than when he left us.



Ay, ma'am, that he is, more lively and more lovely too than ever; and so you would say, ma'am, I am sure, if you spoke your thoughts.



Indeed! and pray how came you so well acquainted with my thoughts?



Why, ma'am, the dressing glass dis∣covered them to me for you have look'd more in it since you knew young Mr. Goodman was arrived, than ever I knew you in all my life before And I'll be whipt if you don't wish to appear as handsome in his eyes as he does in yours.



O you wicked girl, how can you say so?



Indeed, ma'am, if I was as rich as your ladyship, and we were both at our own disposal, I fancy we should puzzle the poor young gentleman which to choose for his choice he might have, that's certain.



And, in that case, you think he'd be puzzled which to choose?




O, dear ma'am, I had quite forgot one thing that is If I was as beautiful as your ladyship.




O, your ladyship's most obedient!
 and so you have quite forgot your sweetheart, William?



William? yes no, ma'am that is  O gemini, ma'am, here the sweet gentleman comes as sure as a gun!






Sir Thomas Richacre and George enter.



Here, Emily, my girl, where are you? I was just going to storm your dressing room as old Amen overtook me I have brought an old acquaintance to see you.



With your leave, sir  




Ay, ay, kiss her, boy, kiss her!  and kiss him, girl! you two must not be strange.



Madam! I I hope  



Sir! I am very  



Heyday! Madam I hope and, Sir, I am very and there they both stop!  why what ail you both? you are not tongue∣tied sure all on a sudden? Pray, sir, what may you hope? and, ma'am, what are you very? come, come, I fancy I can explain the matter I suppose, George, if the truth was known, you hope to get another kiss and you, Emily, are very willing to give it him! well,
  14well, with all my heart, never heed me kiss her again, boy, kiss her again!



Sir, I beg pardon for 



Pho, pho, kiss her again, I tell you I insist upon it and then, perhaps, you'll recover your speech a little.



 I am so over∣joy'd, madam 



Sir, I am extremely  



 Dear heart, sir, I hope you won't be angry, but indeed I cant hold my tongue any longer You're welcome to Kent, sir! I hope you are well, sir?




Very well, I thank you, Patty. I am glad to see you I hope you are well?



Pretty well, 'thank you, sir; how do you do?



Why look you there now I war∣rant Mistress Patt could hold on a how d'ye do, sir? and a pretty well, thank you, sir! till this day fortnight;
 while you stand as mute as an Egyptian mummy.



Dear papa, forgive me. Sir I beg your pardon, but indeed I was so glad to see you, I had scarce power to tell you so!



You have bereft me, madam, of re∣ply, by saying the very words I would have utter'd if I could may I flatter myself so far as to think 



O yes, indeed, sir, you may flatter yourself for my lady and I are both very glad to see you!



Hold your tongue, you chatter-box! I don't know any business you have here.



Dear heart, sir! I did but just speak  Chatter-box! I wish I had been as cunning as some folks, and held my tongue, I might then have been kiss'd a little as well as some other people.




Pray, papa, excuse her she always seem'd to have so great respect for Mr. Good∣man, and was so desirous now of seeing him, that I gave her leave to come with me.





So please your worship, the right honourable the Earl of Sealand is just alight∣ing from his gilded cha-ri-ot.



I'll go to him directly children, I'll leave you to yourselves a little you'll find your tongues, perhaps, when my back's turn'd  but, George, you have not much time to spare Lord Sealand will be enquiring for you, so get dress'd as soon as possible.







Come along then, old Pitch-pipe, and young madam Prate-a-pace!





We follow your good and merry worship! ha, ha, ha! Martha, my child, come your ways.



I'll come presently, father I am in great hopes he will kiss me yet!




Presently will not do, child, come now!
 Wilt thou never learn more manners than to hearken unto gentlefolks' discourse? an eves-dropper! fie for shame! get thee gone about thy business, that's my good girl.



 Psha! fiddle, faddle! how provoking this is! now I am sure I sha'n't get a kiss.





 Your honour's very hum∣ble servant! heaven bless you, my sweet young master!



And you too, my good old friend!



Just such a lovely pair were those first formed ah! would your conditions were as equal! then might I hope, ere long, unto your nuptial benediction, most joyfully to cry Amen!





 What a whimsical old soul it is!



But exceeding kind and honest at least to me he knows no bounds to his good wishes for my welfare which is all I can say in extenuation of his freedom now to you, madam!



O, the well-meaning good creature cannot easily offend me.



Have a care, dear madam, your condescension don't destroy the respect I should preserve 



Let me beg of you to forget those distant words, respect, and madam our com∣pliments are over, (tho' with much difficulty)
 let us now resume that innocent fa∣miliarity we were bred together in, and ever were delighted with when we parted last, you was less ceremonious; then, instead of madam, you call'd me your Emily nay more, your dear Emily!



That I still might without a crime! for sure there can be nothing dearer to me.



Then why this distance this reserve?



O Emily! think but of your con∣dition, your rank in life, and think of mine!



And shall that lay a restraint upon our lips? must they be denied to express what our hearts will feel, forgetful of distinc∣tion?



What my heart feels they can't ex∣press gratitude, love, admiration! all the most susceptible can feel, or eloquent describe, is there. My dearest Emily, still I must call you so why are you thus kind thus conde∣scending! 



In what? 'prithee, now, where is the mighty difference between us? is not your father in every respect (but the lowest of all considerations, riches) as good as mine? and wherein can I pretend to vie with thee, who art an abstract of both their virtues! but we grow serious besides, you have to dress, and see that odious Sealand, which this detains you from; so, 'till we meet at dinner, dear George, adieu!





Adieu, sweet Emily! lovely, en∣gaging, bewitching Emily! O that I were but rich enough to dare aspire to thee! never did I repine at want of fortune but on thy account, and when I find that the only bar to my success, I must repine; since, were I not the child of poverty and dependance, what might I not hope! her partiality for me, I think, is evident and my determination to conquer this ill-suited passion, she has, in one moment, utterly destroyed!







I gave my father the slip nicely  and here he is yet and alone too, that's charming! Now, who knows but I may have better luck than I had before
 Pray, sir, is not my young lady here?
 Hoity toity! why he's speech∣less again may be he is always so when he wants to kiss a pretty girl I wish Sir Thomas wou'd pop in his head, and cry (as he did just now) kiss her, boy! kiss her again!
  Sir! Sir! pray is not madam Emily here?



 Ha! Emily! what of Emily?



Nothing, sir, only I thought she had been here 



Yes, no she has just left me the happiest, yet most wretched, of mankind!






Not one kiss, by jingo! I could cry for madness! I suppose he's proud, and thinks himself too much above me marry come up! and yet he is a pretty gentleman, and if I was as rich as a jew I'd marry him directly.  Stay let me consider I have got a little money by me that my father knows nothing of, if I don't buy a lottery-ticket I'll be burnt! and if I get the twenty-thousand-pound-prize, nay, if I am so unlucky as to get only the ten-thousand, I'll tell him my mind directly and sure then he won't think himself above me! I've heard say, that in London the gentry ay, even your lords and dukes, now and then marry poor girls that are pretty like me, for
  19love nay, (tho' I hardly know how to believe it) folks say, they'll sometimes take up with their own, ay, or other people's, kept-madams! and I am sure it wou'd not be a quarter so bad as that, for a parson's son to marry a clerk's daughter!










HERE, master Metre, here be another chair, and now it be all right, I believe  there be two for madam Emily and young master Goodman two elbow-ones for Sir Thomas and his reverence, and this gilded da∣mask one you bid me fetch for my lord but ecod, if I was his worship, I'd set upon it myself.



Ha, ha, ha! well, put it into the summer-house with the rest, that's my good lad.



Never stir if I don't believe it be made of lead, it feels so plaguy heavy thof I suppose I only think so 'cause I fetch'd it with an ill-will for, to be sure, I did grudge my labour most confoundedly.



Why so, William? I never knew thee idle yet Why so?



Why, because I don't like un and it goes mortally again' the grain with me to do any thing for such a scape-grace for, as the ould saving be he is like the wind at east, good to neither man nor beast!



For shame, William, for shame! you should not speak so disrespectfully of a noble∣man.



Nobleman! why I hope, master Metre, you don't think such a whiffling chap as Lord Sealand deserves to be called noble? I'll be judg'd by yourself now, if he be one crumb like his worship, or a quarter so noble,  thof he be no more but a knight-barrow-knight.



I profess, William, I do not think this light young lord so deserving of his dig∣nity as our nobles in general are said to be; which maketh me most heartily wish he was more like his worship's honour than he is.



More like un! I'll be shot an' he be a bit like un no more than a crab-apple be like a golden-pippin! I wonder, for my part (nay, for that matter, so do the whole neighbourhood) why such a good gentleman as Sir Thomas, keeps company with him, and lets him come dangling here for ever a'ter young madam, like a tantony-pig?



Why, thou knowest, William, his lordship hath a great estate adjoining to his worship's and, although he hath it not in his will, I fear, to do much good, it is in his power to do a great deal of harm, therefore,
  21I conjecture, his worship holdeth it prudent to keep friends with him.



More the pity, I say, master Metre, that what few good men there be in the world should be obligated to truckle to the bad or that any one should have a good estate that has not a good heart likewise!



William! thou art an honest righ∣teous lad, I verily believe; and, although it hath pleased heaven to place thee in so hum∣ble a station, the uprightness of thy heart would adorn the princes and the rulers of the land, more than their costly raiment, precious stones, purple and fine linen!



Thanks to your kind opinion, master Metre I do hope I shall never prove no other∣wise.



I am morally certain thou wilt not  hold forth thy hand there is a shilling for thee and I will bestow upon thee too a do∣nation of good books, particularly, the Old and New Testament, the Liturgy, with, thereunto annexed, the Old and New Version of the Psalms of David, done into English Metre.



'Thank you kindly odsbobs, I shall be quite set up 



Moreover, I will recommend thee unto his reverence, to succeed me in my holy office upon my demise 



What, me to be clerk and sexton! oh lord!



To qualify thee for which important undertaking, I will instruct thee in every thing appertaining unto a clerkship particularly in psalmody likewise how to adapt, as well as
  22set, a stave and eke also, both audibly and emphatically to cry Amen!



I shall soon learn, for I know all the notches already, and can give the key with the pitch-pipe, and sing fol fa with e'er a he in the parish and as to Amen no offence, master Metre, I hope but I could say it twice as laudable as you do.



Audible, thou would'st say, William  and audibly did I use to say it but, alack∣aday, I am waxen old, and my voice is im∣paired but when I was thy age hem! A a men!


Speaking as loud as he can, Wil∣liam puts his hand before Metre's mouth.



Odsbobs! here comes my lady.

Emily enters William carries the Chair into the Summer House Metre is going, Emily recalls him.



No, not here! where is my George? what can have become of him? Mr. Metre!



Did your good ladyship please to call?



Are you going into the house, pray?



Unless your ladyship hath occasion to send me elsewhere.



No, only be so good to tell Patty I want to speak with her.



I will communicate your ladyship's pleasure unto her incontinently. Ah! when young, I had a voice like any bell! and, as the old song sayeth, could dig a grave, and set a stave, and say Amen full well!



















No, indeed, ma'am, I'll never open my lips about it, but when I'm praying heaven to bless and preserve your ladyship's goodness!



Run then, William, as fast as you can; and go out at the garden-door, that none of our family may see you.



Yes, ma'am, I will I'm sure I should not think this a heavy load if it weigh'd as much again as the gilt chair, for I should like to be so employ'd from one week's end to the other!





What a humane creature! such good∣ness must not go unrewarded. How diffe∣rent are our natures! this uninstructed boy, possessing virtues too seldom met with in the most exalted! What then avail a pompous title, wealth, and illustrious ancestry? since the meanest peasant, possessing but humanity, has no superior! while the heart that cannot feel for others' woes, disgraces, not only a distin∣guished rank, but even our very nature!





Did you want me, ma'am? my father said 



Yes, Patty; my papa intends passing the afternoon in the summer-house, so order coffee and tea to be served there.








Patty have you seen any thing of young Mr. Goodman since dinner?



Yes, ma'am, I saw him steal slily by the hall windows a little while ago I don't know where he went, but I have a notion he has seen some trollop in the neighbourhood, as he came along in the post-chaise, that he has taken a liking to, and is gone in search of  and I'm sure that's a shame, when he might pick and choose out of the two prettiest in the whole county!



Why, Patty, this is love in downright earnest I'll be whipt if you have not quite forgot poor William, and are jealous of this young gentleman.



Jealous! not I indeed, ma'am Wil∣liam is worth a dozen of him young gentle∣man! he don't behave like one, that's what he don't, for he has not once had the good manners to offer to salute me since he came home.



Poor Patty! that is provoking, in∣deed 



Yes, ma'am I believe you'd think it was, if he had serv'd you so!



Indeed! ha, ha, ha! why I wish you are not jealous of me next.



No, ma'am, I am pretty secure there, if I really did like him well enough to care about him for, your ladyship being heiress to so many thousand pounds a year, he would
  25never dare to make love to you, ma'am and I hope, ma'am, setting case you was weak enough to like the poor lad, you'd never demean yourself so much as to tell him so.



I don't know that, Patty; for setting case (as you phrase it) I lik'd him, I should make very little scruple of confessing it.



Indeed! lord, lord, how little pride some people have! If I was a baronet's daughter, I'd never think of taking up with a poor clergyman's son, when I might marry a lord, and be a countess.



A mind like his would reflect a lustre upon the meanest origin! and I desire, Patty, you would restrain this freedom, nor make so free with Mr. Goodman's name again.



Dear heart, ma'am, I did but just speak and I should not have said what I have, had not your ladyship ask'd me about him if I am a little jealous of him, there's somebody to the full as jealous of me!



How I am tormented with this silly girl, while my mind is rack'd with a thousand apprehensions!




You wanted coffee and tea serv'd in the summer-house, I think you said, ma'am?








Child! goodlack! ay she is in love with him as sure as a gun, as well as myself I'm sure I won't buy a lottery ticket since that's the case, for, 'twou'd be only throw∣ing my money away!






Heyday! what ails the foolish girl! I wish she is not jealous in good earnest and  what's the matter with the other foolish
  26girl! I wish she is not more affected than she ought for, were I certain George was absolutely gone upon the errand Patty men∣tioned, I believe I should not be very well pleas'd! but it cannot be therefore be still, my heart! poor frighten'd fool! nor throb and flutter without cause!





Ma'am, I ha'run as hard as ever I cou'd, and the poor souls send their duty and ten thousand thanks to your ladyship but, blessed be providence, they say, they don't want any money now.







Why, ma'am, what d'ye think? when I went into the cot, who should I see sitting by the sick man but young Master Goodman; and thof the poor soul be so bad, 'twould ha' puzzled a stranger to tell which of the two ail'd most, young gentleman look'd so piteously.



Indeed! was young Mr. Goodman there?



Yes, indeed, ma'am 



My mind's at rest again!




And the poor woman told me he had been there a good while, and had writ a description to be made up at 'pottecary's for her husband, and had guve 'em money to pay for it, and more to buy victuals with, and kiss'd the sweet babes, and was so kind to 'em, nothing could be like it!



The dear, the amiable youth! how could I wrong him by my late ungenerous fears!




And when I came out, ma'am, who should I see but his worship and Dr. Goodman, and they ax'd me what I had been doing there, and what I was crying about  for, to be sure, young gentleman's goodness had made my eyes water a little and when I told 'em, I wish I may never stir if their honours did not almost cry too!



And where did my papa and the doctor go, William?



Why where do you think they went, ma'am?



Nay, how can I tell?



I am sure it made my heart dance with joy, to see such a grand gentleman as Sir Thomas Richacre, a knight-barrow-knight, justice of peace and quorum, stoop to go into a poor hovel like that 



What, the cottage you had just come out of!



Yes, indeed, ma'am into poor Quickset's little hut! but I cou'd not see Lord Sealand, thof I look'd all about and if he had gone along with their honours, his coat wou'd not ha' set the worse on his back o' Sunday, as the saying be axing your lady∣ship's pardon!



Indeed, William, I am entirely of your mind but, if I was not, why do you ask my pardon? it is not me you are speak∣ing against.



Noa, madam, mercy forbid! it's out of any one's power to say ill of your lady∣ship 
  28but it be rife all over the parish that your ladyship's going to be married to my lord, and there's not a living soul but what pities you: for your ladyship's as much be∣lov'd as my lord's hated and to be sure, that's not a little.



Well, William, I am not married to his lordship yet and 'till I am, you need not fear offending me by such remarks.



Thank your ladyship's goodness  does your ladyship please to want any thing else?



No, 'thank you, William, not at present.



 Now I know the poor souls don't want for any thing, if I can but coax Patty into a good humour, I shall be as happy as a king Odrabbit it! I axe ten thousand pardons, but if I had not like to ha' forgot to remember to give your lady∣ship the piece of gold again, I'll be shot.



William, you are a humane good lad, and shall not want encouragement keep it yourself as an earnest of what I may do farther for you.



'Thank you kindly and heartily, ma'am! it be more your goodness than my desert   now I'll run back again to the cottage t'other way, and watch 'till their honours be gone in at garden door, then make the poor souls have the money, whether they will or not!





Married to Lord Sealand! I shudder to hear it mentioned! whence could such a report take rise? from himself, or from Sir
  29Thomas? sure my dear father, kind to all be∣sides, will never single me out to be cruel to! and (as he does nothing without his worthy friend's advice) surely the good, the pious Doctor Goodman never can approve it!  why should I fear then? and yet I do  the bare idea that it is possible makes me tremble gracious heaven! how dreadful is my present situation! demanded by a worthless insolent I detest! hopeless of him I cannot chuse but love! Oh! George, where is the spot, or what the condition I should not think a paradise with thee, rather than share a king∣dom with Lord Sealand!
 Heavens! here comes the hateful wretch let me endeavour to conceal my agi∣tation!





Emily, my divine creature! how could you be so cruel to leave me to mope and grow stupid for want of your animating brilliancy and vivacity? 'twas abolutely bar∣barous, carissima mia!



Those are qualities, my lord, I am not happy enough to possess but surely 'tis impossible for Lord Sealand ever to be grave, whose animating brilliancy and vivacity would dispel the gloom of a Greenland winter.



O you flatterer! but, perhaps, you really think so do you, my adorâble? make me happy by confessing it.



I dare say your lordship has not the least doubt but every body thinks so.



Mia bella Signora! I see you do I read it in those eyes, whose brightness I adore more than the beacons on the South-foreland, when I am returning from Calais in a hazy evening.



Calais! bless me, does your lordship ever venture so far.



Far! O child, that's nothing to me who have even had thoughts of sailing up the Baltic, or crossing the Bay of Biscay, mere∣ly to kiss the empress's fair hand, and the pope's great toe! and for a kiss of those di∣vine lips, I would explore the North-East-Passage! nor think I flatter you, my angel, when I swear, that neither flip when I am aboard, or capillaire ashore, are half so dear to me!



You do me great honour indeed, my lord but does your lordship ever taste the li∣quor they call flip?



Taste it? ay, many a can do I toss off when I have my watch-coat and trow∣sers on, and am turning to windward in a brisk gale but the flip I drink is not like the vile stuff commonly so call'd, for mine has a most delicate flavour, as I always mix it with capillaire.



Well, it is amazing to me what could induce a person of your lordship's delicacy to venture upon this dangerous amusement you have lately taken a fancy to.



Why, faith, mia cara! I com∣menced sailor merely to avoid the imputation of effeminacy tho' if we meet with any bad weather at sea, I immediately retire to my
  31cabin, and order my pilot, O'Connor, to make for land with all convenient speed.



Ha, ha, ha! you are perfectly in the right upon my word, my lord.



But let us change the coarse indelicate subject I am almost tir'd of the scheme, and another sea-sickness will make me drop it, I believe pray what's become of George? first he walk'd off then you, mia crudel! deserted us and soon after, Sir Tho∣mas ask'd me to go with him to see the sick fellow old Goodman was speaking of as if I had been a physician which I declining, he took away Domine, and left me to indulge in soliloquy, just as I was concluding our marriage, ma chere! upon honour I have not been treated so politely ever since I lodg'd with Mynheer Vander-Dunder, the fat Burgo-master at Rotterdam.



Concluding our marriage, did you say, my lord!



Si, Signora we were on the very brink of settling the preliminaries.



Why, does your lordship really sup∣pose we are to be married?



Is it possible you can still make that a question? have not I told you repeatedly I would marry you, my angel?



But did I ever consent to marry your lordship?



Consent? egad I don't recollect I ever ask'd you on purpose to spare your confusion in consenting, as I am sure my adorâble will.




Perhaps your lordship may be de∣ceiv'd!





What do I see! Emily and Lord Sealand hand in hand! distraction! now I am lost indeed! but she seems averse to him  why then should I tamely give her up? what is his fortune, title, birth, to me? I have a mind as noble, name as fair, tho' unadorn'd with honours and possessions! but I rave  and, if perceiv'd, shall be thought a mean list'ner to their converse.




Ha! George! where have you been, you runaway! in some dull arbour I suppose, poring over your musty Greek.



I beg pardon, my lord, for this ac∣cidental intrusion 



O you are come quite oppor∣tunely to help me soften the rigour of this obdurate fair one.



I shall be but an indifferent advo∣cate for love, my lord it is a language I have not been used to talk.



Pho, pho, tell me something mon∣strous tender now out of your Ovid, Catullus, Tibullus, or any of the soft amorous dogs, suited to the extreme violence of my passion.



Were I in your place, my lord, I should rather follow their example, than barely repeat their words they never said any thing to the object of their wishes but what was dictated and inspir'd by love itself!



Ay, that's true but a rough tar as I am, can't be suppos'd to have so many
  33fine expressions ready on these occasions, as you studying rhyming sonneteers; and Lady Sea∣land, like a tender mother, would never suffer me to read or study much, for fear of spoiling my eyes, or making my head ake come, do now, say something monstrous clever for me  and, in the mean time, (as I fancy my dad, that is to be, is return'd by this) I shall go and make you happy, my angel, by concluding the treaty with him.



My lord! be not so precipitate I intreat your lordship!



He, I am sure, will be no less proud of the honour of having me for a son-in-law, than you, my charmer, are to have me for a husband therefore, mia cara sposa! think what day will be most agreable to you for the celebration of our nuptials; but, for your own sake as well as mine, let me intreat you, not to delay our felicity too long! Addio! (jusqu'au revoir) Addio! mia contessa carissima! fa, la, la, &c.










Now had I not a father more attentive to the happiness than grandeur of his child, I should be completely miserable! Oh, Georgel do not think lightly of me for this declaration  I'd sooner beg with thee, than shine in all the splendor this wretch's utmost power could place me!



Dearest Emily! think not of me  had providence design'd us for each other, my lot in life had been more suited to your birth  as it is, tho' I have presum'd to love, I never cherish'd hope for, not even to gain
  34thee, Emily! would I abuse my honour'd pa∣tron's confidence! may you, sweet maid, but meet one more deserving, while I pray heaven to bless and to protect you!



Do not talk so thee only can I love! to thee only will I ever give my hand I am sure my father will never force me to marry Sealand, or any one, against my will and perhaps some blessed moment may incline him to prefer my poor, but virtuous George!



No more, no more, sweet Emily! I cannot bear it!



Well! we'll drop the subject! pray, did you see Sir Thomas just now where you have been?



Where I have been? 



Yes, at the cottage, down the lane  William told me all.



Did he? but, 'tis no great matter, for the poor woman told me all too, when she return'd from the door, (whither William had taken her to deliver your benefaction) and likewise, that Sir Thomas and my father were talking with him in the lane whereon, sus∣pecting they were coming there, I quitted the cot immediately, and return'd another way un∣perceived by them.

Sir Thomas Richacre and Dr. Goodman enter.



Why, George, where hast been, lad? I have been seeking you.



Sir, I was only  



Come, come, never blush at a good action; that's a false shame, and almost as wrong as not to be asham'd of a bad one: I know
  35where you have been, and how employed.  Your charity is sterling, I am sure, without that too common alloy of ostentation and so is your's, my dear good girl! but, pray, have you seen nothing of my lord lately, Emily? I expected to have found him here, for when I ask'd him to go with me, he declin'd it, say∣ing he'd walk a turn or two in the garden with you till I return'd.



He was here just now, papa, and after addressing me in a most insolent manner, saying he was sure both you, sir, and myself would be proud of his alliance, he left me (as he said) to conclude the treaty with you!



He did, ha? O, come along, I'll conclude it presently.



Sir! I hope dear sir,
 speak to my papa for heaven's sake in∣tercede for me.



Don't alarm yourself, dear madam  Sir Thomas will do nothing contrary to your happiness or inclination, I am certain.



What's the fool frighten'd at?



You said, sir, you'd conclude this hateful treaty!



Why, ay, so I will 



Then I am lost indeed!




Is it possible, sir! must your poor Emily be made a sacrifice!



Heyday! what the plague's the matter with the girl? I'll conclude it put an end to it break it off, you fool! what can I say more to please you? I'd sooner marry you to William, or old Metre, than the first duke in the land, if he had no better a heart than Lord Sealand.



Then I am happy!










Ma'am, Lord Sealand sent me to beg the favour of your ladyship to come and play a tune upon your harpsichord till Sir Thomas return'd which (as you came in the garden way) his lordship did not know you was, sir.



A tune, eh? ay, ay, we'll go play him a tune directly I'll soon put you out of your pain, I warrant you for when he hears what must be known before you marry any one, and what I believe I shall now tell him, I fancy he'll give over the chace of his own accord.



Heavens! what can that be?




If he does not, you will perhaps think better of him than you do at present, and willingly be Lady Sealand.



Never, sir, I am certain!



Well, well, there's no knowing  we shall see go, children, go before us.



Come, my sweet Emily!



What can my father mean?




I know not what to think, whether to with or dread an explanation.



Nor I! but (be it what it may) assure yourself, dear George, I never will be Lady Sealand!





I believe, my good old friend, no better time than now for the discovery.



I think so too, dear sir heaven prosper the event!



Shall she be Sealand's if he holds his purpose?



By no means, sir! and heaven avert, hereself should ever wish it!



Ay, so say I but to be a countess is perhaps an almost irresistable temptation!






By gemini, I am in great hopes she'll have my lord! and if she does, I think I stand no bad chance of having young Mr. Goodman! oh, lud! the very thoughts of it make me al∣most out of my wits! but, hang this college-education  he seems so very bashful, I am afraid he'll never have courage to ask one the question downright what shall I do then?  why, I don't know any other way than this  if he can't get the better of his modesty, and ask me, I must e'en try if I can't conquer mine, and ask him!





Ecod, here she be! I've found the little baggage at last why, Patty, love! I thought I'd lost you never stir if I ha'n't look'd up and down for you like bewitch'd  odsbodikins! I'm glad I ha' found you.



 Why, did you want any thing, William?



Want any thing, Patty! no, not I  nothing but to see thee, cause you know you was a little frumpish afore dinner; and I 'a'n't
  38been easy in my mind ever since come, Patty, won't you make it up?



Make what up, Mr. William? I don't know that we have had any difference  you have done nothing to offend me, and I have no reason to suppose I have said or done any thing to affront you.



Me! no, lord love your dear heart! I never was angry with you two minutes toge∣ther in my life so let's kiss and friends 



Kiss! Pray, Mr. William, keep your distance I don't know what behaviour of mine can have caus'd you to forget yourself so much.



Why, Patty, you be only joking sure come, gi' us a buss, you little cross-patch you.



Why, William, you have been drink∣ing sure, or you could never be so bold.



Drinking, Patty! I don't know what you mean by such an insinivation as that  I believe (ay, and you knows it too as well as I do) there ben't a soberer lad in all the parish drinking! lord help me! if I have swallow'd a drop or a crumb of any thing since breakfast, but one horn of ale, and a bit of meat as big as my three fingers, I'm a drunk∣ard and a glutton into the bargain! and I'd as lief be thought a thief as either so you shou'd not say that of me, Patty!



Bless me, Mr. William, I said nothing about your eating it's nothing to me what you eat, or drink either what do you think I care? or whether you ever eat or drink again or not!



Indeed! if I thought you was in earnest, Patty, I don't think I ever should!



Well, that's none of my business, you know I don't concern myself about inferior servants! all I desire of you is, that you will not make so free with me for the future as you have had the confidence to do lately, for I am determin'd I won't put up with it!



Why, I am sure you can't say I ever behav'd uncivil to you, Patty and if so be I have made bold to tell you I lov'd you, I said nought but truth ay, and you have said as much to me more than once, for all you're so scornful now.



I say I lov'd you? no, William! I own I had a sort of friendship for you, because I thought you an honest young man and so forth but, love? O, no, William! I am very sorry you mistook my civility I never had such a thought I assure you I have very different views!



Patty! eh? what do you say?  don't you go to dear Patty! odrabbit it! my heart's so full I can't speak to her and, if I could help it, I'd never speak to her again!



I should be very glad of it and I desire, nay, I insist upon it, that you never offer to open your lips to me again; for if you do I sha'n't answer you, and so, your ser∣vant!



Stay, Patty one word more before we break off our courtship for a courtship it has been, say what you will ay, and a tender one too! or else when I set off for Oxford so long ago with Master George 



George! you make very free with your betters methinks it might be Mr. Good∣man in your mouth.



Ay, bless his dear soul! there's no name too kind for him but, as I was going to say if so be you was not in love with me, as well as I in love with you, why did you break this bit of gold with me, which I have worn next my heart ever since? but I'll be hang'd if I wear it any longer come off, rot thee! there, there's your keep-sake, your love-token again! and you're a false-hearted girl!  and if you'll promise never to speak to me again, I never will to you while I have breath in my body!



I believe there's no great need of pro∣mising on my side, I shan't be the first to break the silence, I dare say.



Why then fare thee well, Patty! my heart's my own again!



Ay, and a good riddance! take up with a footman indeed, when I have such a prospect of being a gentlewoman I wonder who'd be fool then! I'm sure I won't be such a one, and so your servant, Mr. William!





And your servant, Mrs. Patt! if you go to that a murrain take her for a scorn∣ful young toad!
 I don't care a brass thimble for you! no nor a pin's point!  and you're a base, deceitful, false-hearted 
 odrabbit it! I don't think I shall get the better of this the longest day I have to live!











AND now the decks are clear'd of the tea equipage, if you please, Sir Thomas, we'll resume our topic.



With all my heart, my lord; the sooner we come to the point the better.



 You have some private busi∣ness with his lordship, I believe, Sir 



O no, there are no secrets going forward, George; at least, none that are to re∣main so you need not stir, boy.



With your leave, sir, I'll take a turn or two in the garden the while   I dread the event, nor dare I stay to hear it  heaven preserve you, my dear lost Emily!





Now, sir, if you please for I wait with as much impatience as a becalm'd vessel for a brisk gale to drive her safe into port.



A brisk gale quotha! ecod, I have a notion there will blow such a breeze pre∣sently as will go near to overset you, my lord  or that your vessel, not being heart of oak, will spring a leak; for our discourse will take a turn you little think of.



Dear papa, permit me to retire!




By no means, my dear there is a particular reason why you should be present, otherwise indeed it might be deem'd a solecism in forms but, don't be alarm'd, for I have not the most distant idea that this will come to any thing.



What a savage! O, sir, we'll dispense with a little form to the point, if you please, Lady Sealand and I are all atten∣tion.



 Insolent and cruel!



To begin then your lordship hath address'd this young woman? 



This angel! this goddess whom I adore!



Plain English, if you please, my lord and demanded her of me in marriage?  pray now, if I may be so bold, what is your lordship's motive for it?



What can it be but the most ar∣dent passon?







For her! who else, dear sir, could I possibly 



Say rather, what else?



I don't understand you, sir.



Why, your lordship being (no doubt) pretty well inform'd of the value of my rent-roll; is that, or this


 the goddess you adore?



This is mighty strange, Sir Tho∣mas 



No offence I hope, my lord  but, as I must be assur'd that whoever marries her has no other motive than a real, a disin∣terested affection for herself; this is the single
  43question, upon your answer to which depends the event.



Propose it, dear sir, propose it.



If, instead of being daughter to a baronet, and heiress to a very considerable estate, she had no other recommendation or endow∣ment than her own beauty and virtue, would you, my lord, or would you not, raise her to the rank of Lady Sealand?



Is it possible, sir, you can have a doubt of it? what is the condition I wou'd not raise her from!



Emily, my dear, come hither I am going to lose thee, my little cherub!



Sir! is it possible! 



The time is come, sweet child, I must resign thee!



 Good sir, support me I cannot oh!




 Dear sir, her spirits are quite overcome 



Don't be alarm'd, gentlemen;  nothing but the mauvaise honte usual on these occasions or perhaps the excess of joy may have been too powerful for her where the devil is my eau-de-luce? look up, carissima mia sposa!



 O my dear father! 



One kiss, sweet girl! and I resign that name for, I am not your father! 







What do you say, Sir Thomas?



I am not her father and now, my lord, determine here she is, as rich in personal and mental gifts, as she is poor in fortune, for she has none!



The devil! what a narrow escape! I had like to have weigh'd anchor, and hoisted sale for that damn'd long round-the-world-voy-age of matrimony, in a vessel without either ballast or provision!
 Why, undoubt∣edly, Sir Thomas, fortune was my least consi∣deration but, if the young lady is not your daughter, 'tis proper I should first know who is her father it may be somebody whose fa∣mily it would be improper for me to marry into.



 Most honour'd sir! 



Rise, rise, my dear! you must kneel no more to me!




Where shall I kneel? where seek my father, if you are not!



Turn hither, my heart's darling! and behold him 



Did I hear right? are you, sir, are you my father!



I am! I am!
 I have endur'd a long constraint, but at length am free to boast I am your father! 



Heyday! here's a turn! the wind has chop'd about with a vengeance one mi∣nute south, and the next due north as ever it can blow.



 O sir, forgive me, nor think this an ill return for your paternal good∣ness. I love I honour you most highly, sir, and ever must revere you! but nature pleads most strongly in my breast I love my father too!




Why that's my brave girl! I never yet knew half your goodness, and love you (if possible) better now than ever.



Well, upon honour, this is the most whimsical adventure I ever met with  what, in the name of oddity, Sir Thomas, could induce you to bring up the young gentlewoman as your's?



That's my concern, my lord I had my reasons for it, which time perhaps may shew the only question necessary at present is, whether (if she is willing) you will, or will not, marry her?



A moment's pause, I beg, Sir Thomas 



Pho, pho, come speak boldly, man was it the girl, or the estate you ador'd? in plain english, are you a man of honour, or are you a 



Sir Thomas you are really so precipitate I beg the indulgence of a few moments reflection I'll think a little, ma∣dam, and let you know my determination pre∣sently 



My lord, you need not trouble your∣self to think about it; for rest assur'd, that (fall'n as you may think me) nothing can in∣duce me ever to be your lordship's!



 I never met with such a cursed embarras before!





Ha, ha, ha! so much for modern love! Emily, you have lost your countess∣ship, my dear 



His refusal has made me happy, sir, beyond expression and so I flatter myself it will make George ha! George! mer∣ciful heaven! the thought occur'd not 'till this moment he is my brother!



And I fancy you had conceiv'd more than a sisterly affection for him eh, Emily? 



I had indeed, sir! for, to confess what now is needless to conceal, I lov'd him ar∣dently; and (ignorant of my birth) had I been mistress of the world, he must have shar'd it with me, or I had been a beggar!



Ay, I thought as much well, well, time's a good physician, and cures more ills than half the doctors living it will wear off, I warrant you no sign of my lord wea∣thercock's turning about again? no! I be∣lieve it's in vain to expect him we had better seek for George, and inform him of what has pass'd.



Come, my delight! my only pride! my sweet child, come 



Excuse me a little, my dear father! I'll follow you directly I will but dry thes• tears and oh!




Pho, pho, never take on so about it, Emily you sha'n't go without a husband yet, if there's one in the kingdom that deserves you what say you to a Richacre, my girl?



Oh, sir, that I respect, revere and love you with a most filial affection, I think you do not boubt but most honour'd sir! my other parent! let me stop there my heart's too
  47full! be not offended, sir I can no more  Oh, George! George!



Well, well, we'll talk no more about it at present but upon my word you must not remain single, Emily for, to tell you the truth, I should have been sadly baulk'd, and my whole scheme frustrated, had my lord behav'd otherwise; as I have all along had hopes (which I flatter myself will yet be ac∣complish'd) of prevailing on you to accept for ever that name you have so long honour'd by the using! come along, my old friend  friend, quotha! ecod, who knows how nearly we may be related soon! eh? ha, ha, ha!





What a reverse of fate! how am I bereft of all my fond, vain hopes of happiness and love! had I been reduc'd to the most abject poverty had I lost him I thought my father, and found no other had every calamity our woe-fill'd lives are fraught with, but this, at once besel me, I had still been happy; but now, (oh, George! oh, brother!) I am sunk ten thousand times more deep than wretch e'er plung'd before!





Alone, Emily? where are Sir Tho∣mas and my father? I saw my lord go down the yew-tree walk, so thinking the conference over, I return'd to learn how it had ended  what was th' important secret on which so much depended?







How! weeping! then I know enough, and now am nothing! O fortune! title! how powerful are your charms that can betray goodness itself and make it err!



Forbear, forbear! you know not why I grieve you can't conceive the exquisite distress of my present situation!



Not conceive how dreadful to be given to those we hate, as I am persuaded you do Sealand?



Oh, George, there now needs no dis∣guise the doom irrevocable's past! did you indeed e'er love me?



Love you! do I breathe? do I ex∣ist? could I, but to love you!



Then we both are truly wretched!



We are indeed! but if, as I have fondly thought, our love was mutual, how doubly wretched is your fate doom'd thus to marry one that you detest!



No, that's not my grief 'thank hea∣ven he has refus'd me.







You will not wonder when I can tell you why Sir Thomas Richacre is not my father!




Not your father! amazing yet most happy sound! then I may hope and the first gleam I ever knew now shoots into my soul!



No, there is no hope an eternal barrier is fix'd between us! for you are I cannot speak it!



I am gracious heaven! what?











My dear, dear brother!



Support me, or I fall!



With my very life!






So, so! here's fine work going for∣ward kissing and hugging at a rare rate! it's more than he ever offer'd to me! by jingo, I don't half like this; she'll never have my lord, nor I him, if they go on thus it's well I did not buy the lottery-ticket, seeing how matters are going!




Look up, dear George!



Dear George! lord, how loving we are!




Am I indeed so near to you?



Yes, you can't be much nearer, I think! in her very arms! how near wou'd you be, I wonder!













Then there is no hope indeed!



No, I hope not but, what can this mean?




Patty! how long have you been here?



I am but this moment come, madam  Sir Thomas sent me to desire your lady∣ship 



O Patty, you must forget those words  I am no lady now 



No ma'am! how so?



No longer heiress to a splendid for∣tune, but sister to this much lov'd youth the
  50virtues of a reverend parent must be now our joint inheritance!



But to what purpose, Emily, was you bred up as daughter to Sir Thomas?



He told Lord Sealand there was a reason for it, which time perhaps would shew  and, in addition to my misery, after my lord had left us, said he was pleas'd at his refusal of me; having all along intended I should still keep the name of Richacre meaning, no doubt, with my concurrence, to marry me himself!



Astonishing! yet that accounts for all.



Good gracious! I hardly know how to believe all this I am afraid she's only jok∣ing
 lord, ma'am, I hope you an't serious all this time are n't you Sir Thomas's daughter indeed?



No, Patty, you have lost your mistress.



 I have found a husband in the stead tho', and that's ten times better! but I must seem sorry Dear heart, ma'am, I am vastly concern'd to hear this, for you was very good to me, and I must never expect to have so many nice cloaths given me again, un∣less his worship should really be so kind as to marry you himself, ma'am.



Happy, happy girl! 'would I had no greater grief than thine!



Why, to be sure, ma'am, the black ox has trod upon your foot a little, as the say∣ing is and one misfortune seldom comes alone, as the other saying is you have been very unlucky indeed, ma'am, to lose a great fortune,
  51and your sweetheart too, both at once for I do verily believe you had a kindness for Mr. Goodman before you knew he was your bro∣ther but now that's all over.   'Thank my kind stars! and I shall be Mrs. Goodman as sure as fate!



No, Patty, it is not all over! 



Nor will be but with life!



Lord, ma'am! why sure you wou'd not love your own brother!



Not love him! who shall debar me that?



Nay, ma'am, I only just spoke for brothers and sisters did formerly marry I grant, or the world could not have been peopled  but that's quite out of fashion now, you know, ma'am unless indeed you had been roman∣catholic-papishes, and were lucky enough to be Sir Thomas's children instead of Dr. Good∣man's; because I have heard say, if people have but money enough, the pope will grant a  compensation I think they call it, or some such hard name, (I suppose it means an act of parliament) for a man to marry his own grand∣mother! but indeed, ma'am, if I was you, I'd think no more of my brother, but take Sir Thomas at his word, and marry my father  that is, as he is not your father.



Prithee have done, Patty; I am not yet reconcil'd enough unto my fate, to bear this ill-tim'd mirth I might, nay, perhaps I shall, find refuge in a cloyster, and dedicate my future wretched life to heaven!



No, Emily! 'tis I should be seques∣tered from the world; you have been taught to look for happiness, and, by accepting of Sir
  52Thomas's most worthy hand and noble fortune, yet may find it.



Impossible! oh, name it not again  never will I basely take the hand and fortune I cannot in return for give my heart!



Forgive me, dearest maid! nor think I had any view in what I said, but your repose and welfare; for what little patrimony my honour'd father may have gather'd for us both, shall now be wholly yours; as I will immedi∣ately enter into holy orders, devote my life to a religious celibacy, nor ever think again of love or womankind!



O goodness heart! that will be a great pity, sir; for there's many a pretty girl, I dare say, would be proud to have you.



Come, my dear brother! let us attend Sir Thomas and our father, I promis'd to fol∣low them directly.



Our father! oh, Emily my sister!  I cannot bear the thought it shocks it overpow'rs it mads me! my sweet Emily  go you, while I endeavour to compose this agitation of my spirits before I see them.



May heaven restore you to your peace of mind! but mine is lost for ever!







 Sir, sir, sir!



What do you say, child?




Why, sir, I hope you won't be angry at such a simple girl as me offering to advise you but really I would not have you think of living single; for to my certain knowledge, there is a girl in the world, ay, and a good
  53pretty girl too, that's not far off, would be very sorry you shou'd die a batchelor.



Which I most surely shall!




Mercy forbid, sir! for indeed you are a very pretty gentleman! and seeing as how you and your sister can't conveniently come together, if I was in your place, I shou'd look about me a little and if such a thing was to happen, that you even took a fancy to me, sir, I don't think I could find in my heart to be cruel to you and tho' I am not your equals, you might go farther and fare worse  for I have a little money by me, and a pros∣pect of getting a very large sum soon and you know, sir, I am a sort of an heiress (as I may call it) besides, and I dare say my father has sav'd something worth having.




How this silly girl torments me! I had better check her, or the giddy creature may suppose I know not what I thank you, Patty, for your good will to me, 



Thank you, Patty! O gemini, I be∣lieve he'll come to at last.




But hope you'll not deceive yourself into what might hereafter prove a trouble to you.



No indeed, sir, it never would so far from it, every thing I did for you wou'd be a pleasure to me!



Still you mistake me, my good girl 



Good girl! O the dear soul, I shall have him as sure as a gun!
 No, in∣deed, sir, I don't 



Pray hear me without interruption 



Yes, sir, that I will
 for, to be sure, I cou'd hear you talk for ever!



I am afraid you have conceiv'd some∣thing like love for me 



Like love? indeed, sir, if a poor bash∣ful girl must speak out it's love in downright earnest!




Pray don't interrupt me you have entertain'd, I say, a partiality for me you mis∣take for love, and which a return to might pos∣sibly confirm in you; but, as that can never be, I intreat you, for your own repose, in time to check it, and never think again of what is im∣possible! Oh, love! thou tyrant o'er the heart, how contradictory are thy decrees!





Impossible! why is it impossible? sure I am not his fister too lord, lord! that any body should stand so in their own light!  well it don't signify fretting about it if I can't have him, I must have somebody else?  and, as he won't marry me, I think I'll e'en behave kinder to poor William, for I'm sure he loves me dearly and if I can but coax him to forget how I used him to day, and ask me the question (as he often has before) again, if I don't have him, I'll be whipt! as I live, here he comes, and a likely lad he is as any in the parish George Goodman, with all his airs, an't half so handsome. I'll pretend not to see him, to try if he'll break his resolution and speak first.






Ay, there she stands, a sulky thing! what can have made the little puss so plaguy cross-grain'd to day? she won't take a bit of notice of me a stubborn young baggage! and I'll be hang'd if I speak to her first if I can help it!




Not one word, by jingo! if I don't take care I shall lose him too since he won't speak, I must! so, come down proud stomach!  William!



Did you call, Mrs. Patty?



Ay, William, why you pass by a body as if you had never seen one before.



Why, Mrs. Patty, I be unwilling to anger any one and the last time we parted, you know you bid me never speak to you again; so I was trying to please you that way  thof it almost breaks my heart! but if it kill'd me outright, I shou'd not care, if it did but pleasure you, Patty!




Lord, William! why you did not think I was in right earnest, did you?  ha, ha, ha!



Eh! he, he, he! why, wa'n't you Patty?




Wa'n't I! why no, I tell you I only did it to try you a little ha, ha, ha! that was all.



Was that all? lord, lord, if I cou'd not ha'sworn you was in downright earnest! for you have look'd all day long as if you cou'd eat me with a grain of salt!



But I cou'd not tho', William for I have too great a regard for you to hurt a hair of your head.



Have you indeed? well now, that is kind to tell it me!



I should be very ungrateful to behave otherwise than kind to you, William, who have always profest so much love to me nay, more than once even ask'd me to marry you.



Ay, more than twenty times, Patty  and, if you were but willing, I'd axe your father leave to get Mr. Liturgy, our curate, to publish the banns for us next sabbath; and, as soon as ever we were out-ax'd, I'd marry you, and love you to my dying day!



I thank you kindly, William, for your offer but, had not we better wait a few years longer, 'till we have sav'd a little to be∣gin the world with; as I don't imagine you are much richer than myself.



Pho, never heed riches, Patty  it's none but those who have too much already, that marry for the lucre of gain! not that I be poor neither last wages, I gave my father to save for me, made (with what he had before of mine) forty-four pounds, twelve shillings and fix-pence that is, in even money, forty-two golden guineas and a half so, you see, Patty, I be somebody, and ha' gotten a good round sum to begin the world but, if we had not a sixpenny-piece between us, a young cou∣ple that have health and limbs to work, a good heart, and a sound conscience, have enough to begin twenty worlds!



That's very true, William and I don't think there's a heartier young couple in
  57the county than we are besides, I have a very handsome sum of money by me too, and a power of good cloaths Miss Emily gave me 



Well then, Patty, shall us put what little we have together, and make a match on't, eh?



Indeed, William, I don't know what to say to it 



Come, never be faint-hearted nor stand shilly-shally about it, you simple tony 


Metre enters unobserved by them.



Bless my eyesight! what do I see? I hope the boy hath no unchaste purpose!



You know, Patty, I do love you dearly 



But honestly I trust 



And if you'll only say the word 



Goodlack, I am terrified!



I'll go buy a ring directly. 



Oh! I am satisfied!



I do know the size of this dear finger to a tittle and it shall be as heavy as your heart can wish.



No, heavy rings are not the fashion now let it be a light one, Willy.



Now then, my dear Patt, you be my own for ever and ever!




He, he, he! their amorous parley is wond'rous pretty, I do protest!



Well, I vow, Billy, you have a most bewitching tongue, and have quite won my heart!



He, he! that's pure!



But you must ask my father's leave, for I would not do such a thing without his blessing for ever so much.



Thou art a dutiful good child, and heaven I hope will bless and prosper you!




Why you know, Patty, I mention'd that before, and I'll go directly and tell un the whole story odsflesh! here he is, as sure as a gun! well, how lucky this be!



Heyday! what hath exhilarated thee so, William? thou lookest as merry and happy! 



Merry and happy! ay, that I be  and hilarated too, as you call it, I believe; for, ecod! I hardly know whether I stand upon my head or my heels!



Why? what hath pleased thee so overmuch?



What I do hope will not displease you, or we shall be all in a sad quandary.



Lord, I am so asham'd, I can't look my father in the face.




What is all this about?



Why, fir, I that is, Patty and I, if you 



Patty, and I, if you! what? what?  why dost not speak out? dost thou know, Martha, what it is he lacketh?



I believe, father, I partly guess 



Well, what is it? 



Why don't you tell my father, Mr. William?



No, do you, Patty  




Come, come, speak out boldly, lad!  faint heart never won fair lady.



Ecod, you've hit it! for you must know, sir, Patty being in love with me  that is I being in love with she I mean if so be you were but willing, we shou'd be main proud to become man and wife together!



Is this true, Martha?



If you please, father!




Yes, if you please, fa her!




Why, William, as I have often told thee before, I believe thou art a very honest good lad but, in troth, ye are both full young.



No indeed we a'n't, father!



'Twould be only losing time to stay any longer 



Well, I will take it into serious co∣gitation as you will be under my eye I think I shall not oppose your virtuous incli∣nations, but will most humbly solicit the sanc∣tion and permission of his reverence and Sir Thomas, which I am prone to think, at my intreaty, will not be withheld.



No, I hope not!



And then, father, when I am Patty's spouse, I'll keep the bible you said to day you'd give me as choice as old gold, to write the names of all our children in; if so be that we increase and multiply, which I do hope and pray to heaven we may, Patty!



Ay, and so do I, I am sure, William!



 Never did I unto any prayer more fervently ejaculate Amen!
All three go off repeating Amen!






Emily and Lord Sealand enter.



WHY do you persist, my lord, in detain∣ing me thus rudely, and prevent my returning to the house? pray let me pass, my lord I desire you'd leave me!



Leave you? impossible, my an∣gelic creature! I exist but in your presence!



That your lordship's existence has no sort of dependance upon me, I have had a most convincing proof.



How can you be so cruel, my adorable! have I not declared the most ardent passion for you? am I not now confirming it? what can I say or you desire more?



Indeed, my lord, I never thought to hear such words as these from you again the effect Sir Thomas's explanation had upon your lordship, made me conclude 



O, crudel! can you suppose I love you more or less, my charmer, for being daughter to this gentleman or that? no my love is (as Sir Thomas wish'd it) intirely per∣sonal, and in possessing you, my angel, I ask no more! bravo, Sealand!




How have I been deceived! I blush to think how much I have wrong'd this gene∣rous man!




Why do you turn away, ma chére? why avoid me? sure I deserve a better treatment I, that am waiting to receive, and place you in a state of affluence superior to that in which you have been bred, and from which you are so unexpectedly fall'n but grieve not at that, for in my arms you'll find safe harbour from all the storms of fortune!  Pretty and poetical that! I don't think Ovid, or any of the love-sick tribe, ever said a better thing.




O my lord! pardon me, I beseech you, for having thought of you so unworthily  I feel the warmest gratitude for this so gene∣rous a declaration, but cannot profit by it.



Say not so, my charmer you know not half the good that waits on you and yours your father shall be rais'd as high as I have power or interest to advance him your brother too 



Ah, my poor George!



He shall be poor no longer  I'll give him a living, buy him a commission  or place him to his wish in whatever stile of life he may prefer say but you will be mine 



What is there else I wou'd not do to serve my father and too-much-lov'd brother! and testify my gratitude, and the great respect I now have for your lordship.



No more, no more; prithee, my charming angel, have done with gratitude, respect, and all such cold unanimated expres∣sions love is all I require; give me but that, and all the joys and luxuries of life attend
  62you well said again, Sealand! egad, this love makes a man talk divinely!




Oh, sir! think not of a wretched creature, who ne'er can taste of joy again!  were you, if possible, more noble, good and ge∣nerous than I now find you were you at once the greatest and the best of human kind so indelible is the impression (tho' ever unattain∣able the object it is made by!) on my afflicted heart, I could not marry with your lordship.



Ha? what! marry? O no, my dear, I did not mean that!







I love you, my divine creature, to adoration, almost distraction every thing but matrimony and that, oh, that wou'd be downright madness indeed! non, non, mia cara signora! that's quite out of the question now  your planks are started! and, from a vessel of burthen richly freighted, that has lost her cargo in a storm, you must now be cut down to a pleasure-boat! no had metaphor that for a sailor 'gad, I think I shine to day!




Good heaven! what can your lord∣ship mean?



Mean, my charmer? mean that I adore you! that you shall be as happy as love and gold can make you shall command my heart and share my fortune any thing but marriage; and that your own good sense must tell you is now impossible!



At length I awake my dream of ho∣nour, generosity, respect, and gratitude is now no more 



But when your father and George are inform'd of what I propose for their ad∣vancement,
  63as well as for your own, I am sure they will readily 



Stop your licentious tongue, aban∣don'd wretch! are you not content with this most base attempt on me, but must my pious father and most virtuous brother be your sa∣crifices too! must they partake and countenance such guilt! oh, shame, shame! disgrace and scandal to your dignity and birth!



Heyday! what is all this? you can't be serious sure, child, in rejecting so gen∣teel an offer?



Sweet heaven look down with pity on me! the measure of my woes was full be∣fore now it o'erflows!



Why, my dear, you have really made a very fine progress in the small time you have known yourself to be the parson's daughter  you both preach and pray most divinely upon my soul! but we'll leave such dull stuff at present to those who know no better how to employ themselves come, my Venus! let us retire to yonder mossy couch; where Paphian, Cyprian, and Citherêan boughs entwine to form a shade for love!



Unhand me, sir! how do you dare insult me thus! be assur'd, altho' Sir Tho∣mas is not my father, he will resent this out∣rage.



O fie! how can you be so ill∣bred, my dear creature, and want so much courting to your own happiness? Come I am certain you'll not be angry at a little gentle violence let me thus force my angel to be kind!



For honour's sake, my lord, forbear! pity my distress'd condition, bereft of fortune, love, almost of life! nor with unmanly violence add infamy to my already insupportable af∣flictions!



'Tis all in vain you are a charm∣ing girl, I love you, the place is bien com∣mode! and 



On my knees I beg! think what distraction a reverend parent and a tender bro∣ther both must feel for my undoing! and, with a nobleness suited to your birth, my lord! forego the advantage you now have o'er my defenceless situation, and quit your horrid purpose!



Ridiculous! to suppose I'd miss this golden opportunity no, no! comply therefore, my charmer! and spare me the dis∣agreeable necessity of compelling you you won't, eh? why then we must have a fair trial of who is strongest 



Help, help, sweet heaven! rescue a helpless creature from destruction! oh, save me from dishonour and perdition!



You may as well be silent, child, for we are far enough from the house nobody hears you 





Yes, villain, I do!



And so has heaven!



Pox take him! is he here? I wish he was at Oxford again with all my soul.




O my dear brother! my protector! my guardian angel!



My sister! my sweet innocence!



O rot you both! I have got into a blessed scrape here I wish I was in the Bay of Biscay with all my heart!




Cruel insulter! to trample on a wretch just fall'n to earth!



How did you dare, sir if you had no other sense of guilt how did you dare to violate the laws of hospitality thus grossly!



Oh, now you are going to preach  very good proceed, sir I am all attention! and must edify, no doubt, as I shall be finely lectur'd (I suppose) between you.



Insensible villain! dead to every feeling of shame, remorse, of honour or huma∣nity!



Sir, your most obedient!



But, my lord! tho' you did not think this poor girl worthy to be your wife, remem∣ber she is my sister, and not to be dishonour'd by the most exalted ruffian! for your pre∣sent safety be thankful we are unarm'd; else, in the cause of injur'd virtue, I should forget there was a female present, and punish your atrocious villainy on the spot!



Why really, sir, if you are cer∣tain of victory before the encounter, I think it full as well indeed that we are unarm'd!



My dear George, contain yourself  oh! I can scarce stand pray lead me in!



Lean on me, my sweet sister, and fear nothing! have a care, sir, how we meet again, it may be fatal to you!



Be calm, my brother! my deliverer!



Fear nothing, dearest! bear up  bear up! he must be more than man who in∣jures you while I am by, and less than man who could at any time attempt it!







Pox take you for an ignorant, impertinent, meddlesome puppy, I say! here am I to lose a fine girl, because her stupid bro∣ther knows so little of the world rot him!  but I'll not drop the affair here I am deter∣mined let me consider um! ay faith, the very thing! then she may squall 'till she's hoarse again, and I need not apprehend a second interruption my French scoundrel shall about it instantly.
 Hold what noise is that? 





Apropos! yonder is the very fel∣low I want La Poudre! La Poudre!





Est ce que your lorship plese to vant a me?



Yes, I do please to vant a you, you puppy; come hither 



Je suis bien aise I ver much glad den I happen to valk a dis vay save a your lorship de peine to send for me.



Hold your damn'd Babel of a tongue, and mind what I say.



I am not say von vard, mi lor  I am dumb.



I wish you was with all my soul at least for the present 



Fort bien, my lor I shall not open my mous je ne dirai pas un mot not von vard I vil speak.



Then cease that confusion of lan∣guages, you damn'd French chattering rascal, and hear me!



I hear a your lorship parfaitement bien, and so may de whole parishe, ma foi!  you talk a so loud, I hear you if I was two tree mile off 



Ha! egad the puppy says true  and that's not altogether so proper at present  who was that with you?



Your lorship coashaman, Robert.



That's lucky, by Jupiter! call the surly savage hither.



I vil, my lor ici! Robert! Robert! come speak a mi lor courez, cou∣rez, plus vite! for vy you not make a great haste, you surly sauvage!





Do you want me, my lord?



Yes, Robert; put the horses to directly.



I can't just yet a while, my lord; the poor things have not quite din'd.



I tell you they must be put to directly I have not a moment to spare.



Very well, my lord then they shall only just finish the handful of meat that's in the manger 



Damn the manger! I tell you I must go immediately.



What, mayn't they make an end of the mouthful they're about, my lord?



I tell you no! I'll make an end of you, you rascal, if you don't get the carriage ready this instant.



Very well, my lord! then I'll get 'em rubb'd down and put to presently 



Rubb'd down! you damn'd pro∣voking dilatory rascal, if they're not put to this moment, I'll 〈◊〉 down with a witness!



I wonder ••no'd wish to be a coach∣horse? poor souls I can never have a meal in comfort!




But hark ye, Robert! go this way, or you'll ruin all thro' the private door, which you may unbolt, at the bottom of this walk if any of Sir Thomas's people are at the stables, make some pretence to get them out of the way let nobody see you take the carriage out, be sure, if you can possibly avoid it, then saddle La Poudre's horse, and wait for us at that garden-gate.



Very well, my lord. what maggot's in his head now, I wonder! not that I car'd a whisp of hay what was going forward, if the poor beastes had but fill'd their bellies it's bad enough of all conscience to be a coach-man, but, damn it, it's worse yet to be a coach-horse.





Diable! for vy is all dis, mi lor?



Why, I have got into a cursed dilemma here, La Poudre, and you must be a damn'd rascal to endeavour to help me out of it.



Sans doute, my lord! assuré∣ment I sal do every ting in my possibilité  mais vat dilemme, mi lor, is it I mus help you out?



I had like to have been finely taken in here, La Poudre: Emily is not Sir Thomas's daughter, but the parson's.



Ah, morbleu! den I suppose she have peu on point d'argent, littel or no moneys  not so grande fortune as you did expeck?



You have hit it therefore I have declin'd marrying her as I intended, and offer'd (instead) to take her into keeping.



Vous avez raison, mi lor; 'tis ver vel juge and she vil make ver pretty fille de joye for your keep, en verité.



Why, ay, La Poudre, tho' she is not freighted for a matrimonial voyage, she'd make a charming pleasure yatch! but she has refus'd that 



Refuse dat? la grande sotte! oh que de great a fool!



Her puppy of a brother just now interrupted me in an attempt upon her, and they are gone in doors to acquaint the family of it, I suppose now, unless I can contrive to carry her off, I lose her for ever!



Parbleu, c'est vrai, mi lor it is ver true inteed.



In hopes of which, you hear how I have order'd the carriage now, if you think it possible to decoy her out, Robert and I will be ready to hurry her into it in a moment.



Je ne scai pas, mi lor it vil be ver difficile but I will try all my possibilité.



No matter what unaccountable lies you tell 



Lie! bygar I vil lie and swear thro' tick and thro' tin;



If you succeed, the moment she is without the garden door, do you bolt it within to prevent their tracing us; then climb over the wall directly, mount your horse, and scour away as if you rode for your life.



Oui, mi lor but vere mus I scoure?



Down to the beach as hard as ever you can ride, and hail the Tarquin bid O'Connor bring the skiff ashore immediately, and both of you wait my coming to assist me.



Je vous entend bien, mi lor  and I sal scoure comme le diable!



Then, if I get her but safe down there, I have no more to do but whisk her on board the Tarquin, put off to sea, and 




Allez, allez, mi lor somebody come 



I am gone succeed, my dear La Poudre, and you are made for ever! now,
  71Venus! be propitious to my scheme, I'll sail for Paphos, and there worship thee!





Ma foi! it be de old gentilman himself come! parbleu, I no like his look he is fort enragé in one devil a great passion mort de ma vie! I wish I no get break a my bone! fa, la, la, la, &c.


Sir Thomas Richacre and Dr. Goodman enter.



Where is the rascal?



Fa, la, la, la! who, sire?



That scoundrel of a lord! 



Mi lor scoundrel? je ne scais pas  I am not acquaint vid mi lor Scoundrel, ni monsieur Rascal non plus! I have not de hon∣neur to know de gentilmens en verité who do you mean, sire?



Mean, sire! why, when I ask for a scoundrel, a rascal, and a lord, who can I mean but Lord Sealand?



Mi lor Sealand! 



Heaven forbid there should exist another lord, those names could be applied to!





Is the villain here yet, sir?



I don't know where he is, not I, nor will this fellow tell me.



Parbleu! I am amaze! je vous en prie, gentilmens, vat is all dis fracas and tintamarre? est ce que you dit ask a me, sire, vere be mi lor Sealand?



Why, who should I ask but you? do you think I enquir'd of the trees and flower-plots?



Je vous demande pardon, dat I ave no understand vat you speak ven you ask or mi lor Scoundrel 



Well, now you do understand  where is he?



Vat, mi lor Sealand?



Yes, you damn'd incomprehensible puppy! Lord Sealand.



Sire, he be only just valk littel way down de jardin.



Down which walk? 



Down dat a walk, sire  



Now then, if the villain has a heart, I'll put it to the proof!






C'est par la gauche, de left hand, fire;

 gentilmens, mi lor be just by de orangerie.





He sha'n't be there long, a dog! nor in any other place that I am master of  for, as soon as I have told him what a scoun∣drel I think him, if he don't walk out of his own accord, I shall make bold to kick him out!





Kick him out! mort de ma vie! kick a mi lor Sealand? vat, in de name of vonder, all dis mean, sire?



It means that your wicked lord has made a most infamous attempt upon my daughter's honour?



Your daughtere, sire! vat daughtere?



My Emily my dear, my in∣nocent child!



Your shild, sire! be mademoiselle Emily your shild?



She is! which that disgrace-to-his-rank no sooner knew, than (not content most poorly to reject her he had just before solicited for a wife) he wickedly endeavoured to seduce her to be his mistress!



Very wicked inteed, sire! 



Nay more, to aggravate his guilt, proposed rewards for me, her wretched father! to be the pander to my daughter's infamy!



Helas! c'est une chose bien in∣fame et extraordinaire, inteed! I am quite shocka to hear it! I no mush vonder now de old gentilman be go kick a mi lor but I vonder great deal you ave so mush patience and phi∣losophie dat you no go give him littel kick too, sire.



'Twould ill become my cloth to seek revenge tho' I came here, I must con∣fess, in anger; and, had I met him, should have loaded him with bitterest reproaches  but, on reflection, think it better to avoid him  if he repents his fault, I am satisfied!



'Tis very good of you inteed, sire for mi lor ave been fort mechant, very naughty I mus confess; and I shou'd be no mush surprise if de young gentilman fight a mi lor and kill him ecoutez! hark a, mon∣sieur! I think I hear de sword clash oh, que oui! dey fight! dey fight! ah, mon pauvre
  74lor! he vill be kill! he vill be kill! and I fall lose my place!



Kill'd! forbid it heaven! tho' he deserves the worst that could befall him, yet  let me endeavour to prevent more sin!





Ha, ha, ha, ha! so far I ave tell de very pritty lie inteed, to get dem all out of de vay now, vile de coast be cleare, I go to de maison, and try all my possibilité to get mademoiselle to mi lor eh! parbleu, it vill be no politique to come back dis way and meet a les gentilshommes again! vat I sall do, ma foi! let a me considere  





George brother! where are you, my dear, cruel George? 



Quel bonheur! here come de lady quite apropos! now for de bold stroke  ah miserable que je suis! la peur me fait mourir! I am frighten to death! help a meurtre! meurtre!





Ah, murder? merciful heaven! I fear'd as much, and therefore followed  where? who?



Ah, madame! I am frighten out of my sense! Young monsieur Goodaman be gone out of de gate of de jardin to fight a mi lor Sealand, and I justement hear de sword clash and pistol fire!



Gracious heaven defend him! bro∣ther! father! help! murder! help!






Ha, ha, ha, ha! dat is bien fait  ver vell done inteed!
 you be goot girl, run ver vell mi lor vill kesh you dans un moment, and carry you quite away! ha, ha, ha, ha!

Sir Thomas Richacre re-enters at the upper End of the Stage, looking about.



Where, in the devil's name, has he hid himself?



Ah, ma foi! here come old gen∣tilman again! now I must run bolt a de jardin door apres mademoiselle, climb over de vall, (take care I no break a my neck tho') monter á cheval, and scoure down to de beeche as if de devil vas scoure after me! ha, ha, ha, ha! bygar, I am von very greata devilish lucky rogue! ha, ha, ha, ha!



George and Dr. Goodman re-enter.



'Tis in vain to seek him here, sir; he must certainly have returned up the yew∣tree walk to the house, while we have been this way, and may offer fresh insult to my sister the thought alarms me! let me fly to her protection!





Why, there's no finding the dog any where, Doctor he is not in the garden I'm sure unless he has hid himself at the
  76bottom of the canal I'll have it dragg'd, and if I find him there, I sha'n't have quite so bad an opinion of him as I had.



Let us hope, sir, he has reflected on the heinousness of his behaviour, and with∣drawn himself privately through shame.



Shame, a villain! he was not asham'd of committing the offence, but I sup∣pose he'd blush up to the eyes to ask pardon; nay, run the best friend he has in the world through the body, or blow his brains out, sooner than do it!



It is to that false shame, sir, we may attribute most of the impious duels, by which our laws divine and human are daily scandaliz'd and broken!



Ay, it's too true, Doctor the more the pity! come, George heyday! what's gone with him?



He went in doors to Emily, I be∣lieve, sir.



Well come, my good friend, let us forget this puppy that has vex'd us  'thank heaven no harm came of it I think we had e'en as well go tell your sweet girl what I was proposing, when George and she came in from Sealand; and have the wedding cele∣brated as soon as possible.



Dear sir, consider once more the vast disparity before you finally determine  the obligations you have conferr'd on me and mine already, are never to be cancell'd, but this unthought-of condescension 



No more, no more, my dear old friend! I have considered it thoroughly, and (if you will so far indulge me) it shall be so 
  77we'll shew the libertine we can set a proper value upon merit, without the recommendation of fortune, tho' he cou'd not, by offering her a husband not much inferior to himself, who will love her and protect her!





Have you seen my sister, sir?



Not since we left her in the house; is she not there?



No, sir! Patty says, that fearful of my having a rencounter with Lord Sealand, she follow'd me into the garden.



Bless me! where can she have gone so suddenly?



Why the devil's in the people to day, I think, i'my conscience one can't turn one's head, but, like goblins and fairies, or a jugler's cups and balls, they're vanish'd!  Odzookers! now I think a little, my mind misgives me sure that damn'd fellow, Sealand, has not convey'd her off!



Which way, dear sir? the garden door, you see, is shut, and fast bolted, which, if they had gone out of it, must have been left open.



Why, Emily! Sealand! French∣man! scoundrel! where, in the devil's name, are you all got to?






Sir! sir! your worship!



What are you bawling about, you rascal? is not one enough at a time?







What does the blockhead stare so at? have you seen your young lady any where lately?



N n no, your worship!







N n no, sir! I ha'n't seen ne'er a one of them since tea-time 



Then what do you come to plague us now for, you puppy!



Lord, your honour! I only came to tell your worship the poor woman, Dame Quickset, that lives at the cottage where your honours all went after dinner to day, is begging for dear life to speak to your worship.



I am busy now I can't speak to her zounds! I cou'd not speak to the great mogul if he was here why, Emily! Sealand!



Dear sir, be patient for a moment  it may be something concerning my child  pray let her speak with you.

Dame Quickset speaks without.



Where is his good worship? I must speak with un, for it be upon life and death!
 O, heaven bless your wor∣ship! you're undone! you're undone!



So I have been just thinking!  but how, how?



Young madam! your daughter! your daughter!



What of her! 







Where is she, good woman, where is she?



Heaven knows where by this, not I! some vile villains have kidnap'd the pre∣cious lady away, to have their wicked will of her; or else (for the lucre of gold) to sell her for a neger-slave, or a turk, I do verily believe!



A negro or a turk! why what a plague does the woman mean?



Why, an't please your worship, a strange outlandish looking man came galloping down our lane not a minute agone, whipping and spurring poor beast like any mad! and a fine chariot came driving a'ter him from your worship's garden door, as thof 'twou'd ha' tore the ground to very bits; with somebody screaming and crying i'th' inside on't as thof they had been murder'd! and, as it pass'd by our hut, who should I see it was but the sweet young Lady Richacre, your worship's daughter, with some vile rogue sitting beside and holding her, disguised like a gentleman!



As sure as death it was that dog Sealand!



Good heaven protect my child!



Follow me, William! and help to get arms and horses ready!



Od rot un! I'll take blunderbuss from hall-chimney for myself, and, if I come up with un, I'll make un remember the day o'the month I warrant un!



Metre! John! Coachman I saddle all the horses! load all the fire arms! raise the whole county! blood! I'll blow the villains all to pieces!











DEAR heart, how I tremble! I am sadly afraid they won't overtake them lud, lud! I wish somebody was come back again, for I begin to be afraid to stay in the house any longer who knows but they'll come and run away with me next! O, I wish William was come back! I hope the dear soul won't come to any harm! lud, lud! what a twitter am I in! and what can have become of my father? sure he has not follow'd them a-foot  hark! did not I hear a noise? perhaps I forgot to fasten the hall-door in my fright, and somebody is coming to run away with me!

Metre enters out of breath, she runs and embraces him.



O dear father! is it you? I am glad you are come back! where have you been? what have you heard? have you seen any thing of them?



What! hath no one returned yet, Martha?



Nobody but you, father. 



Goodlack! goodlack! was there ever the like heard of! neither tale nor tidings can I learn, and I have run up and down al∣most
  81every lane in the parish, untill my poor old legs are just ready to drop off!



You had better sit down, father, and rest yourself, while I get something for you.



Sit down, child? no, I will neither eat, nor drink, nor rest, untill the precious lady is found! I wanted but to know if any one had been more prosperous than myself, before I journeyed to any vast distance; and since no one hath, I will travel unto the world's end, but I will find her!




Pray, dear father, don't for, if you should chance to meet with the villains, they may murder you, and then come and run away with me! indeed I can't stay here any longer by myself with such dreadful apprehensions  O! I am terrified out of my senses!



Be composed, my good child they must be hardened wretches indeed to slay a poor old man like me, who could assail them with nought but prayers and supplications  therefore, make fast the door after me, and look heedfully unto the mansion, child, while I   as I am a sinner, my reverend master is returned! I pray heaven he bringeth joyful tidings! 





Ha? what's that I hear? joyful tidings, said you? is she found, Metre? is she found?



No, truly, if your reverence hath not been so prosperous!



Distraction! O my child! my lost, lost, violated child!



The Philistines are come upon her, verily!

Sir Thomas Richacre speaks without.



Here, Patty! where are you?



Lord! here's his worship come back, sir who knows but he may have had better luck  I am in great hopes 




No, no, no! there are no hopes! no hopes!









Here, your worship! 

Sir Thomas Richacre entering.



Who's at home? has nobody found this rascal yet? nobody return'd?



Yes, an't please your worship, his reverence is returned, and so am I.



And so are you! why I did not know you had been any where where the devil did you hide yourself? I call'd and bawl'd for you before I went out 'till I was hoarse again, but could not find you.



Indeed, your worship, my poor father has been running all over the parish, seeking for young madam, 'till he is almost dead.



Well! and has he found her?



Oh, no, no, no!



Why then I wish he was quite dead  and I wish I was dead and we were all dead! and buried! and 



Good your worship wax not wroth with your poor old servant! I did my best, in truth; and was just going to repeat my feeble endeavours as his reverence came in.



Dear sir, advise me I am almost distracted! what shall I do? where shall I seek her?



I know no more than you almost distracted, quotha? zounds! I have been stark mad this half hour!



Will your good worship please to repose you in your easy chair?



Repose the devil! 







Which way did you go, Doctor?



I went first, sir, to Lord Sealand's house 



Psha! that I know already, for I was there just after you what could induce you to go there? you might be sure enough he would not carry her home which way did George go?



I know not, sir heaven will, I hope, direct him better!



He can't have worse luck than I had go which way he will for, so far from a coach or a chariot, I could not see so much as a cart or a wheel-barrow but, come, come don't let us stand chattering here let us go look somewhere or other  





Hilli ho! my hearts! what cheer, honies? what, all under hatches? tumble up, tumble up, my jewels!   By my
  84soul! this is the strangest vessel I ever stuck foot aboard the devil a hand is there walking deck to keep watch! so, fait, I e'en made bold to take a peep into the cabin!



Who the devil are you, sir? what do you want here?



Arrah, be easy, my jewel! don't put yourself out of your latitude, and you'll know who I am presently but why won't you station a hand upon deck yonder to keep a bit of a look out? or you may be boarded by a land-pirate, honey!



Go, Martha, and make fast the door, child.



Dear heart! I am almost afraid this strange man is come to run away with me!





What's your business? what do you want of me?



What do I want with you? the devil a toothful do I want of you, but a little civil discourse; nor that neither, unless you are the commander here.



Well, sir, I am the commander as you call it What then?



Why then I'll lower my top-sail to you, honey!




But what's your business? for I'm in haste 



Why you are to know, joy, I am just come full sail upon the outside of a horse (with another in tow) from the salt-sea-shore, to bring you advice of a sweet cratur, a female young woman, (belonging here) and my master Lord Sealand 







Indeed you may say that more pity the two words should ever be splic'd to∣gether!



But your news, sir, your news!



Why, you must know, I receav'd orders from Mounseer Powder-puff, my lord's walley-de-shaver, to have our skiff ready to carry my lord, and the young woman I mention'd, aboard our cutter, the Tarquin but I soon found, by her unwillingness, that she was not a volunteer of her own accord; but had been press'd into the sarvice without giving her con∣sent to it so, faith! I began to be a little queer with my lord about it; for the sweet cratur look'd as innocent as a sucking dove, ay, or a new-born dove's egg! and I determin'd not to aid and assist at making her otherwise!



Eternal blessings on you for your goodness!



Devil a goodness in the case, honey  'twas no more than the duty of every honest man that is not a rogue!



Give me your hand, my heart of oak! I am your friend for ever!



So, while we were raving and squabbling within half a cable's length of land, a good clever likely young jontleman, and a carrotty-pated livery-servant, came galloping and splashing into the salt-sea, as if they were riding post over to France or Holland! for their horses were fairly afloat, and half way to the skiff in the turning of a handspike.







Hollo! you young harebrains! says I have a care you don't run foul of our
  86little nut-shell, and spill us all! upon which the poor girl cry'd out, it was her brother!







Devil fire me! says little Brian O'Connor (that's myself) if their beasts shall board us, and send us to the bottom, if he was your brother and sister too! but, do you hear, young jontleman? says I, have a little wit in your folly, and don't fink your friends and your foes together, but take in a reef a two and we'll be alongside you presently.



That was right, friend, that was right!



Upon which, you may take your swear, my bug-of-a-lord did all he could to prevent my carrying the boat ashore and, at last, when he found nothing else would do, (nor that neither) was trying to hussle me overboard 







Indeed it was not! for, as soon as I perceav'd it, Oho! thinks little Brian, are you for that fun? I'll be bound I match you to a tittle, my jewel! so, upon my conscience, I made no more ceremony, but gave him as pretty a genteel lift as you shall see in a sum∣mer's day, and capsiz'd him (souse!) headlong into the wet ocean! where he look'd, for all the world, like the gold and filver fish folks keep in glass washing-rubs!



Ha, ha, ha! well done, well done, i'faith!



But (notwithstanding his demerits) he was not drowned, sir, I hope!



There we differ, old Stave, for once for I hope he was.



No, faith, sir, as ill luck would have it, he was not drown'd.



The more the pity, say I.



Upon my conscience, sir, you say very right it was God's mercy and a thousand pities sure enough! but I take it he was a little damp or so, for when he scrambled ashore, the salt brine ran from him by pailfuls.



Ha, ha, ha, ha! I shall burst, I shall burst! upon second thoughts I am glad the dog was not drown'd, for if he had, I should have been kill'd outright.



Yes, fait, and so would he too!



But how ended the matter, pray sir?



O, it was soon over, honey! for when I had thrown the whale into Jonas's belly 



Jonas into the whale's belly, I apprehend you mean, sir!



Well! the whale into Jonas, or Jonas into the whale, it's all one an't it?  when I had given my lord a summerset, I say, and spilt him into the ocean, we got ashore presently but, as the young jontleman was hoisting his sister out of the boat, his draggle-tail'd lordship lent him such a pat o'the cheek, as was enough to break his hand∣some face, or put one of his forecastle lights out!



The cowardly villain! but he re∣paid it, I hope?



Och! I'll be bound he did and with interest too for he had the honour of horse-whipping his lordship to his heart's con∣tent! and (by way of premium) I divarted
  88myself the mean time with beating his impu∣dent French walley-de-shaver!



Bravo! bravo! ha, ha, ha! but what became of the livery-servant all this while? sure he was not idle?



What, the lad with the bunch of carrots growing on his head? indeed he was not for he had no sooner handed the poor frighted girl out of the gangway, and brought the two horses they went, and I came upon, to an anchor; but the tight lad beseag'd the coach-box, took it by storm, and is now piloting the young jontleman and lady safe into port here, aboard my lord's own chariot, fait: leaving him and his rascally companions to pad the hoof, and trudge home upon their ten toes!



Odso! then let's go meet 'em! they can't be far off by this, and I long to see the dear rogues again   hark! sure I hear a carriage stop.





My lady's come back, sir! my lady's come back! young Mr. Goodman and William have found her, and they are all come back together!



Rejoice and sing! kill the fatted calf and be merry, for the lost sheep is found!

George and Emily enter.


She runs to Dr. Goodman, Sir Thomas Richacre catches George in his arms.



My dear, dear, brave boy! thou'rt welcome home again!




 O my lov'd sire! scarce did I know my father, ere I was torn from him! but am restor'd (thank heaven!) to his paternal arms!



Thanks, gracious providence! I see my child again!







Odzookers! George! I have been in a plaguy pucker about you, you rogue!



Sir, I am eternally bound to you for this solicitude! And, was not my dear father exceedingly alarm'd?





Alarm'd! why I tell you I have been almost out of my wits about you both!



Sir, I am bound to you for ever! but, my dear father  
 is not he happy too that my sister, his sweet daughter, is safe restored?



Ay, that he is, I'll answer for him and, as you have so bravely help'd to recover a daughter for him, the least he can do in return is to provide you with a father, by restoring me my son!



Sir! what does my patron say?



Say? ecod I don't know what to say? only that, in having you for my heir, I am father to one of the best and bravest lads in the kingdom!







Yes, my dear boy! I am indeed!  your father! George, your father!
 Odzookers, Doctor, I could contain my∣self no longer, faith!



Dear sir, he is your own, and truly worth the claiming!



Indulgent powers! is it possible?




O good gracious! ma'am! here's good news for you.





Wonderful! wonderful! most won∣derful!



Am I in a dream! 



Upon my conscience I can't tell  but, if you are, you have had a very pleasant ride in your sleep!



Dear sirs! what am I to think?  within these few hours I thought myself the son of this worthy divine, and this sweet maid, your daughter, sir  
 we then were wretched beyond idea, supposing our∣selves the issue of one parent! and now, sir 



And now, my dear boy! all is set right you are my son, my own flesh and blood! at least your mother, Lady Richacre, (who was a pattern of conjugal fidelity) told me so and Emily is as surely Dr. Goodman's daughter.





Transporting sounds! then we may yet be happy!




Devil burn me! but this makes out the old saying good that it's a wise father knows his own child O no, fait, I don't mean so neither (tho' that may be true too) but, it's a wise child knows it's own father!





 (if I really am so blest) may I presume to ask why we have both been bred in such a mutual error?



I'll tell thee, George I had ob∣serv'd, with great concern, how seldom young men, bred in the insolent pride of inheriting great estates, deserv'd them! I am a whimsical old fellow, you know and therefore proposed to, and prevail'd on, my respected friend (as we became widowers almost together) to join with me in a project I had formed (in imita∣tion of the Spectator's Leontine and Eudoxus) of exchanging children for a time hoping thereby to render you more worthy than you might otherwise have been, of the fortune and title you was born to the experiment was a singular one, I own, but the event has fully justified it!





And, sir! if I dare ask one question more what recompence did you purpose to this young lady for being deluded with such an imaginary grandeur?



Bless me! what is he saying?




Was it to realize the golden dream?



Why, I had some such notion, indeed, George. 



If I remember right the story you alluded to, sir, the good, the generous Eudoxus, join'd the young and loving pair: is that my sire's intention? or (which I dread to ask!)  is it to marry her yourself?



Ha? what! marry Emily myself? bless her dear little heart, heaven forbid! no, no, I had a younger spark in my eye for her 



Benignity itself! he means my George, I'm certain, and I shall yet be blest!




Then, sir, I may speak plainer 



What will the dear youth say!




And declare, that I am vet a beggar, if you add not to my late acquisition of for∣tune, the supreme delight of restoring this lov'd maid to the station she was bred in, by per∣mitting me still to call this best of men my father!



What do you ask me for? she's none of mine, you fool! why don't you ask the Doctor?




 My indulgent fa∣ther!

 O, sir! either my behaviour has hitherto been unfilial, or you will kindly receive me for your son again.



My ever dearest son! take her, and may heaven shower down eternal blessings on you both!







Ay, and so be it too, say I!



Now, if my Emily thinks me not unworthy 



O talk not so! 'tis I that am unwor∣thy yet wherefore? if desert consisted but in riches, then I were indeed deficient! but, conscious of a mind superior to the distinctions of birth and fortune, I feel that I deserve your love! for, had our conditions really been as we imagined, preferring thee, the worthiest, to the most wealthy, I should have gloried in my acquisition more than in a conquest of the most exalted!



I know it, my sweet Emily! I know it.



And, if my preserver loves like me, he will not ask, but take my trembling hand;
  93assur'd, that he possesses wholly my fond, my beating heart!



Thus then I take thy snowy hand! here seal my faith!
 and hence∣forth we are one!



Ay, and a very pretty splice you have both made on't!




 I have so full a sense, sir, of your most unexampled goodness, in first adopting your poor girl, and now confirming thus your favour, I cannot thank you as I ought! let these duteous, grateful tears speak for me!




Rise, rise, my sweet child! you are my daughter now indeed!




 Well! I wish I may never taste another cheekful of beef and biscuit, or a sup of grog again, if this is not as pretty a piece of business 



My good friend! the preserver of my Emily! amid these several transports I have too long overlook'd you!



Och! no offence, gra! I have been overlooking you too, 'till I don't know what ails me fait! but I've a notion the salt-water that spalpeen of a lord splash'd in my face when I tilted him overboard, had not got out of the corners of my eyes before! for some drops trickled down the scuppers of my cheeks into my mouth just now that tasted quite brackish! they could not be tears sure! for (tho' we Irishmen are apt to make blunders) a
  94weather-beaten chap like myself would not cry, sure, at what he's so well pleas'd with!



You have a double title to my gratitude, as I receiv'd assistance from you against your own master; not fearing, in the cause of virtue, to offend the wretch you serv'd!



I'll tell you what, honey! Saint Patrick be thankful, I'm never afraid of doing what's right! for tho' I'm but a menial man of low degree, I am sprung from a very great offspring, and have got the thick blood of the kings of Ireland bubbling in my veins, joy!  and, in my foolish way of thinking, so far from offending, I sarv'd my master most faithfully by not sarving him at all at all, in such an unjontlemanlike undertaking!



You are a right honest tar! and shall never serve any one again while you live.



Indeed and I will always sarve both you and yours with all the blood in my bones!



How, or in what words shall I ex∣press my very fervent thanks to you, for hav∣ing sav'd a helpless creature from what I dread to think of!





I'll tell you how you shall thank me, jewel! by holding your sweet tongue, and never saying another word about it!



Generous man! my deeds shall then speak for me.



Dear father! now every thing else is settled so nicely, do, pray, put in a word for poor William.



And yourself, eh, Martha?



If you please, father.



Well, I will adventure to address their honours hem! hem! good your wor∣ship! and good your reverence! this seem∣ing an auspicious hour, your poor old servant hath an humble boon to crave.



What is it, old silver-locks?



That it may please your honours, when the bans of matrimony are published between my dear and honourable young master and mistress, (as I trust his reverence will not approve they should be married by licence) the names of my poor child, Martha Metre, spinster and her chosen spouse and helpmate, William Strongbow, batchelor, both of this parish, may be permitted most humbly to follow.



William Strongbow! what, young carrotty-poll? where is the red-headed rogue? I have not seen him since he scal'd the coach-box.



He is in the hall, I believe, father!




William Strongbow! approach his worship's presence.





Did your worship please to want me?



Ay, come hither, William I am told you have behav'd like a man of Kent to day, in helping to rescue my maid of Kent here from Lord Sealand and his myrmidons?



I did my best, an't like your wor∣ship, as I was in duty bound.



And likewise that you and Patty want to make a match together?



If your worship and his reverence please to give us leave.




What say you, Patty?



William has spoke my mind, your honours!




Why then marry away, you young rogues, as fast as you can! you have my good∣will.



Metre, William, and Patty.

I humbly thank your wor∣ship! 







Metre, William, and Patty.

I humbly thank your reve∣rence! 



And I pray heaven to bless and prosper you!







And in reward for your service to day, I'll make a man of you, my boy!



I most humbly thank your noble worship's honour and goodness!



And, with your leave, sir, I will give Patty a little portion.



'Thank you kindly, sir! and may you and my dear young lady be as happy together as you deserve!



I thank you, Patty! may you,

 and every virtuous pair be no less so!







And now, Patty, we shall be as merry as grigs, or as midsummer-day is long!



That we shall, William! and I long for the wedding to be over, that, instead of plain Patty, I may hear myself call'd Mrs. Strongbow!



Now, I believe, all parties are re∣warded and satisfied, except the poor Quicksets; and they too shall partake the happiness they, by the timely alarm given us, were in great measure the means of, and never be poor, or want for any thing again, unless it be health, and that the richest of us can't bestow! And so, every thing is settled, and we are all hap∣py! are we not, old boy? shake hands, my heart of oak! what say you?



Why, sir, I say the honour of wagging a fist with you wou'd make the happy if I was ever so miserable! but I'm after think∣ing the young jontleman and his little sweet∣lips there, ay, and t'other young couple too, won't be quite easy 'till they have shook hands and been splic'd together in church, fait!



The idea transports me! my Emily! my destin'd bride! we now approach the height of human bliss! blest as we are in the paternal care of these our best of fathers, the affections of our faithful friends and ser∣vants, and the fruition of our mutual disin∣terested love! the vices of that miscreant lord, you happily was delivered from, are pu∣nished by an indelible disgrace! while the
  98virtues of this circle are rewarded with a per∣fect, and, I hope 'twill prove, a lasting felicity!






