Behind the Curtain a School-Master at study writing, with many Books before him; and a little Boy under him with his Grammar in one Hand, and Bread and Butter in the other.

Invention comes in Studying. After a Pause, he steps back and calls Furor Poeticus.


FVror, Furor. So Ho Ho.〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
Enter Furor, Panting and Blowing.




Good Master Invention  Oh  You are too quick for me. You are in as much haste as a Schollar to get a Wife, or an Heir to Sell his Land. Hey Presto  Whip and away; your Brains are as nimble as if Projections and Monopolies were alive again.



Come Furor, you know I have a deal of Work to do; since my name was Invention, I never knew such a busie time.  Let me see my Table-Book; What Business have I to dispatch?  Ho! Bodkin the Taylor, I must invent for him new Fashion'd Breeches, with a Tippet here behind to turn up, that Gentlemen may go to Stool and not Untruss. Item, I must invent a Plot, how the Papists may escape the Purgatory of the Parliament.



I have a Plot for that. Let them put their Heads through an Hempen Rosary, and say three Ave Mary's with a Wry-mouth; and I'll be their Bondslave they need not fear afterwards.



Memorandum, I must invent a Plot how the Scots may get more Money, when that they have is gone.



Pish  That's easie. Let them come for't.



Arm's for a Welch-Man.



Two Trees Rampant, and another Crossant, a Ladder As∣cendant, an Hangman Couchant, the Rope Pendant, and the Fields Sable, &c.



To help a Chamber-Maid to her Maiden-Head.



If she be Handsome, she shall have mine.



Memorandum, Parson T. M. must have a Sermon made against Christmas, Pret. 2s. 4d. Hem.  Mr. &c. would learn to Preach after the New Cut.



And that's not the short Cut, I'm sure.



Item, I must find out a Cure for one that's sick of two Livings.



Let the Incumbent sweat three Weeks for Anger; suck his Thumbs with Patience; be soundly Cup'd twenty four Hours: After that, take the Wax of an old Commission for a Divine to be a Iustice of Peace; and to it add a Quart of Abel's Wine, a Pound of Brumfield's Soap that hath scaped a Scouring, with an handful of Goring's Tobacco-roots; mix them with the Oyl of Lambs Grease, boyl them in a Corner'd-Cap from an Arch-Bishop to a Bishop, from that to Dean, from that to an Arch-Deacon, from that to a Prebend, and so to a Commissary (if you can Decoct them so low) then
  7
strain it through a Lawn-Sleeve; let it cool: Fiat Emplaistrum. Lay this to one of his Temples, and his Plurisy will leave him.



Item, I must find out, How many Religions there be in London.  Item, Whether Strafford be dead with his Head off.  Item, I must make Verses for a young Gentleman, upon a Louse that was found in his Mistress's Head, six Foot long, upon the fifth of November last.



 Avaunt Six-footed Monster, if I catch thee, My Pollux Onix quickly shall dispatch thee.




Brother Furor, where are we?  What Place is this? It should be a Conventicle, with so many Heads and Faces in it, and all together in a Barn too.
 As in presenti perfectum format in avi.



Heark  Here's a School, I think. 



Ay, and here's the old one in his Form, as sad as if he had two Livings, and had Sold one of them: He looks as Melancholy, as if some Woman had Scratch'd him by the Face, for whipping her Boy; Or if he were studying to Decline.  Hist  Hist.  Come hither little Boy.




Now Gentlemen, what's your Pleasure?



Prithee what's thy Master studying on? He's so close at it.



Why, He's making a Play, for an Exclusion.



And hath he done it?



Done it! I think he hath gnawed three Quills to the Hilts for a Line or two. The Frost hath gotten into his Nose I think; and till his Brains be thawed, we shall not have a Drop more done in it. I think, if the Clasps and Keepers of Hope, did not hold up the Breeches of Discretion, He'd do't in's Hose: And yet he hath all
  8
the Play Books in the Country to help him. Like the Cuckooe, he sucks other's Eggs: Here he steals a Word, and there he filches a Line, as we Boys do for Theams. He hath studied himself out of his Wits about it, and if it should not take, (I hope it will not) I believe it will be his last. He'll run away for shame.



And why do'st thou hope it will not take?



Why? Because I have never a Part in it.  But he shall come short of a Christmas Dinner, my Mother says. Kissing goes by Favour, she says.  Pray ye Gentlemen step in to him, while I run home to Breakfast. Exit Boy.




By your leave Sir,  God bless your Learning.




Apollo bless thy Brains, thy Brains so fickle,
And Souse them in pure Heliconian Pickle.



Marry, and Soust Hog's Head is no ill Meat, Furor.



Gentlemen you are welcome. Ye take me at a hard Task here.



Why? Prithee Pedanto what's thy Negotium?



Why Gentlemen, my Trade is to teach Wild-Geese how t• fly in the Figure of Criss-Cross-Row.  That is to say in English, I am a School-master; and here against Christmas, I am blowing my Nose for a Dialogue.



