




NOw send that all things be well at home, But troth, I half doubt it, my minde so misgives me: It could not be for nothing sure, that the Rats eat a hole in my pocket last night, and a Crow kept scraping, and kawing at me this morning: uh my fears are out, This Rogue has given me the slip, and is run away with my cloak bag. 
Enter Lean-chops with a cloak-bag under his arm.
Oh Lean-chops! art thou come 
I profess thou didst half fright me, This London is so villanous a wide place, I was afraid I had lost thee, and must have been at the charge of crying thee; Art thou come Rogue?



As you see Sir: But it seems, must thank this, for your care and my welcome: And yet I'le undertake it might have lept safe on a Dunghil, for any thing that's in't.



Away sirrah, I have often told you of your surly proud heart, sirrah, sirrah, he that scorns a little, shall never be master of a great deal; No more I say, but stand forth, and lets see whether we have lost any thing by the journey. 
He takes out a Roll, and reads.
Lazarus Suckdry! ( I God wot, a poor man as poor as Lazarus! I must be contended, ) Here I am: Zacha∣ry Lean-chops!







'Tis well, Lets on: Item, one horse, three shoes and a half, two stirrups, one saddle, one bridle, one girth, one crupper, and half a saddle-cloth.



All safe and forth-coming.



Very well, observe, one doublet with a new pair of Foreskirts, one paire of Breeches with a blew Cod∣piece Point, one pair of Stockings, 



Without feet Sir. 



No matter, no matter, 'Tis not seen, one paire of Boots, one Spur, and Spur-leather, one pair of Gloves, one Basket-hilt sword, one Girdle-hanger, one Hatt, one Band, one Coat, one jump, and one switch. 







Item, In the cloak-bag, one Sessions Suit and Cloak, one pair of blew Stockings, with orange coloured garters, and roses, Three shoes, one Comb, with five teeth, one razor, half a washing ball, and a piece of a Glass, let me see, is it fast? all safe? ha? 



As you left it: He deserves to to be damn'd after it, that would venture a hanging by stealing any of't:




Come Lean-chops, come, This place is a little too publick, We'll look over the rest when we come home.







Follow me, and have a care, Here comes a couple. 
Enter Joeose Driver.
One does not know what they may do. Have a care, I say, Have a care. 



Mr. Suckdry! Your servant, welcome to Town:







How do you? you do not look well, let me give you a glass of wine; 'twill comfort your heart.



Wine! uh uh I dare not, my Doctor tells me 'tis naught for me. I was right: He thinks I have got mony, and would make me drunk, to steal my Cloak-bag, uh uh.




Come, it shall cost you nothing.







What ailes you Sir.



Uh, uh, sick, A sit of the Chollick. I must home.



But perhas I have somewhat to say to you, may deserve your stay: You have a daughter?



A poor Girle God wot, What of her?



Call her not poor she that is vertuous, and handsome, is rich enough.



Ah Sir, But every man is not of your opinion Alas poor child! she wants a Portion: There's something else re∣quir'd, besides vertue, and handsomness. This, may bring ad∣mirers, that, sweet-hearts, but 'tis mony, mony that gets the hus∣band.



Let not that trouble you: I have a Son, and though I say



it, a handsome fellow; One, that throw him where you will, shall live in the world.



But I can give nothing with my daughter, poor wench, She's a right Philosopher; She carries all she has about her: Good Sir do not abuse our Poverty, uh, uh. 



Nor do I: Here's my hand, I'm in earnest: What say you?



I have told you already: she has no mony:



And I have answered it: Shall we bring 'em together?




Jocose, Farewel: my Sonne and I'le see you within a few daies.



But (with your leave Sir) I hope you are not in earnest.



No? But I am: And if I can but compasse it, shall think it the best daies work I ever yet did in my life: This fellow (as poor as he seems) tell him but of a good Mortgage shall lend you ten thousand pound upon't, at a dayes warning; and yet would have the world believe him to be a poor man: And such, in troth he is, since he dares not enjoy what he has: for (O my Conscience) were he now sick in earnest, he would rather die, to save charges, then be at the expence of a Glister.



A man would wonder at it, Yet such I've heard of.



But beyond him, I think few: I have had this design in my head a long time, and made him many a Mortgage, and kept touch with him at his day, meerly to beget an opinion in him that I had great dealings in the world; when yet I have found enough to do, to keep my head above water.



Do not despair Sir: But think how I may be service∣able to you, and see what I'le do, A Mountebanck's Zany, shall



not be at more command, nor half so nimble, as I'le be indu∣strious.



I do believe thee, and perhaps may have occasion to try you sooner then you think of •t:



Never too soon; nor nothing too much to serve so good and bountiful a Master:



Well then, to be serious, I have a great while gone the plain down-right honest way, but I find, that begets nothing, but laughter; And therefore, I'm ev'n resolv'd to follow the rest of the world, That is to say, feed the humours of fools, and if they will set up windmils in their heads, contribute my assistance to cut out the sailes; When saw you Sir Gudgeon Credulous?



Very lately; But so big with contemplation, there was no coming near him, 'Tis true, he cry'd, How does your Master? Remember me to him, Gave me the State Nod, and Exit.



'Tis such a Political Hocus! such a Frippery of Shreds, and parings, that I can liken him to nothing better, then a Tay∣lors Cushion; no two pieces of the same colour: To day this, to morrow, that, the next, a third thing, But what that is, no man knows; 'tis past all mens understanding, and his own too; for (to speak truth) he never had more, then a man might well trusse up in an Egge-shell, and room to spare: in a word, I may say of him (as 'tis said of Nature, concerning Monsters) He was produc'd, not intended.



Nor have you mistook your Character I have known him A Mathematician, a Pol, a Star-gazer, a Quack, a Chaldean, a Schoolman, a Philosopher, an Asse, a broken Grammarian, and most abominable Poet, and yet fick of all, but the Asse: and now at last (if I mistake him not) a most confident, ignorant Projectour.



And that, he may thank me for, I saw he was past the remedy of a Mortar, and if I should have pretended to a miracle, to have reduc'd him, 'twould have been hardly believ'd; And therefore I ev'n let him alone, and as I saw occasion, work't him to my own purpose: me thinks you might be useful to me in't.



And will: I am your servant, command it;



Here dwells hard by, one Mistris Gods-good, a rich Widow, to whom I have made some long pretences; nor had they been (as I am told) altogether succesless, if this Cockscombs Estate had not hung in my light: she believes him what he is, an Asse, but yet a golden Asse, and cry's, that's enough to cover his other faults: Now could I flea him of that fine skin, I need not trouble my self to make him ridiculous, and consequently, do mine own work.



And truly he's in a fair way to't. And now give me leave to tell you, you could have thought of nothing wherein I could have serv'd you better.



I know thou hast been bred a Schollar, and thy invention not ill: But canst thou Cant?



How think you Sir, Suppose I should tell him I had studied the Emporeuticks, Lemnicks, Camnicks, and Plegnicks, could demonstrate the Minimum quod sit, of Homocrecious, and Heterocrasious; and stripping Materia Prima to her smock, dis∣cover the most private recesses, and occult qualities, of Ignica∣drillica, Metallorgonica, Euricatactica, and Hydropanta pressoria, Do you believe (I say) he would be able to understand more of it, than I do my self, which is just nothing? If you call this Cant∣ing, let me alone with him.



Excellent! Then to subdivide 'um into as undemon∣strable (yet seemingly probable) Projects, We shall make such sport!




And get good mony I warrant you Sir, But see! my young Master, yet me thinks not so merry at heart as we are.



Now Nando! What news with you: Thou art as spruce, as if thou hadst been with thy young Widow, yet look'st as heavy, as she had turn'd thee to lead: How goes it?



Why faith Sir, I just came from her.



And what? How did she receive thee?



So, so, The City way, But at last I had laught her into a pretty good humour, 'till (as the Devil would have it) in dropt her Uncle, and quite dampt all, with a noise of Joyn∣tures, and I know not what, A disease, I think I shall be last trou∣bled with: To be short, she did in effect tell me, she was handsome, and would never marry, but to better her Fortune.



Let her go, let her go; If thou wilt not be wanting to thy self, I le put thee upon a better, and one that shall never cheat thee by pretending to be richer then she is; for in a word, she is not worth one groat.



What do you mean Sir?



A good wife, and (for ought I ever heard) may make a vertuous wife.



No ready mony Sir? me thinks, half one half 'tother, were somewhat like:



Let not that trouble you: Her Father is rich, very rich, and has no other child to leave his Estate to, and shall ra∣ther put her off, to an ordinary Fortune, with nothing, then give an hundred pound, to marry her to the best Estate in London.



And who may this be good Sir?







I could like it well: But how is it to be done?



Not, with that tossing Feather, Lewd Peruwig, Lac'd Band, Flanting Linnen, Embroyder'd Belt, wide Slops, Shop of Ribbons, and vile Porte-canons.



Why Sir, you have seen them all before:



Nor am I angry with thee, for doing as other people do, no, I had rather have thee comport thy self to every mans hu∣mour: With old men, severe; with young, jocund; with the humoursome, morose; with women, galliard; with thy compa∣nions, pleasant; and with a niggardly Rascal, more sordid than himself; at least, appear so; And so would I have thee treat this fellow.



If that were all, I could easily follow your directions.



And you may not repent it: Go, be rul'd by me; Strip all this trumpery, 'tis enough to fright him: should he see thee now, he'd swear the feathers were more worth than the Bird: Go I say, and get me some little odde hat, but quite out of fashion; a diminutive Band, no cuffs, haire shorter than your eye-brows, at most, not beyond your ears, close breeches, greazy Gloves, Gresham Shoes, Leather Shoe-tyes, and for your Cloak, no matter if it be of another Parish, he'll like it the better.



My acquaintance would laugh at me.



Get thou the mony, and laugh at them boy: Then for your discourse, get me together all the base, ill, sordid tricks of a covetous wretch, and deliver them as morals; wonder at the ignorance of the age that knows not those honest thrifty Rules, or if it do, its shame in not practising them.



Well Sir, I see you are in earnest, and for once I'le try what I can do: But I doubt 



Do and ne're doubt it: about it straight, while 'tis hot, and leave the rest to me.



You have commanded, and I shall not dispute: But if I bring it to passe, I may well swear, miracles are not ceast.




Come let's be gone, thou knowest the plague's in the City, and if I stay longer, 'tis odds but I may be infected.





I hope Sir, you do not fear Sir Gudgeon Credulous?



O no, he's a good preservative against it.



I told you he was as big as he could hold, Do you not observe Sir, how hard he wrings his brows, to the manifest ha∣zard of disblocking his Peruwig? Will you not speak to him?



Presently, let's view him a little.




It must take without doubt, and the profit be infi∣nite, No man knows what: But for the manner of doing



it: This way? No It may be certain, but 'tis too far about the bush. That way? No: for though it be the shorter cut, we may yet be too hasty in the experiment. Tother way? Neither, the charge will be too vast: Hang charge, we shall quickly fetch't up agen, All I fear is, The thing will be so considerable, it may chance to be begg'd from us; and against that, there's no other fence, but to swear 'tis worth nothing That was well thought on. Then after this, comes my Widow I shall be but too rich one Ju∣piter! there could be no lesse then then ten Jupiters, Lords of my Nativity.



Sir Gu. Credulous! save you! I see theres hopes of the business you mind it so well. Have you made any experiment?




Yes. But I do not find it altogether answer ex∣pectation: However, 'tis but early daies yet.



Pray be very curious in it, and Driver (to whom I have committed the management of my interest) shall assist you: I must tell you, he's no ordinary Artist.




Better and better then he has seen it?



Seen it Sir! If I should tell your Worship all I have seen, I should despair of the work, 'twould so put you out of pa∣tience.




Good Driver! and how? and when?



Did not I tell you, you would not have patience? Good sir let things do themselves: one minutes over-hast, is enough to put us a twelvemonth back: for it fares here as with the Philosophers Stone, the least error in the work, and we must begin all anew.




Honest Mr. Driver I will be rul'd. 




'Tis he I have his name here fast in my Book in good black and white. Let me see E, F, G, H, J, J, J Jo, Jo, Jo Jocose Here 'tis Jocose pag. 150. Mr. Jocose for himself and



Wife 108 l. 7 s. 9 d. ob. A good round sum, would I had it, I could be content to bate him the single mony.



But hark you Driver Thou seest this Pagan Cousin of mine, and know'st his business; prythee put him off with some whim or other.



I warrant you sir, leave him to me.



Cousin! your servant I was just sending my man to speak with you, but he knows the business, and can tell't you, as well as my self. Come Sir Gudgeon I le wait on you.





Your servant sir I thank you.



Now Mr. Gotam, you may see what 'tis to have a Friend at Court You thought, I warrant, my Master had forgotten you.



Why, truly sir, this mony has been due a pretty while; long before his Wife died, I am certain.



No more of that. Suppose he put you on a businesse shall make you for ever, And be worth ye: thou hast hardly faith enough to believe, what!



Aa! good Mr. Driver. As how I pray?



Why thus, my Master, you know, has great friends, and therefore doubts not, but by their assistance to procure a Pa∣tent of Priviledge, to engross a business solely to himself. I must confess it will scarce amount to more then a Coppy-hold Project. 



What do you mean by that?



That is to say, it will not exceed Ten Thousand pound a year, and I can assure you, if ever there were an ingenious Invention, 'tis this, and in this my Master intends to take you in with him, and let you go what share you please. You shall do no worse then himself.



Ah sir, my Cousin is an honest Gentleman, and I have had long experience of his love: How do ye call it?



'Tis an Ignicke, Hydre•icke, and Hydroterricke invention, consisting of Heat without Fire or Smoke: and certainly, Nature and Art, melted down into the same body, could not produce



such another Diacat h•licon, that shall equally serve to all purposes; Roast, Bake, Boile, Wash, Brew, dry Mault, Hops, Wheat, Oats, and generally every thing else (as I told you before) without the help of Fire or Smoak: Now sir, you know the business, and may consider of it.



Consider! I apprehend it already, and find it too great to be dally'd with: Why it will destroy all the Wood∣mongers upon the River, and reduce them to their first Dung∣boats agen. How have you done touching the charge?



Truly you have hit upon one of the main points, and part of the reason why my Master made you privy to it; for as on one hand, we must take in some Sharers to lessen the charge, so on t'other, it behoves us to consider how many we may admit, for fear of diminishing the profits.



Most true we'll carry't on between our selves: It will fall to my turn to be Church-warden this next year, and then I shall have the Custody of the Parish Stock, if that will serve you, command it, we shall be able (I hope) to fetch it up a∣gain before my time be out.



By much: But the business is now on foot, and must not stand still for fear of spoyling; and therefore we must be pro∣vided of present money; because, you know, some fees must be scatter'd among Servants and Clerks, and some other will go to making of Tryals, things will not come without charge.



You say right, and now I think on't, I may be able to bring in my Neighbour Squeeze, the Exchange Broker, and by his means old Mr. Suckdry, and Mrs. Godsgood; theres mony enough at an hours warning, if one could tell how to get it.



Pray about it, and I'le see you tomorrow; if you go forth leave word where I may find you. Ferewell, I must follow my Master, the Knight and he are gone to see a proof of what I told you. Exit Dri.




Farewell, but Mum. Certain I rize with the right end upward to day, I have had such good luck; I shall be an Alderman I see, in spight of all three-half penny Stars: I think a Brass-jack-line would hang as well o'my shoulders as on ano∣ther



mans; certain it must. But see my Wife. 
Enter Mistriss Gotam.

This Hyterridinctido will be news to her, y'faith will it. Sweet heart! well met.



I had as liefe ha'found you at home; the main chance goes well forward in the mean time, and you never in your Shop: God held! a Beggar I found thee, and a Beg∣gar thoult leave me.



Nay Wife, I have good news for thee, I have been with my Cousin.



And has he paid you the mony? I am sure't has been due ever since my first Husbands time.



'Tis sure enough, not too hasty Wife, we are beholding to him, you know he took notice of me at Court, shew'd you the Privy Lodgings, got you a place at the Play, gave you a Bot∣tle of the Kings Wine, and a Court Tart, and sends us Venison twice in a season Wife. 



Better he had sent his mony, and I could have got t'other my self; marry gipp, this is one of your old excuses; you think you have got a Wife can maintain you, and now for∣sooth you must walk like a Gentleman: Sirrah, sirrah, look out and mind your business, or I'le make you look out.



Good faith I do.



Yes among your Gills too much: what was that you said to our maid 'tother night in the Kitchin, when you thought I was a bed? I heard you, you mought have come up a pair of stairs higher if you had pleas'd; I do'nt wonder now she'as lost her stomach.



This is nothing but thy jealous head.



Jealous! Come up here! You can be merry enough abroad, when you are amongst your flirts, but at home you're as sad and lumpish as a Gibb'd Cat; I can tell you the reason, Thou art sad because thou canst not bury me: I half doubt the Rats-bane you bought 'tother day was not alto∣gether



for the Rats: Do you understand that, Gentle∣man?



Not I in troth.







Prethee have done, I told thee I had been with my Cousin, and have good news for thee.



As what I warrant?



What! Such as shall make thee a Lady within this Twelvemonth: My Cousin and I are ingag'd in a business cannot be less worth then Fifteen Thousand Pound a Year ho∣nestly: Now Wife! where's your Loving Husband?



Whatever I say in my passion, thou art 'Tis but only to make the better. But hark ye my dear, sha'nt we not keep a Coach then?



A Coach! Yes, and Eight Horses, and our Coun∣try House new built. Come follow me, and I'le tell thee the rest within, which I would have thee communicate to your friend Mrs. Godsgood, and bring her in for a share, while I do the same to my Neighbour Squeeze the Exchange Broker: Come 



Any thing good Husband, I'le be thy best Wife.












VVEll o'my Conscience there was never so un∣luckey a fellow as my self; Service do you call it? Certainly, if Damnation be only Poena Sensus, that were a fitter name for it: Here I live with a Master that has Wealth enough; But so fearful, sad, pensive, suspicious a fel∣low, that he disquiets both himself, and every one else. Art (I have heard say) has but Seven Liberal Sciences, but he has a Thousand Illiberal. There lives not a more base, nigarly, unsatiable Pinch penny, nor a more gaping, griping, Polling, ex∣torting, devouring Cormorant: A spunge sucks not up fa∣ster, and yet a Pumice gives back easier. The sign is always with him in the Clutches; and a Kites Pouncke truss not more readily. He shall watch you a young Heir, as diligently, as a •aven a dying Horse, and yet swallow him with more tears then a Crocodile. He never sleeps but he Seals up the Nose of his Bellows, least they loose breath, and has almost broke his Brains, to find the like device for his Chimney, and his Throat A Gamester has not studyed the advantage of Dice half so much, as he, a sordid Parcimony, which yet he calls Thrift; And will tell you to a Crum, how much difference there is in point of loss, between a hundred dozen of bread broken with the hand, and cut with a knife: The Devil's in him, and I am as weary of him, as of our last Journey, which both of us perform'd on the



same horse. As thus, In the morning (about two hours before him) out gets Peel-Garlick, he joggs after, overtakes me, rides through the next Town, and a little beyond it, leaves Palfry a grazing for me, and marches on himself; in like manner, I get up, overtake him, ride on, and leave him on this side the next Town, and so order our business, that he rides out in the morning, and into the Inn at night, and through every Town by the way. Nor need we fear any mans stealing him: Smithfield at the end of a long Vacation cann't shew such another Wall-ey'd, Crest-falne, Saddle-back't, Flat-rib d, Gut-founder'd, Shoulder-pitcht, Spur∣gall'd, Hip-shotten, Greese-moulten jade; besides Splint, Spa∣vin, Glanders, Farce, String-halt, Sprains, Scratches, Malander, and Wind-galls innumerable. Like the fools Hobby-horse; were it not for the name of a horse, a man had as lief go a foot: and thus we jogg on in grief together. But hold, I hear him, somewhat's amiss.





Undone, undone, whither should I run? whither should I not run? Stop there, whom? what? where? I know not Lean-chops!



Sir, what ayles you?



Oh A lost undone man: what a deal of misery a day brings forth? I have lost my mony, and what should I live longer: hunger and poverty will be my end.



How much have you lost Sir?



I believe thou knowst as well as I, Ah a whole half piece, Gon, gon, gon; and I undone. I believe thou hast found it; open your coat, Lets see your right hand, your left hand, both hands, your third hand, vh, no hopes, undone undone.











Why see now, may not you be asham'd to use me



thus, and for nothing too?



Asham'd! what should a poor man do with shame? Get in, get in. 



Tis past three of the Clock, and I have eat nothing to¦day.



This Rogues mind is nothing but his Gut; A good thrifty servant, that minded his Masters profit, would have gone to the Cooks, and cheapen'd every joynt, tasted all, but bought none, and made a good meal on't. One would think sir∣rah, you might not be asham'd to do what your Master has done before you. Get in, I say, and look to the house.



There's no fear that any one will carry't away, and for any thing in't, there's nothing but Cob-webs.



What's that he mutters? No marvel sirrah, if for your sake I am not made an Alderman! I will have the Cob-webs preserv'd, they are good for a cut finger. Get in I say How the slave stirs? If I come to ye, I le mend your Snails pace.



One were better be hang'd then endure this life.



How he mumbles the Devils Pater Noster? Sirrah get in, and stir one foot till I call ye, and thou hast as good have broke thy neck. So, He's gone.  Exit. Lean. And I'le go visit my gold: I am affraid I have spoken in my sleep, or dropt some word or other that may discover it; or that this Rogue has eyes in his Poll, and observ'd where I buried it, but if he has, I'le so dig 'um out: I have reason e∣nough to suspect it men speak more heartily to me then they were wont; are more free in their salutes; stop, and talk with me; shake me by the hand, ask me how I do, whither I am going, what's my business, if they may serve me, and the like, nay, Mr. Jocose t'other day would have giv'n me Wine, and pre∣fer'd his Son should marry my Daughter, without a Portion too! Ah, Ha, I do not like when rich men speak kindly to a poor man; they offer bread with one hand, but carry a stone in t'o∣ther. But I loose time, my gold, my gold: this must be the place: All's safe, and I'm alive agen: All hail! 










I am going abroad Lean-chops, shut the door after me, bolt it, and bar it, and see you let no one in, in my absence Put out the fire (if there be any) for fear some body seeing the smoak may come to borrow some. If any one come for wa∣ter, say the Pipe's cut off, or to borrow a Pot, Knife, Pestle and Morter, or the like, say they were stole last night. But hark ye, I charge ye not to open the door to give them an an∣swer, but whisper't through the key-hole: For I tell you agen, I will have no body come into my house while I'm abroad; No, no living soul: Nay though good Fortune her self knockt at door, don't let her in.



Shee'l have care enough of that her self, she has been often near us (but I think there is a Cross upon the door) she ne're came in yet.



Sirrah, sirrah hold your peace and do as I bid you; 'T would better become you to know more, and speak less: 





How no! Who was't?



Mr. Squeeze, your Exchange Broker he would sain speak with you.



O let him in by all means, he is a good man, and ne∣ver comes empty handed, make haste before he be gone sirrah 

This Rogue will never learn wit, one would have thought he had liv'd long enough with me to have been able to distinguish persons, I must ev'n discard him, 'Twill save char∣ges. 








O they are weleome, they are welcome, and chiefly your self: It came in good time, for I profess, I had hardly a groat in the house.















Let him alone a while, let him handle the monie, He means, he has never a Groat he would spare by his good will.




Tis all right and vvell, only here's a Parliament Six∣pence, pray change it.



How was I mistaken? There sir.



Hark you Neighbour, what's their business?



Such as you never dealt in before, the most inge∣nuou'st Invention was ever yet found out. I'le undertake af∣ter the first Year you may make Cent. per Cent. of your monie e∣very three months, besides a certain Banke ready upon all oc∣casions.



Say you so good Mr. Squeeze? As how? As how?



They'll tell you that themselves; You know Mr. Gotam? he has been alwaies held a sober man.



Indeed has he, and vvell to pass: He is of the Li∣vory, and in a short time will be Master of his Company; He marry'd the Widovv Minee; I knew her first Husband, he vvas a thriving man.



Marry was he. But the business is of so great a con∣cernment, that 'tis not one or two ordinary mens purses are able to carry it on. The other is Sir Gudgeon Credulous, a vvor∣thy, vvise Knight, and in his own Country of the Peace, and Quorum.



He seems no other.



There is a Gentlewoman too, one Mistriss Gods-good.



O, I have heard of her, A rich Widovv.



That she is o'my knowledg; I deal for her, All



persons concern'd, but the main Wheele of the vvork is Mr. Jocose. Faith sir, I'd have you come in too; As poor a man as I am, I am resolv'd to go in Five hundred pounds.



But what shall you come out Neighbour? What? &c.



No man knows what! You had best speak to 'um.



How much would they have from me?



That shall be as you please, whither any thing or no∣thing: only at present they would borrow of you Tvvo Thousand pound.



Two thousand pound! Do you know vvhat you say?



Yes, 2000 lib. You are too quick for me, I meant upon good security.



O that alters the case. Life is frail, man mortal, but good Security may do much; What is the Security? Citizens, or Country Gentlemen? You know my vvay, I must have a Judgment at least.



Pray talk with 'em your self.



You're welcome Mistriss, Sir Gudgeon Credulous, I understand, And you Mr. Gotam, Your businesse vvith me?



The same sir. I thought Mr. Squeeze had inform'd you?



If he has not, we shall.



Why truly he has given me a small touch of't.



Then thus Sir, We are all persons jointly concern'd in the same business; and we look upon the whole charge (what is past and to come) may amount to 9000 li. somewhat under a years profits: Of this I am out already 4000 li. The Wi∣dow Gods-good advances 1500 li. more; Mr. Gotam 1000 li. Mr. Squeeze 500 li. And to make up the sum, we vvould bor∣row of you 2000 li. upon good Security. 



Alas sir! 2000 li. I am a poor man: 2000 li. and I are not so near of kin, but we may marry to morrow. But if







Would the Court of Aldermens were as good: Se∣curitie!




Sir there's a Gentleman at door enquires for you.



For me? It may be Mr. Jocose, Pray desire him to come in, I am glad he found me out, Now you'l be able to see the very guts of the business.



What share goes he?



Alas Sir, None; 'Tis enough for him that the in∣vention was, and the Patent will be his: There's reason in all things: 
Enter Driver.
Oh Mr. Driver! Where's your Master?







He intended to have been with you himself, but being unluckily takenill of the Gout, he sent me to your house, where I heard of your being here. 



A good rich disease I warrant I shall ne're be trou∣bled with't.



All that he bad me signifie to you was, That the work went well on, and only wanted more workmen, and more materials.



We are about it now, and have provided very well for the time. And now you are come, pray save me a labour, and let this Gentleman understand the business.



Which Sir? That of the Plegnick Screw, The Hand∣quern, or the Horse-Wind-Water-Mill?







Have you more then one?







is now in operation I think you call'd it, The Metallorgan icum Ignicadrillicum.



You mean that of a constant heat, without fire or smoak.



The same, The same.



How is't possible? which way?



Tell you that, and tell you all; Every Art has it's Occult quality, which once demonstrated, would cease to be a secret, and some other might chance to get between us and home: However, since here are none but friends, and all well∣willers, I will give ye some small hints of't, which to be short, is singly effected by a new kind of motion (for you know, motion is the cause of heat,) And this meeting with matter ready dispos'd, shall either work naturally by it self, or in cases extraordinary, by an Antiperistasis: and be, not only Equi-sufficent, Equi∣cheap, Equi-excellent, as all minor Projects pretend to, but more cheap, more sufficient, and super-excellent, which when we are better acquainted, I will easily demonstrate.



I'll promise you, if this be able to be made good, 'twill save abundance of Wood and Coales.







What think you of this Sir?



O'my Word no contemptible buisness. I hear he has more on foot; and why may n't we get one to our selves?



Perhaps you may: And the lending this mony may be a good introduction to t'other.



Don't you think they would take half mony, and half Jewels?



Perhaps they might, but then you must enlarge the su•, or they may want mony to carry on the work.



You say right: What's their Security?



O'my Conscience if you would but stand upon't, they'd go near to Mortgage to you, a third or a fourth part of the clear Profits.



Softly, Don't talk of a Fourth, I'll make 'um be∣lieve I will have a moiety; though rather then fail, I could be contented with less.







Why truly to tell you truth, we have made very few proofs of the rest: But if you will call at my Mastres's, I'll give you that account of 'em may be worth your trouble: There will be enough for you all.



But hark ye Mr. Driver, Don't you bob me off, with a third rate Project now? 



Sir Gudgeon! that you should think so!











And all the reason in the World; You hear Gentlemen what he sayes.




I would have him secur'd, But I would not though leave a twentie shilling piece in pawn for a groat.



Alas Sir, 'Tis none of my mony, 'tis my Friends, and I'le account truly between you both: If you intend honestly you cannot give too great Securitie.



You may do it, I'le undertake my Master shall not op∣pose it.



Then get ready the Writings; I hope we shall have a good account in a short time.



As soon as you please; I'll about it straight; We may be all made and send us but good luck.








Farewel good Gentlemen; But stay Mr. Driver, pray stay, let me speak with you, methought you were saying your Master had a great many other Projects; Surely, surely, he must be a very rich man.



Why faith Sir, he is well enough, tho' he be at a great deal of charge; for now and then an Engine breaks, and an ex∣periment fails; should all take right, he would be too rich, but that's almost impossible; he that will get, must now and then ven∣ture to losse. This is our comfort, the first good hit, pays for all miscarriages.



That's well, But pray tell me, What children has your Master? 



One Son Sir, and that's all: I have often ask'd him why he toiles himself to leave so great an estate, when the tenth part of what he has alreadie would serve my Young Master, and to spare.



No ill sign, I like him the better, But dost think he was in earnest when he propos'd a match between his son, and my daughter?



Yes trulie, if he said it, you may believe him; But alas! What should my young Master do with all that Wealth you two are like to leave him?



Keep it, keep it, and breed more: Prythee tell me, dost think thy Master would settle a good swinging Project upon him in possession?



Yes trulie, I believe he may.



Then hark you, Pick me out a good round one, and it may not be the worse for thee; 'Tis the first part of Faul∣conrie



to hold fast, and if thy young Master has that good quali∣tie, I dare trust him for the rest, or he may quickly learn it. 



I shall be glad with all my heart to be an instrument, in the business; And now upon second thoughts, I think your daughter may make an excellent wife for him.



Your reason good Mr. Driver, Your reason?



Because I have so often heard him protest against your great matches, (as he calls 'em) and compares 'em to an ill pud∣ding, all blood, and no fat.



I'le be sworn, a hopeful young man; But tell me (Prethee be true to me) what kind of wife does he most affect, if he might have his choice?



What? Ev'n a good honest mans daughter that shall bring him no charge, nor put him in fear of being eat out by her kindred One that shall never send her Husband on a How d'ye, or keep more Coaches in Town, then he has plows going in the Countrie One that shall not spend his Michaelmas Rents, in Midsomer Moon, and cost him more in sailes, and rig∣ging, then the Hull's worth.



'Tis a hundred pitties, but thou were Supervisor Gene∣ral of the Female sex.



Faith Sir, I card not much if I were, I should be the bet∣ter able to serve my friends But this is not all.



Prythee on I like it well.



One that is not haunted with Perfumers, Lacemen, Mil∣leners, Silkmen, Jewellers, Mercers, Exchange-men, Semsters, and Hey day! And can be contented with her husbands Tailor. One that understands not the way of smooth chinn'd pages, and can find both Lacquies, and women, in a single Chamber∣maid One that was never read beyond Aqua fortis, and tin∣ning glass, and is as much gravelled at Spanish Paper, and Talcke as a Countrie Vicar, at an Hebrew Pedigree: One that has no Aunts, nor she Cosins to visit, and goes not above thrice a week to the Drawers for new patterns One (to be short) that is all her self, and thinks it no scorn, to be her own Semstress, and Tirewoman.











Enter Jocose, Ferdinand, in a Precisian habit, and Driver.



I This is something! I protest I should hardly have known thee my self! But one thing I do not like this hat, 'tis so high Crown'd, he'll swear 'tis meere waste, and three Ounces of stuffe might have been well sav'd.



That may be quickly mended, either by getting another, or circumcising this; it lies under the band, and will ne're be seen, or if it should, he'll like it the better.



Ne're doubt it Sir. It must take for I have read him such a Lecture of my young Masters frugalitie, that he is out of all patience till he see him, and if you can but out-cant him now, the work's done.



That must be left to chance, And yet 'tis not impos∣sible, but I may make my partie good with him: Have I liv'd in Genoa (where the Jews come laughing in, and go crying



out, as having met with greater Jews then themselves,) and do you think I shall not be able to deal with him? I war∣rant ye:



Well said Nando, A good confidence is half the thing.



But when must this robbery be?



I expect him here instantly, though not purposely about this business; for my design was to have it come on, as it were by the By, and of it self.



What other business has he?



O Sir! To see how the main work goes forward; Be∣sides, he expects you should settle a good lusty Project upon my young Master; and I am wide of the mark, if he is not hammer∣ing at another for himself. And to tell you truth, so they are all,



Now send that thou hast not engag'd us further, then we shall be able to get off fairly.



Pray Sir trust me Have I desired you to appear in't? Or been wanting to't in any thing my self?



Well, I referre it to thee; But must you have all the sport? were't not possible that I might at least laugh in∣wardly.



I was just making it my request to you, that you would so dispose your self, as to overhear the discourse, and perhaps it may not be unworth your while for the men having con∣sider'd that two heads are better than one, have communica∣ted it to their wives, and ask'd their Advise in the point, and they are so a Gogg upon't, that they must have their Projects too, and amongst them, you'l find your Widow, I never saw things hit more luckilie, 'tis impossible but you must car∣ry her,



Do you expect 'um here?




That knock, may chance to be their's.



Take the occasion of leaving 'em alone, for perhaps



they may be more free amongst themselves then if either of us were present.




Sir here are some Gentlewomen that enquire for your self, or Mr. Driver.



It must be them.




Do you tell 'em I am a little busie, but you'le go and ac∣quaint me with it; You shall find me in that Window.





So, And now for the good Women, But what to say to 'em, tell he that can, he must be better read in these books then I am. 




Lady's! Your servant, And had you not com∣manded the contrary, I had sav'd you this trouble by waiting on you my self.



No Sir, 'tis our own business, and we thought least notice might be taken of it, by discoursing it here.



Yes indeed, 'twas all our opinions: Only I must confess the Widow here would have preferr'd a little state, before convenience.



But since I was over-rul'd; Pray Sir, Where's your Master.



I ll let him know you are here, and he'll wait on you presentlie.



I think this Gentleman would be able to do our busi∣ness as well.



Yes truly, He looks like a likely man.



However if Mr. Jocose were present too, 'twere no whit the worse.



Be pleas'd to repose your selves a while, and it will not be long 'ere my Master wait on you.







Come Neighbours, I think it were not amiss if we agreed among our selves what we would have, before they come.



Now truly and indeed, 'twas well mov'd.



I like it well, pray begin.



Trust me not I, but I'll do as good, I'll put in now and then; Pray Mrs. Godsgood.



However you mistook me, I mean it so; pray Ma∣dam, No pray forsooth will you?



Not I indeed, how say you? The Widow. 



The Widow, the Widow. 



Then in obedience to your Commands, And may this present meeting be happy and prosperous, to our selves and the whole Commonwealth of Women; and that we pro∣pose those things that may be for the Common good and dignity of the Sex: You cannot be ignorant how much your hus∣bands have incroacht upon you, or (to speak truth) how much we have all lost, by letting the men ingross all business to them∣selves, without so much as asking our advice, as if we (forsooth) were no part of them, and made to no other end, but to sit at home and prick our fingers.



I indeed, a publick grievance.



The more's the pitty.



Pray Sisters, Has not every pittiful Corporation it's Counsel, the meanest Parish it's Vestry, and our very Fumb∣lers their Common Hall? And shall women only loose their pri∣viledge? Shall we alone do nothing?



Had we no more wit then to be rul'd by our hus∣bands, we shou'd n't, but for all that we (now and then) do our parts, and sometimes too, more then comes to our shares.



Thank themselves, that wo'nt be quiet when 'tis well.



Pray no interruptions in the middle of a speech: There will be time enough for all. Nor would I set up a new thing, only revive an antient and laudable (tho' somewhat



antiquated) Custome. I have heard of an old Emperor, somewhere or other, that ordain'd, That as he had his Counsel of men, so his wife, should have hers, of women, which should be in∣dependent, and without appeal to 'tother. 



Marry away with him, An old man! What should we do with him? And I have heard of a place too, where they hung up the men, after they come to threescore, as things past their labour, and consequently useless. 







No more of that good Sister, for if I mistake not the story, they were more severe upon us, and burnt us for Witches at Forty. 



Hey day! Pray Sisters.







With all my heart; No offence I hope.



None on my part I assure you.



More still! This Councel, as I told you, (whether in jest or earnest it matters not) They call'd the Shee Senate, and this is that which our present interest should prick us for∣ward to restore. Nor let it be any rubb in the way, that Women are forbid to speak in Publique, that being meant of a Congregation of men, and I speak only of an Assembly of Wo∣men, for otherwise, if we were ever to hold our tongues, to what use were they given us? Those tongues, I say, that if they might, would speak sense as well as their own; and upon a good occasion, could be as loud Think you (I warrant) they were given us to no other end, but to lick our teeth, and cheapen Eggs? I think not, and why should vve not use 'em then? No doubt but vve may, and perhaps too, to as much purpose as the men; for could vve look into their Councels, 'tis ten to one but vve should find many things our selves vvould have been asham'd of. How common is it with them to be five dayes in vvording the Question, and as many more e're they can put it right, and perhaps at last, make no∣thing of it: Whereas we, are plain down right, we think what we please, and speak what we think. How does this Con∣sultation



thwart that, a third both, a fourth all, as if they met only to justifie the Proverb, So many men, so many mindes; Whereas we, if the reines were in our hands, if we did not ma∣nage them better, I am sure it could not be worse.



Well open'd, pray proceed.



I think this enough for Introduction; The next thing I would have consider'd is, of what persons this Coun∣cell should consist.



Of whom but women?



All that will, what else?



That would be rather a Tumult than a Coun∣cell.



And to select a few, and exclude the rest, would be What d'ye call it? The men have a hard word for't Oli Oli Oligar, fie upon't, I can't hit it, Oile and Garlick I think they call't, 'tis either that, or somewhat neer it; A very mark of tyrannie.



Pray no more interruptions, If you do not like it referre it to another time; And first, (if I might advise) I would have no maids of this councel.



No maids! Why I pray? were you never one your self, or was it so long since, you have forgot it?



Pray give me leave, I say no maids, because we may happen to speak that among our selves, that may not be fit for them to hear.



Goodly, goodly, As if we could not tell how the Market went, tho'we neither bought nor sold in't.



Well said little Gentlewoman, stand up for your Priviledge.



I warrant they are not so ill bred, but they know what's, what, as well as our selves; How say you Mrs. Nancy, do not you know a pudding, from a Cart Wheel?



I think I do!



Did not I tell you so?



But how will you know, which are Maids, and which not; Do not all go for Maids till they are mar∣ried?



And are not some afterwards? What think you of those that have overgrown old fellows to their husbands? may not they be call'd Maids, though perhaps much against their will?



However for honours sake we'll think 'em other∣wise: But my meaning was, that none be received, but such as are, or have been marri'd.



Well distinguisht, And yet perhaps it might be no hurt, if they sat behind the hangings, though they gave no voice; 'twould make •em the abler against they came to't themselves.



For that, as you please; But pray no more interruptions: The next, I would have none admitted that have been shod round: And amongst them I would place such as are past fifty, who like old Garisons are fit for nothing but to be Lighted, and the rather too, to make roome for others.



And good reason, pray on:



Then I would have none admitted, that had not first purg'd her self by her corporal Oath, that she had never made her Husband a Cuckold: Unless she be very ugly, and that in such cases it be taken for granted, that she has not.







This Widow I see would make a very Tyrant.



Confess and be hang'd, I am for none of't,



Nor I neither; Here's a fetch with all my heart. 



At least you may qualifie it by Proviso, That if it be done to oblige a Gentleman, she may notwithstand∣ing, &c.



That alters the case a little; But I am clearly for throwing out both.



And so am I, At least for laying the debate aside till a full house.



What you please, I do but offer Next, That if any discover the secrets of the house abroad, That such



Person or Persons, have their tongues committed, to a three daies silence, without Bail or Mainprise.







A tyrannie never heard of before!



Pray have patience, Next, that none be permit∣ted to speak irreverentlie of their Husbands, in as much, as be the men what they will, the Wifes honour, depends upon theirs, to traduce them, were, but in effect, to disgrace our selves.



Oh! Worse and worse.








How hard your Widow's beset, I think 'twere not amiss if you reliev'd her.



And so I will, She's better qualifi'd then I expected, Follow me. 



Not speak irreventlie as you call it! Do you think it reasonable, that my sham-leg'd Monsieur should say what he please of me, and I, nothing? Or fit (I woo's that he be ever rambling abroad, When (though I say it my self) I am as able a Woman, for the matter of the point of that, as any Wo∣man in the two next Parishes; And I must sit still and blow my nailes forsooth?



Or that mine should be perpetuallie abusing and striking me, I am sure he has so pomell'd me about the Head, that I am hardly able, to bear a cup of drink, as they say: For look you, d'ye see, when I am troubled, I go to the saluta∣tion, with two or three neighbours, or so, and call for our Gills of sack a piece, (alas you know, it is not much) and then we sit and chat over it, and look yed'ye see, I am now and then troubled with a Rheume in my side, and go lame a little, and then when I come home, my Rogue saies I am drunk, and stink of Aquavitae; when alas, 'tis well known, 'tis meer grief, meer grief makes me in that condition; Aa you don't know this husband of mine he were a very devil, but that he wears his horns, And is this to be born think you.







No by my troth is it not. Come, come, serve him as I did mines; He stroke me t'other day; and I set out my throat as loud as I could, that he had murdered me for what I had; and as the neighbours came in, I made 'em believe I was in a sowne, and held him so long in suspence, that from that day forward; I got the staff into mine own hand; Ah my poor first husband, he was a man of a thousand, I could have made him believe the Cow was made of Wood, But how d'ye think I brought him to't; Even by complaining first, and pretending he did this and that in his drink, which he (good man) never thought of; and if ever he deny'd it, 'twas but bringing my maid to witness, and I was sure to be ask'd pardon.



I here were a woman for the Chaire! 



Withal my heart. 



Then for the Quorum, if two Women and a Goose make a Market, I see no reason, why three, may not make a Council, at least to determine, tho' not to hear?



I agree with you; And truly I think so we should all; But for this Widow, She's insufferable! Come neigh∣bour Squeeze, I see we must be well advis'd, whom we trust the Chaire with, She may in time betray our liberties.




Madam, Your servant, me thought I heard you some∣what hot, could n't you agree?



No indeed Sir, Nor is it likely.



Truly I think 'twere not amiss if we intreated this Gentleman to take up the business.



You could not have thought better; Pray Sir will you give your self a small trouble to oblige us.



Alas Madam 'tis too large a Parish for me; However I shall look upon your intreaty's as commands; What may it be?



Why thus an't please you. 



No, pray let me.



Hold, suppose we walkt in; we should be less subject to disturbance, Will't please you Madam, 







Call you me this Matrimony! Help the good man say I, for I am sure they need it; And yet certain there must be some little, I know not what in't, that I am ignorant of, or they would not be so hot upon't, That like bold Seamen, having scapt one Wrack, they dare yet venture on another: What∣ev'r it be, I envy it no man, bless him with it say I I had ra∣ther believe my share of it, then run the experiment; For as far as I have ev'r observ'd, Between a quiet, and an unquiet Woman, there is only this difference, That he that has the first, rides an ambling horse to the Devil, and he that has the second a Trotter. 






Honest Mr. Driver, And how? What news? Ha 'you been as good as your Word?







Aa! Mr. Driver, You were ever my friend: But prythee satisfie me by discoursing the reason of 'em, as why, some are more lucky in their hits, then others. 



You must know Sir, that inventions came by degrees, but have ever had this ill fortune, to be fatal to the first Inven∣tors, who have only discover'd a new shore to shipwrack their persons on it, or bury their fortunes in it.



How shall we do then?



Well enough, We have this advantage, that others have gone before us, and broke the ice to our hands; How∣ever we must not be so hasty as to expect all things should be



done at once; No, Nature makes no leaps, and Invention which is the hand-maid of Nature, must but follow her, and take patern, from her.



Nay I grant ye, time perfects every thing; Nor can it be thought, that our invention should be so absolute, as that it were impossible to be improv'd.



You have hit the point, and learnedlie; However for demonstration: The Spade and Shovel were Primitive In∣ventions, and from thence came the Plow; In like manner from the Rake, the Harrow; From the Pestle and Mortar all sort of Mills, vvhether Horizontal, or Plegnick; Horse, Hand, Wind, Water, or otherwise; From the Wheel-barrow; Carts and Coaches; From the scraping of a Hen, Letters; From Pease-Hulls in the Kennel, the Invention of Shiping; And from a Kites taile, the Rudders to 'um; I should have men∣tioned an other thing, vvhich how simple soever at first, 't has been since improv'd to a wonder.



As what good Sir?



Why thus You know men originallie lapt Water like doggs, but finding that a little troublesome, They soop't from their hands; from thence came Wooden dishes, thence earthen Pitchers, Thence Black-Jacks, thence Flagons, thence Kanns, thence Horns, thence Pewter cups, thence Glasses, and as an Eu∣mechanick from the whole, Silver and gold Tankards.



I le be sworne thou hast cut out the buisness no∣tablie.



Marry has he; A shrewd fellow. But hark you, Have you remembred me?



Presentlie I vvas just coming t' ye, And shall only tell you by way of Prolegomena, That Inventions are of two sorts (to wit) either such as are destructive to humane Societie (as the Invention of vvalking invisible, and making Ships and Boats sail in the Aire, as well as on the Water, vvhich vve call Cacamechana) or such as are advantageous and useful; and of this kind, I think I can shevv you as much choice, as any man vvhatever he be.



I must confess I am for those, let's see.



I, I Those, those.







Aa! Good Mr. Driver What are these?



Let me see most Excellent things! You know Sir, we English men chiefly buzzle our heads about two things, That is to say, Religion, and Trade; And truly you have luckily hit upon both, The one, is a Project for a Divinitie-Mill, that shall go by any winde, and never stand still.



But of what use?



Marry To grind Controversie, and that so fine, and subtile, it shall hardly be perceptible, And I'll undertake, make more Proselites, than ever did Cha•cers Frier with his shoulder blade of the lost sheep.







Why this 'Tis the height of Art! An Emporentick In∣vention, of making Cloth without Wool.



How's that? Cloth without Wool; Make me but that good, and Write your own Conditions.



With your favour Sir, I was in before you Pray go on How is it to be done?



Why thus I shall discover all. 



Not to your friend? good Master Driver.



Then thus You must gather the Atomes into a Glasse well ground, and then thred 'em upon a fine imperceptible Loome, and when they are once Wove, 'tis easie milling 'em to what consistence you please.



But how shall we do for this Loome?



Did you never hear of Uulcan• Net? You must take Copy by that.



Cry y'mecrcie good Mr. Driver, This shall be mine; I have a Glass (as one would say) made for the purpose, A most excellent Optick, It shall make you an Atome shew as big as a Quarter Staffe.



Alas Sir the Thread will be too big, and fit for nothing



but to Thrumme Coverlets; whereas my design in't was to alter the affairs of Christendome, by breaking the Spanish trade of fine Wool, and the Duch new manufactures.



I apprehend you, The Price?



Why troth Sir it will not go, under five hundred pound and a quarter share.







Here here Mr. Driver, What are these?



A rare invention for the sealing of Butter, without the charge of Butter Prints; The same for Ginger-Bread. 







This A Whirligig for Dreining the Sea, for Treasure Trove: But to this there belongs another oh I have it, A devise to stop up the Rivers, that they shall n't run in, till the Work be over: But this will be a work of time, and charge.



However, the profit will answer it.



Here are others would do as well, or better You grasp at too great things. An invention for the making Books sell at treble the rate they would have done otherwise. 



As how good Sir? my brother shall be in for this.



By a fine new Title and Picture before it; or if that faile, getting 'um supprest, and somewhat else which I shall only tell the Bookseller himself. A new Engine for the better sowing of Wheat, and setting of Leeks; A Proposition for the Farming the Excize upon Jews-Trumps, and Town Tops. 



Not forgetting Nine-Pinns, and Shovel-Board Tables I beseech ye.



As how I pray can that amount to any thing?



Almost incredible, There's a great mistery in t, for look you Sir; Do but consider how many more boyes, then men there are, and then make the conjecture Where's this, oh Here Be happy. Here's an Invention will do thy Work: Thou may'st ev'n shut up Shop, or do what thou wilt.



I can turn it over to another, which will be all one, What is't?



Why, 'tis a Project to incorporate the Gold-finders, and makes 'um turn Salt-Peeter-men; for besides that the materials will be exceeding cheap, the learned, upon experiment have found, it makes the best Gunpowder, by reason of its Nitrous qualitie, and the refuse, most incomparable soape; An Invention must necessarily destroy the trade of Pot-Ashes, and consequently bring all the Soap boilers in London under your girdle.



I'm satisfi•d, Not a word to Sir Gudgeon; Lets shake him off, and you and I'll drive the Bargain by our selves; Pray Sir use me as kindly as you can, and I promise to consider you bet∣ter as the Profits shall arise.



Well Sir I shall not press too hard upon a young beginner, I hope you'l be as good as your Word.







Here Sir, If to morrow be any thing fair, I'll be∣gin the experiment, and perhaps, make some small essay this night upon the Moon.



I know not what excellent qualitie your Glasse may have above others, But if I might advise you, I would defer it to the Dog-daies.



The goodness of my Glass will supply a small defect, I'll tell you what; But you'll happily believe it, I have discover'd with it a Flea in the Bears tail, and a Louse in Caput Algol Anglice, Medusa's head, Tis but trying Come I am out of patience till I set it on foot: My service to your Master, I cannot stay to talke with him now: Farewel.













GOod Mr. Squeeze no more, I am so full of business I can hardly tell which to set about first.



But I am afraid, these will scarce turne to ac∣count.



How! not turn to account! Is the sole engrossing of all Love Letters (whither in Verse or Prose) within the Realme of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, so cheap in our eyes? Besides that unimaginable Project of procuring a fift Terme, and the multiplication of Offices, accord∣ing to the augmentation of Suits, so slight with you? O the boundless Avarice of insatiate men!



Nay good Mr. Driver.



What! nothing content you, unless you fine for Sheriff the first year. Gi me't agen.



Pray Sir, Are you angry because my Wit is not so ripe as yours; Great things are not so easily apprehended: Suppose I offer'd that of a fift Terme, to the Innes of Court, and Doctors Commons, do you think they would advance any thing consider∣able upon't?



Think! About it, and be thankful, We shall have you now once in a twelvemonth not know your old friends; But if you do, it shall be a warning to me, how I ever 








So, so the wheels go merrily round: And now for my main game, Mr. Suckdry, if I can but squeeze that Sponge into my young Masters pocket, the work's done, let me see 

He must not take me unprovided, Hark! 'tis he. 

A Project for the reprinting of Tom Thumb with Marginal Notes and Cuts; And that every man within this Kingdom, buy it of the Patentee, at the rate of Twelve pence, or come up to Town to shew cause why he will not.



Good I won't disturb him yet.



Another for raising six pence upon every thousand of Bricks; and two pence a joynt, for every joynt of Meat that shall be drest on Friday's and Saturday's.



Excellent! This fellow will be rich, he minds his business.



That every Usurer pay twelve pence per pound out of all interest mony, towards Charitable uses, and that the Patentee have the disposing of't.







Whose there? Mr. Suckdry! Your servant, you see I am at work for you; But this is not the business I have design'd for you Hmh 'tis come at last Here 'tis A thing shall bring you in a vast deal of mony without any charge, besides the primary charge.



As what, good Mr. Driver? What?



Why 'tis a Wooden-Horse, so contriv'd with Screws and devices, that he shall out-travel a Dromedary, carry the burden of fifteen Camels, run you a thousand mile without drawing bit, and which is more then all this; not cost you two pence a year the keeping.



Ha, Ha, He y'faith y'faith! prythee on, Is there no difficulty in the work?



The greatest, will be to set him a going: But I think I have sufficientlie provided for that: I'll tell you how I have order'd it: Turn one Pin, he shall Trot, another Amble, a third▪ Gallop; a fourth, Flie; And all this perform'd by Germane Clock-Work: Don Quixotes Rosinante, was an Asse; Rey∣naldo's Bayart, a meer Slugge; and Clavellino the swift, a very Cow to him; I might mention Alexander Beucephalus, the Cid's Bajeca, the Moores Zebra, Rogero's Frontino, Astolpho's Hippogryphon, Orlando's Briliadoro; The Muses Pegase, the Suns Horses, and Zancho's Dapple, But they are not to be nam'd the same day together; One thing more I could tell you But 



Good Mr. Driver out with it: No Butts (among friends) I pray.



'Tis but shoeing him with Cork, and he shall tread as firm, and strike as true a stroke on the water, as he does on land; and which is more, care for neither tyde nor weather, and run in the winds eye: A devise, must of necessitie break the Packet Boats, and consequentlie engross the whole dispatch for Ireland, France and Holland.



And do you think you could prevail with your Master to part with this horse?



Yes certainly for his Sons good Though as I told you before, he has more alreadie then he knows well how to spend.



No more of that Prethee let me speak with him He shall have Bags, Daughter, Devil and all.



I'll wait on you agen imediatelie.  




Not cost a man two pence a year the keeping, So so 'Tis an excellent shap't horse, and must be good, Why may not I improve this Project now, and make him carry as much on his back, as the Trojan horse did in his belly; at least, as many Citizens and their Wives at once, as the great Bed at Ware, will hold at twice, 'twas well thought on 



Enter Dr. and Ferd.


This is my young Master Sir, will you please to be known to him.



A towardly young man save you Sir 



Your friend and Ferdinand Pray no Complements.



An humble young man, and sparing of his very words I ll try his temper With your favour Sir I have long desir'd your acquaintance, and having a further inclination to continue it, I must crave leave to ask you a few questions. 



The fewer the better, as near as I could, I would not waste either time or breath.



Excellent! pray Sir what do you take to be the great∣est vertue in the world?







Short, but pithy Admirable! But might not I be so much beholding to you, as to give me your reason for t?



It would better become me to learn from you How∣ever, since you desire it, I shall tell you what first mov'd me to it.



I am beholding to you pray begin.



Then truly Sir I find it founded upon Nature, The Sun the Moon, the Stars, are sparing of their light, and do not alwaies shine; The Earth is barren in some places, that it may be fruit∣ful in others And the Sea, has its ebbs and neaps, as well as flowings and Spring tides; And in a Word, from the beginning 'twas ever so.



Excellent agen! let me not interrupt you.



Nor is this all; It has been the general practice of all times The golden age, to save charges, were clad in skinnes, drank Water, eat Acorns, and to shew their innocence, wip'd their noses on their sleeves: The Philosophers, they were spa∣ring The Brachmans, went naked, Diogenes liv'd in a Tub Pythagoras, on Carrets and Cabbage; Plato wonder'd, a man could eat two meals a day; And Epicurus (whatever



we think of him) was as great a Prince with a tost in the drip∣ping Pan, as a fat Citizen with his shoulder of mutton and Ca∣pon: The Stoicks, were abstenious to a miracle, and if ever they exceeded, 'twas never at their own charge; Nor have they walkt alone, The learned tread hard after 'um; for either (like the ancient Druids) they commit nothing to writing, or if they do, 'tis so close and aenigmatical, that no body can pick any thing out of 't: But I burden you.



By no means, good Sir on.



To come nearer home, we all cry up Charitie, and no doubt, do well in it; But who makes any use of it? at least, any more then needs must; we bless 'tis true, but without a Crosse, And for good Works we do no more then will just serve (if yet that) for fear of supererogating, Pray tell me, was it for no∣thing think you that we found a late stile of the Keepers of the Libertie; or that the Keeper of a Park had his name to no pur∣pose, surely no The Age is arriv'd to that height of thrift, that they find more's got by selling their Bucks, then by eating them themselves, or giving 'um their friends.



Right: I have not found more thrift, no not in Spain or Italy.



And now you mention Spain, give me leave to put off my hat to that Venerable name The Spaniard! the frugal Spa∣niard! that shall make you five meals upon one Hen, Feast his Familie with three Pilchards, and carry a pound of Mutton in tri∣umph on a Skiver! But I forget my self, I am sure now I wea∣ry you yet if you have ever so much time to spare, read but Sir Jeffery Drop-nose his discourse upon Save-alls, or his new method of skinning of Flints, and perhaps you may not think your time ill spent.



Ha Ha what was that? Books Books?



Yes Sir, a good thrifty Author and well receiv'd.



Uh Have a care, No Books I beseech you They cost mony Read men Read men. Hang these liberal Sciences, This is no time for 'em Study Thrift, Study Thrift, 'Tis strange, you that are so great Master in the Theory, should be



so much out in the Practick! let me read to you.



With all my heart, and I readilie embrace it.



'Twas well said And first, for your person. Have nothing about you that may be spar'd, nay though it be not worth a farthing; for if you would but seriouslie consider, how much one poor farthing, Use upon Use, in 200 years amounts to, you would not lay it out upon waste: Next, eat little, drink less, and sleep much, to save fire and candle-light; And if ever you are sick, be your own Doctor, and never exceed above a half-pennie worth of Sena: Then for your clothes, make no new, but beg an old suit as for a poor friend of yours, but fit it up for your self; but short and close, lest your wife, taking exam∣ple by you, run out as much in train.



But suppose, Sir, I kept her alwaies in mourning, would it not do well, think ye, to save Linnen, and washing?



Verie good, and well observ'd And hark you never let her be too forward in making Babie-clouts; perhaps the Child may be still-born, and then, there's so much sav'd And since you have nam'd mourning, let me advise you, never give anie upon your will, they'l then mourn indeed: and for your wife, make her no more new clothes than needs must As long as the Cat's skin is burnt, you shall have her keep home, let it be once sleek'd and she's presentlie a Catterwauling Then for your house-keeping Be ever exact in keeping Fasting-daies, and Hollie-day Eves; for besides that you complie with the Discipline of the Church, you save your own purse And for your provision Be sure to buie the worst of everie thing, (as rotten Eggs, mouldie Wheat, stinking Beef, and the like) for besides that it is much cheaper, your familie will eat the less, and for that reason also, let your meat be either bloud∣raw, or over-rosted; and as near as you can dine late, that they may have no stomach to Supper.



Then, Sir, If you'll give me leave 



Good leave have you proceed 



If your Friend come to dine with you Ask him by way of prevention, when he'l be so kind as to come and dine



with you But if he chance to surprize you, Treat him not, but tell him you'l make no Stranger of him Either he has an appetite, or he has not; if he has, hungers the best sauce, if he has not, 'tis all lost If he be your friend, he'l be contented with what you have; if not, 'tis too much.



Or rather take pattern from the Prudent Dutch, tell him your house is visited, and so carry him to the next Inn, and there eat upon his purse, Two mens meals well sav'd But one thing more which I had quite forgot If ever you should chance to keep Servants, change 'em often; they are generally diligent in their new clothes And for their service Let eve∣ry one perform two Offices at least; following herein the exam∣ple of the same thrifty Dutch, with whom (generally) one and the same person supplies the several Offices of Chaplain and Barber.



How unfortunate am I, that have been so long a stranger to such excellent Morals Pray, Sir, oblige me once more.



Ha, ha, he Shall I turn prodigal in my old age?



Of Counsel you may, Sir it costs you nothing.



Well-well-well, Since I must Make the Ant your pattern for laying up, and the Limbeck your example for giving it out again The Limbeck! (peace be with him that first invented it) The Limbeck, I say, that be it never so full, gives back again, but drop by drop Which that you may the better do, let me advise you, first, to avoid Law-suits, it being like a Sheep's flying for shelter to a Bramble, where commonly he leaves the better part of his Fleece behind him Next, give no mony to Servants, it being in effect a paying for your enter∣tainment and as little, upon hopes of return, Ingratitude reigns Then, never fish with a golden hook for fear you lose it, or that the profit do not countervail the hazard and charge But this I would have you when you have any business doing, let your hand be either fumbling about your little poc∣ket, or playing with some gold Ah! it makes a man so nimble when he believes it will be his presently But when 'tis done, give him ne'r a groat; onely shake him by the hand,



invite him to your house, and tell him your wife and he are Town-born children; let him say what he will when you're gon, you've sav'd your mony, and the loser may be allow'd the liberty of speaking Let the world call it sordid, or what they please; He that can do this, may be presum'd to be content with it, and consequently, happy; for happiness consists in nothing more, than in being content Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo A good saying, and the onely piece of all the Poets I ever un∣derstood And hark ye, if thou marri'st my daughter, it shall be the posie of her Wedding-ring.



How, Sir! marry your daughter why I scarce ever saw her.



No matter, no matter she shall be rul'd by me.



Alas, Sir charge of children will come on And I have heard say, A Wife's as chargeable, as an old Tenement, 'twill cost you half your rent to keep it wind-tight and water-tight.



Well, well, well thou shalt be at the charge of repairs during my life, and after my death, shalt have all All I have All-All-All.



Troth Sir my young Master is bound to you, Come Sir, speak comfortablie to the old Gentleman.



I can only thank you Sir, and tell you, that I am wholly at your dispose.



Why that's well said. 




Mr. Jocose! in pudding time! Do you remember what you said to me, touching your son, and my daughter? trulie, trulie, I like the young man so well, that if I had twentie daugh∣ters he should have 'em all, All Body and bones, and all I have after my death: I trulie every groat, unlesse it be four old Harry groats, which I have thus dispos'd in my Will, viz. one groat to the poor of St. Giles's, and St. Andrews Hol∣borne, to be equallie divided amongst 'um; A second, to the Hospitals of St. Bartholmews, Christ Church, and St. Thomas, to be



equallie divided as before; Provided alwaies, that (within the first six months after my decease) they set up my name amongst their benefactors; A third to charitable uses in general, to be disposed, as to my Executors shall seem meet; A fourth to∣wards my Funeral Expences, I think there will be no great need of a Sermon: A man must do some good you know.



And may he never thrive that shall go about to subvert so pious an intention; And now for my son, You have my consent.



I thank you, But d'ye hear Mr. Driver, Don't you forget the horse now; no more but mum. 



I apprehend you Sir: Your nod's enough.



Come Son, for that must be thy name now; Come go home with me, and good Mr. Driver let it be your care to get us a gentle reader, he will not expect so much as another, But for the Clerk, you may let him alone, one of us can say Amen, as well as he: There's so much sav'd. 



It shall be done Sir. 



Farewell, good Sir, we'l make no Wedding of it Tailor's Lists, and blew Points, shall be both Garters, and Fa∣vours 



So much the better Your servant.





Send them good luck.



And none for me, good Widow?



O by anie means your Project deserves it.



Am I unkind to you then, that I'd have you take your monie again? No you are rather beholding to me that have not made those advantages of you, that had I lov'd your monie better than your person, I might have done.



In that respect I must confess I am But pray tell me How came this humour about?



You may best answer that your self You know I lov'd you, and could not be ignorant, but that I look'd upon Sir Gudgeon Credulous as a block in my way, which once remov'd, I might



have the better hopes of kissing the Mistress my self: pray what did you most fancie in him, his person, his parts, or his estate?



I was never so greedie to expect all three I could for a need have excus'd the two former, to have been well secur'd of the last.







You men (alas for you) you never mind those lit∣tle things of Estate You are above Ordinances You are altogether for Vertue.



Not so far neither, good Widow A little of both does no hurt They do as well together as ill asunder 
Enter Sir Gudgeon.

 But see! your Haberdasher of small Projects 



Yours, Sir, Madam who thought to have found your Ladiship here?



Can you blame me, that am so far dipt in your Projects, to enquire at least how things went.



You might have trusted that to me I dare warrant you a good return, and in few daies. A little time must needs make us either Princes, or Beggars I hope the first.



But suppose the latter?



'Tis not to be suppos'd Let me tell the Widow of mine, Be happie.



'Tis the thing we all wish But how came you to be so confident of a sudden?



Because 'tis impossible we should be otherwise The work goes pleasantlie on And hark ye, Widow, I am resolv'd to present thee a piece of Scarlet, for thy own wearing, shall not have a lock of Wool in't And yet good substantial Cloth.



But who makes it, Sir Gudgeon?



What matters that, so you have it I am promis'd an Artist, shall do wonders.



A small Philosopher I hope?



'Tis not material whether he be or no I love to trust everie man in his way, what care I whether my Tailor be a good Musician, or my Coach-man be able to Con a Ship: it is enough to me that he perform what I intend him for. For my own part I am so well assur'd of the thing, that I could wish I were no Knight, but had staid to have been made a Lord for altogether And so let me say to thee once again, Wi∣dow of mine be happie.



For that of Happie, be so as long as you can But pray take me along with ye No longer Widow, nor yours I be∣seech you.



How's this! Who dare say the contrarie? He were better 



Have broken your Worship's pate: With this Ladie's leave That dare I: or if you will not believe it pray, Madam, lend me your Busk.



Mr. Jocose! 'tis impossible! I never thought you would have serv'd me thus.



And why not would you engross all to your self? He projects, and She projects too. Good, Sir Gudgeon, there's Conscience in everie thing. 



'Tis well you are my friend But do n't ye presume too far.



Further than this Ladie I shall not and yet so far (with her good favour) I ever shall.



But you may come short home You know the necessitie of attending more grand Affairs lies upon me But 



Does the fool prate?







I obey And now, Madam, I leave it to your own judgment, how much I was out in my Character And if there remains any thing to your further satisfaction, pray let me know it.











MRs. Gotam, well met whither so fast?



Marrie to find out this Rogue that has abus'd my Husband I tell thee what, Squeeze, He and his Staff-men have made such a stink in our house, that all the neighbours are up, and crie, A Wedding, a Wedding I have been this half hour a shaking the Bride-laces off my petticoat.



Why, what's the matter? 



Hang him for a fool He cries, 'tis a new way of making Gun-powder But when he's in a condition of receiv∣ing it, I'll ring him such a peal I ll Gun-powder him .



And mine's as bad o'the t'otherside He's so full of business he's ev'n mad He talks of nothing but Sonnets, Ma∣drigalds, Acrosticks, Love-letters, Wedding-Posies, and I know not what Well, if thy Husband's Project be the beginning of Love, I am confident mine's the end of't.



O that these men must do all things by themselves, and never advise with their Wives till it be too late But I'l make my Gentleman know a piece of my mind before I have done with him. 




Peace, peace here he comes. 



Uh Hum Puth 'Ta'd need be profitable, I am sure 'tis not very toothsome.



And whither, Gentleman? whither so fast? Your Wife's nothing with you But I've a Crow to pluck w'ye Where's my Coach and the eight Horses you talk'd of, and the new Dining-room to our Country-house D'ye think to rob me thus.



Nay, good wife dear hony they're all a coming: Do'st not see what pains I have been taking and all to make thee a Ladie Prythee 'tis all for thee Good faith it is.



Marry fough All what?



What ever I bring to perfection Thou must have patience 'Tis but an Embrio yet.



Pray leave me off your Brewing, unless it were to better purpose I was finely holpt up when I married you, and refus'd more likelie men everie way, and such as would have maintain'd me like a woman But the devil ow'd me a good turn: 



Nay, dear wife thou art alwaies in this Key What encouragement can it be to a man, when his wife believes nothing but what she should not?



Say speak what should I believe, or what should I not believe? you'l teach me, will you?



No, good wife But we may hear one another though.



I ve heard too much Thou lets everie one lead thee by the Nose, and make thee an Ass and a Beast And I could find in my heart to make thee too (Look better to your business) Come come where be the Keys of the Chest? give 'em me.







What to do with my own? why was it not al mine? And dost thou grutch me my own? Go go - try thy Experiments with what thou broughtst thy self, unless they were better or more likelie.






Mr. Driver! Never in better season.



Why how now Mrs. Gotam, Sitting in judgment upon your Husband?



If I do 'tis my own husband and one that (if you please Sir) has been fool'd enough by you.



Nay Wife you wo'nt spoil all? the Gentleman is a Civil Gentleman, and an excellent person in his way.



I ll excellent ye both What fine Project is this you have put my Husband upon? Had your Master no one to fool but his own flesh and blood?



What does your Wife mean Mr. Gotam?



Alas Sir, if you liv'd at our house you'd never ask that question 'tis her ordinarie exercise to keep her selfe in breath.



I'll breath you must you abuse me too! remember this Gentleman. 



But may not I know whence all this heate?



You know but too well And as you have brought him on, pray bring him off, or I ll make the house too hot for you and your Master too I'll powder you. 



And why How goes it forward?



In plain Troth Sir (between our selves) I half doubt the Woman's mad, She has thrown all the Tubs about house, and rais'd the Neighbous about our ears.



And you think you've done a wise action now, to discover in one minute, what some men might have study'd their whole lives for, but never found.



Indeed Sir! And do you believe there was any thing in't?







of you, I discharge you of all monies due by vertue of'um.



You've done well Wife yo've made a fair hand •n't.








Not a word more I ha' done with't. 



And wilt thou gang with me my Jo?
And wilt thou gang with me?
Now for thy Daddy's Benison,
I prythee now gang with me.



I heres your diligent man, He has traverst Scotland already. Now Mr. Squeeze, how goes all affairs?



Why, as a man may say, on Wheels I had no sooner set up my Bills, and hung out a large Label, with this Inscription in Capital Letters, 
Young Men Advance, and Maidens eke draw near, Here dwells Loves Epistoliographer.
I say I had no sooner hung it out, then my house was too little to hold the company. O' my Conscience I think Wapping, Rat∣cliff, and East Smith-old were never so drain'd since the last great shew I'll undertake, 'twould have made two Ginger-bread women for ever.



See here Mr. Gotam! see what industry can do! And yet I vallu'd your device at least 50 per Cent. more then this.



I'm an unluckie fellow this a man gets by making his Wife acquainted with his business.



Nay prethee sweet heart lets home agen I'll try to recover all.



Impossible, or if it wern't, the Neighbours have



smoak'd it. O Mr. Squeeze! what luck you have!



My faith I do prettie well, and at small expence I'll be sworn the Packet of Letters, Familiar Epistles, Academy of Complements, and two or three of the new Poets, is the great∣est charge I have been at and I am confident I shall, in a short time, be able to bring it into a lesser compass, by Printing some blank Copies of the several kinds, that shall indifferent lie serve to every occasion.



A prettie device and well found out.



But the main thing I built on, troubles me You remem∣ber the Fift Term. 



And what of that?



I have offer'd it to all the Inns of Court, Chancerie, and Commons, and none bids me any thing for't for they that have any thing to do, crie four is enough, and they that have not, though they shrug their shoulders, and look smilingly on't, yet whither it be, that t'others keep 'um so low, or that they fear they'd in a short time engross this too, though they seem to wish well to't, yet they bid me not a farthing. 



No matter You'll find enough in this; You must not be too covetous.



But good Mr. Driver Will you assist us at least in the Soap business.



They go together make one, and t'other follows: But I'll meddle no more in't I am too full else-waie.



Pray consider of't and wee'll take a turn or two in the Garden the while Perhaps I may light udon some new propo∣sals. Mr. Squeeze shall I beg your companie?







Well, I am gon so far but how to get clear agen, there s the question, I brought it on, and I hope my Master has by this time thought of some device or other to bring it off. 



Sir Gudgeon Credulous! Your Servant.



Oh Mr. Driver! How have you serv'd me? I have been trying your Experiment at least 40 waies, and I'm sure my glass as good as any in Christendome, but the Devil of a thread can I make hold, 'twas as rotten as dirt An old black, dy'd out of a rotten Scarlet, and that too, burnt in the die, is Iron to it.



Sure Sir you're mistaken:



No, no, no 'tis but too true.



Or did not take the right way:



Oh no I was exact to the Thousand part of a haire.



Or perhaps over did your work, and so calcin'd 'um O'my Conscience if the truth were known this was it And yet 'tis strange, so grave a Philosopher, that has written so pro∣foundly of Cobwebs, and Perry, should be so much out in his first rudiments.



I know not, but 'tis as I tell you.



You see what 'tis when men cannot be contented to do, but they must over-do 'Tis well I did not trust you with the business of Malleable Glass Suppressing Mountebanks, and Enlarging the Citie Charter If I had, 't ad been all one.



How's that, good Mr. Driver? Pray lets hear 'um They may make amends for t'other.



No, no more I'll never trust a man agen that can't go by himself One of your Years and Intellectuals, and not read without a Fescue!



Come, come lets trie to recover't agen.



Never, never I know, though I han't seen your work, you have spoil'd the design; for things of this nature are so nice, and kickish, the least Error renders them irretriveable. A man had better fix Mercury in a blowing Mill, then offer to think on't.








Patience, Sir Gudgen, patience.



Hugh Patience And had I more, here's that would exercise it all.



And now no longer Widow, be as merrie as a good Hus∣band can make thee.



I have but your own word for't; and yet hope I shall have no cause to repent the action; 'Twas well said And I l promise thee (as near as I can) I'll give thee none But see, Sir Gudgeon Credulous! He's come to give thee joy.







Save you, Sir Gudgin You've been a great stranger I see I might have even done what I would for all you y'are a kind Suitor!



She jears me too! Is it not enough to have in∣jur'd me, but you must tell me so?



I injur'd you! forbid it Pray how goes on our common business?



All evaporated gon gon quite lost 



Why as I understand you, there was to be nei∣ther fire nor smoke in 't.



I know not The Devil was in't And my new Drape quite defunct.



And do you think it was kindly done to engage me in such a business?



'Twas no more then what I did my self But I see (now it is too late) that I am meerly trickt out of my monie, my Widow, and all But some bodie shall dearlie rue it.



That's not I, Sir Gudgeon Is it?



No matter whether it be or no There are other bodies in the world besides your self.



Yes that there are There are Bodies Politick, as London and Westminster; and Bodies Simple, as Sir Gudgeon and his Par∣ticipants.



D'ye hear this, Mr. Driver? I shall order you y'faith, if there be any Law between the Mount in Cornwal and Berwick Stairs.



However, Sir, I am to thank you that you have been pleasd to lend me some monie to defend the Suit.



Well look to t I say no more. 




No departing in wrath, good Sir Gudgeon One does not know what you may do to your self You had better stay a while and take a little advise with you: Go go down into the Country and awe your poor neighbours with my Lords nod, or his whisper in your ear at parting Studie Longitude and the Philosophers Stone; The North-West Passage, and the Square of a Circle So brave a Sir Poll, trouble himself with trifles! By no means no no Embark for the Indies in a Cock-boat, or to France on a Mil-stone; Plant a Colonie in Terra Incognita, or settle an Intelligence with the Emperor of Utopia These were fit for Sir Gudgeon!  Hae tibi sunt artes!



Well, Sir, we•l Tis your time now.



Or if you love the smoke o'the Town better Enter your self a Vertuoso, and sit in Judgment on everie man but your self Never open your mouth with less than a Caball, and yet speak little, for fear you be understood However let your sententious Tooth-pick speak for you, that you could say more, if you durst trust the Companie, or were not under an Oath of secrefie: Sir Gudgeon beat his brains about ordinary matters! fie fie 




You do well, Sir 



Not cost a man two pence a year the keeping O rare! Mr. Driver 



See! here's another of your Brethren Prythee, Driver, entertain him, while I look to the Knight.



So keep me a prisoner too you fear nothing.











But hark, Mr. Driver A word Ha'ye fitted out the Horse yet?



And over-fitted too What's worse then ill luck? Certain we are bewitch'd.



As how, as how, as how, Mr. Driver? no hurt I hope, good Mr. Driver?



Yes faith, Sir But it could not be helpt.



What? what? what? what? what I pray?



Why faith as he was coming full speed down Highgate-hill, he tript upon a stone, fell, and broke his leg short off.



Uh undone for ever No good to be done with him now? Speak Ha? 



Why trulie he may be made serve again To the Court of Guard, or so But I fear me, not without some charge.



Uh Charge What a fool was I to be so forward in this Match, till I had seen what would have come of t'other?



How, Sir? is my young Master so cheap with you al∣ready?




Why that's some comfort yet He'll save it up again by little. Oh? Driver! VVhat's this I see surely this house is the Land of Visions My Daughter in beaten Sattin Held me I faint I faint Uh 



Come, my dear And now no more of your No pray I thank ye's 'Twas well carri'd.



While I was at my Fathers, blame me not if I obei'd him, and now his Election has made me yours, I hope I shall not so mistake the person, as to pay you less.



That's a prettie Rogue.



O my father Good Sir, help 



Certain he never gat her Nay were she not my wife, I'd swear it What's the matter? stand off and give him Air.



Uh Hu my son and all! And all to be daub'd! Is this the thriftie Gentleman? Uh How apt is even the best ground to run into weeds? Uh Uh 



Come, pray Sir, do not disquiet your self, or judge me by my out-side 'tis the way to be mistaken a second time.



Is this founded upon Nature? This the habit of the antient Philosophers? It had not been amiss, if while they pretended to instruct others, they had yet taught themselves.



Let me supply that defect, if yet you doubt it.



This the keeping your wife in mourning, to save Linnen and washing? This the burnt Cats skin we talkt of? defend her from what follows.



Pray Sir hear me And though I did a while put a force upon my Nature to humor you, be not now disturb'd that I am yet at last come to my self agen.



Vh, vh He believes these things are death to me, and will murder me, though it be but to scatter that little which with so much pains I have rak't together.



Do not misconceive me, 'Tis my desire you may live and enjoie what you have. The Earth, though she conveighs the water through her veins, is allow'd yet, to suck in as much as may refresh her self.



I was right He is resolv'd to break my heart.



Pray Sir hear me, and set not up your rest on that, which simply consider'd, is not that blessing the world takes it for. No,-Wealth not enjoy'd, is but a dead heap of muck, and the same unactive lump in the Chest, it was in the Mine. Were you master of all the most mightie could wish, did you not onlie possess riches, but tread on 'um should fortune cover you with gold, and were your wealth as boundless as your eye, yet had you not a heart to use't, you would but from thence learn to co∣vet more, and those false desires having no limit, would become as infinite as error.



Vh vh no mercy!



Let me prevail good Sir You cannot but hear a man that pleads against his own interest You have enough; why should you denie your self, at least, a moderate use of it? Why should ye be fearful to approach it, and yet be jealous of others? (like the sensitive Plant, shrink at the touch, and cramp into a Convulsion) Why should ye use your wealth (as Anglers their little fish) 〈◊〉 to bait for more? Or why degrade your self from that 〈◊〉 wherein Nature set ye, by a voluntarie sale of your 〈◊〉 Slaverie? In a word, why should you pos∣sesse that with pain, which others behold with envie? Such as (in it self) rather threatens, then profits, and thus obtain'd be∣comes not the end, but change of miserie. Come Pray Sir.







I'll be his security Pray stay a little, All will be well 
Enter Squeeze, Gotam, and their Wives.
Oh Gentlemen you're welcome Now Sir Gudgeon, what think you of reconciling all interests?



You're in your own house You may do what you list.



No more of that, I pray I must have all friends though to my own loss. And therefore, to be short, let me tell you Sir Gudgeon, that finding you so inclin'd to Projects, I thought you might be instrumental to mine, and I have compast 'um This, * for my self, and that for my Son for any thing beyond that, I am wholly a stranger to t For I ever look'd upon Projectors, like the Dogs in the Fable, that burst themselves, by endeavouring to drink up the Pond, that they might the easier come at the car∣kass, that floated on the middle of't. 



And do you think to carry't off thus? Dost



looke like a Sheep-biter and seest thy self laught at?




Pray Gentlewoman with your good patience a little The Use may chance to be more comfortable then the Doctrin For once I'll be the Author of an ill Court-President, You shall all have your Monie agen.



Say you so Mr. Jocose! Now send us more such Courtiers Come Gentlemen we will be friends before his mind alter 'Tis ten to one but he had been too hard for us.



Indeed might he have been.



And so he has been for me.



I shall loose nothing by't.



What say ye Gentlemen, d'ye like my motion?



I I Mr. Suckdry shall be rul'd by me.



That's more then you know though.







'T'as taught us wit.



And I hope you'll consider your tutor Driver.



Well well leave him to me.




The same of * you since now at last you find,
Who ploughs the Clouds, shall only reap the Wind.





BEfore the three first Acts you'l find Scaen. 1. Wherin the Printer mistook his Copy; be pleased to blot 'em: each Act being but one Scaene, and the Stage throughout the whole Play kept full, The rest, being at most but literal, leaves to your favour.
