A stately Room in Roderigo's House.




WE Spirits, uncompounded Essences,
Not manacled, or immur'd with Walls of Flesh;
We can dilate, condense, or limb our selves,
As like us best; assume what Colour, Shape
Or Size we please. And I have taken this;
My Servants, that my Name below, Belphegor;

Here, Roderigo. My Quality, a Merchant
Come from the Indies. O most happy Lot!
Who would believe, that void and formless Mass,
That fluid infinite, had e'er produc'd
Such an harmonious Order? It strikes Wonder
And Ecstacy. .

And what think ye of this World? Is not this better than toasting the
Soals of our Feet?



The Air, I must confess, is somewhat better but for the
People not a doit to chuse.



I fansie 'em the worst of the two; and more fond of the Place,
than our selves.



Can ye blame 'em? They know what they are in this World,
they know not what they may be in the next.



Yet live here, as if they expected no other And so exqui∣sitely
practis'd in Cheating one another, that the best of us is a meer
Novice to 'em.



Not a Skip-kennel, but gives you three Tricks for one.



And for their Masters could you believe it, Sir, I met with
a Signior t'other Night, most devoutly, with his Beads in one Hand;
and the other in my Pocket.



Why didst not beat him?



I did but challenge him for't, and the Rogue had the Impudence
to kick me, for taxing a Person of his Honour.



I believe both our assumed Bodies were damn'd Cowards,
while they lived here; for my part, I had rather take ten kicks,
than so much as look back to see who gave me one of 'em.



But sure, the Women treat ye better?



As judge your self it is not long since I had a concern with
a Signiora; and just as I had stript, and was going to Bed to her, slip,
went the Trap-door, and down dropt Crispo into the Common-shore.



And mine has given me such a Remembrance of her Love, that,
as Young soever as my Figure speaks me, I can hardly speak Knitting-needles,
without endangering the Bridge of my Nose And when
I tax'd her for it, had the Impudence to ask me, how she could give it,
when she still kept it her self?





But how d'ye find Mankind in general?



Still slandering us As drunk as a Devil As mad as a Devil As
poor as a Devil As dull as a Devil And what not! when yet,
there's not so much difference between us, as would turn a pair of
Scales.



And then perpetually playing Fast and Loose with us Ever
and anon giving their Souls to the Devil; yet, at last, bequeathing
them another Way, without the least thought of the pre-conveyance to
us. And therefore, I beseech ye, give me leave to return to my old
Quarters.



Not forgetting thy Excellencies, poor Crispo.



Villiachoes! And must ye throw up your Cards, when they
play into your Hand? Peace and be thankful All this but makes
our Game Go humour them for we're restrain'd, and can do
nothing without themselves They hold the Candle to us The
Mud's their own; We only shake the Viol, and stir it up and so look

Now to my own Affair  

At the Pandaemonium, or Common-Council of the Infernal Lake Pre∣sent
 Lucifer, Abaddon, Belzebub, and others, the High and Mighty
Lords, Potentates, and Princes of the Grand Abyss Whereas,
upon taking our Yearly Audits, it has been observ'd, that the Souls of
such as arrive, generally agree, that their Wives sent them And
whereas, the said Board had formerly Ordered, That for the better
discovery of the Truth thereof, some one of their Body (as by Lot
it should fall) repair to Earth And whereas the said Lot
  3
fell to Belphegor, Generalissimo of the Aspaltick Lake Resolved, as
followeth.
1. That the said Belphegor forthwith take upon him that Province,
and that a Million of Duccats be assign'd him; not as Advance, but his
full Complement. And well enough no ill Encouragement.
2. That for the better carrying on of the said Service, Himself (and
Two other Spirits assigned him as Servants) be at Liberty to assume,
and actuate what Bodies, and settle in what Part of the World, shall
like him best. And I have don't.
3. That upon his first Choice, of his Place of Residence, he imme∣diately
Marry a Wife, and live with her Ten Years (if possible) after
which (pretending to die) that he return, and, upon his own Ex∣perience,
make Affidavit, of the Pleasures and Calamities of Marriage. And
I have done that first. A desperate Service, no doubt! 

4. That he lose all Qualities of a Spirit (unless, perhaps, upon some
last Exigence) and become in all things as a Man; subject to all the
Conditions of Humanity, Poverty, Imprisonment, Passions, Fear,
Hate, Love. 
Where there Ten Thousand more, that sweetned all.
Love! There's no Passion, but what's founded on't:
Men Fear, for what they Love Desire, Hate, Envy,
And all, because they Love themselves. But mine
Carries a nobler Tincture; and I Love
To that Degree, I've half forgot the Sex.

And, but that she has little odd Humours, and perhaps too, some Fits
of her Mother; O Origen! I'd release thy Kindness, and never accept
other Heaven, than here.
But see! She comes!

as conducting her Sister Portia to her Coach They
bow at distance He points after her.
Such was the Infant-Morn, when it first brake
And blush'd, to see the Chaos left behind her.
Thence I felt Passion first What else I view'd
Wrought in my Mind no Change, no fond Desire:
But there, I am transported. I, that was
High Proof 'gainst all things else, There, there alone,
Weak, for to me, whate'er she Wills is Fate.

He runs to her.
Sure Nature was asleep when thou stol'st forth,
And all the Graces she design'd an Age,
Crowded themselves together, and made thee.



And are not you a fine Gentleman, to coax your poor Wife? 
Alas, poor Fool! she cannot chuse but believe ye.



Couldst thou but see my Heart, thou wouldst.



You can't Dissemble not you you are Mary,
that you are 




At least would be, whate'er I thought might please thee:
And were the World at my dispose, 'twere thine.



No doubt of it Witness the Necklace.



I had forgot 



And so you do every thing that concerns me.



See I have brought thee a better.




But I long'd for t'other The Set of Neapolitan Horses too But
I'm your Wife There   'Pray' bestow
it where you intended it I cou'd observe that Eye of yours, as my
Sister past you.




Fie, my Imperia, fie Wilt thou be always thus?



And much you care, whether I am or not One would
think a Woman of my Quality   I know
not why so many good Women die; but wish I were dead too,
that I might trouble you no longer.



No I'll die first, that thou mayst have another.



No marvel, truly I live so well with you.



She crys! By Heaven, she crys! Poor Innocence! My
Life! My Soul! My Imperia! Thou shalt have any thing; 
We'll come to Articles.



And long you'll keep 'em.



By this Kiss for ever.




And shall I have the Necklace I long'd for?




Thou shalt, my Dear.



The Set of Horses too?




I would they were better for thy Sake. Thou shalt.



The broach of Diamonds would be very becoming, and the
Locket,   now 'twas so pretty.



That, and whatever else thou wilt.



The Pearl too Were large, round, Oriental and the
Pendants so delicate I fansie how I should appear in them.




Less than thou truly art: But thou shalt have 'em.



And   do what I will?



What pleases thee, sha'n't be amiss to me only be kind, and
love thy Roderigo.




A match, a match, I will.





Some techy Mortal now would have quarrell'd; but we, old
Experienc'd Devils, know better things, 

And live with her Ten Years (if possible.) Mistaken Fools 
'tis possible. I will live with her, and that, for ever.




Thy Articles, Belphegor; thy Articles.



And what of them? The Casuists are clear in the point; 
They may be shifted for Advantage. Sue 'em.



But is there not a Publick Faith, even among Devils?



It may be broke for Empire, why not for Love then, that com∣mandeth
Empire? It may, and shall Be gone.



Be Witness, thou inviolable Styx!
Thou 'ast broken thine; and I pronounce thee Mutinous.




That I could reach the Slave, I'd make him know,
I fill my Orb my self, and make my Circle
Without a barrowed Light 

Squib on and say,
I am more proud in my Imperia's Love,
Than when (as Thunder-proof) I once bestrid
That vast Convex of Fire; and leading up
The embattled Legions of Apostate Cherubs,

Plow'd the Parch'd Earth, and make th' affrighted Deep
Shrink to its last Recess.




O my Dear, heard you not the Thunder? I'm so afraid. 



Of what? of thy own Shadow?



How can you be alone?



Yet, meditating on thee That very Thought were Com∣pany
enough.



O, but confess; you look as you were disturb'd.



And thou so near? Impossible. Or were it so,
The Sight of thee would reconcile my Passions,
And give me to my self.




But won't you tell me true? Are you not well?



How can that Man be Ill, that's Happy enough
To pity Caesar? And such am I in thee.

Here will I fix my Empire Here I'll Reign,
And Reign alone.










YOU cannot say, but that he paid you honestly.



I wish I could say, I were as well satisfy'd. I ne∣ver
found such honest Payments rais'd an Estate; if ever I deal
more on single Interest, may I lose my Principal.



Who'd have expected even that, at least, taken it from one so
  6
honourable, that has perish'd his own Fortune, to save the Publick.



These honourable Rags are such fine Things! how, I pray',
do you find the price currant? Does the Frippery deal in such Lum∣ber?
 I think not. Good Sir, keep your whipt-posset for your
better Friends, and give me, more substantial Fare.



His Vertue, might deserve better Language; and it may be a
Question, if it had not been for him, Whether the State had been at
least, what it now is.



And true. When the Sun could hold no longer, and the
Moon slept, his Eyes have been our Sentinels.



But what Money has he got with all this? Or what Share in
the Government? Simple Merit Lords few Mens Horoscope.



Greater than both, the Conscience of Worthy Actions.



What Credit has it in the Bank? for my part, I can boast
I have kill'd mine. And, if you'd here me, cou'd shew you a Man
has done nothing of all this, and yet, even the Senate will confess
him Wise, Prudent, Virtuous, every thing. And, that he is
not one of themselves, I believe it more his own Fault, than theirs.



Who should this be?



What think ye of his Brother-in-Law? Roderigo. 
There's a Man for ye! and, to my Glory, he calls me Friend.



But whence this Meteor?



Whence e'er he came, he darkens all our Stars:
You'd swear he were descended of the Goths,

Or had been at the Siege of Constantinople.




Some Moor, or Baptiz'd Jew?



Be what he will,

Turk, Pagan, or Infidel, wou'd I'd his Wealth
With his Religion. He's a Castilian.

Were I that Man!



You'd take't for an Affront
His Catholick Majesty should call you Cousin.



And yet you hear me not complain. I've that
Which finds me Friends, or makes 'em. That one Thing
That can do all Things. How it makes a Door 
Or shut, or open.



Or your self (perhaps)
Snore o'er your Cup, or find a Fly i'th' Ceiling.



That matters not; I'm sure it breeds Compunction,
And Fellow-feeling in a Man of Office;
Makes, and remits Offences; even Justice,
More Deaf than she is Blind. And who would want it?



That would Grimaldi, and every Man, whose Soul
Is not compos'd of the same Dirt he treads.
Want it, (I mean) rather than have't, on terms
Dishonourable, or Sordid.




Any ones Morals can reform the World?
Don't they all thus? And, which is more, Court, Follow,
Adore the Rich, and spurn the Unfortunate.



And I as much the World.



But say, that World
Spurn you agen. Did ever wise Man chuse
Him for a Friend, that was deprest by Fortune?
Rats quit a falling House and Men, a Party,
When they perceive it going.



Where's Honesty and Honour, all this while?



Nay, if you come to that, farewel Kingdoms.
Nor is it mine to Question 'em. Your Servant.




Well, Fieschi, and what thinkst thou?



As is his Name, such is the Slave himself:
Who'd expect other from a Dog, but Snarling?



His Soul is Sence; and as he has no Knowledge of Vertue, he
has no use of it. But how have you dispos'd Montalto's Matter? Is it
so order'd, that it be not known from what Hand it came?



'Twas the last thing I did. I left the Writings in a seal'd Box,
with Bianca, who has assur'd me, she'll watch an opportunity, and con∣vey
it into her Ladies Closet.



As well as I could wish. Good Man!
He could have sooner Perish'd, than told me,
Told me, his Friend, he wanted me. Who sees
His Friend's Distress, and stays till he's entreated,
He comes too late. 'Tis an Extorted Kindness;
Lost ere it comes, and shews he wanted Will
T'ave done't at all. But, this Marone sticks in my Stomach. 
Whence truly is he?



Pansa (I think) remembers the first Plantation.



That do I, Sir, from the time he first came to Town in Second-Mourning;
 that is, in a Livery as ragged and tatter'd as an He-Goat;
 his Hat, right Beggars-block, no Crown to't; his Doublet
and Breeches so suitable, that in a dark Morning, he'd have mistaken
one for t'other; his Stockings, without Feet or Anckles, like a
Chandler's drawing-sleeves; and those too he durst not trust off his
Legs, for fear of crawling away. In a word, a Thing made up of
so many several Parishes, that you'd have taken him, at first sight, for
a Frontispiece of the Resurrection.



Thence, he came in as a Sub-subcollector; and thence, into
St George's Bank; and now, being in his Nature insolent, this imagina∣ry
Reputation has made him intolerable.



And for his other Qualities, I know somewhat my self: He
never forgave beyond the Opportunity of a Revenge; or spake well of
  8
any Man, but to his greater Disadvantage. A pretty Gentleman. But 'tis
pity. 



Nay worse, shall play both the Devil's Parts, of Tempter and
Accuser: Provoke his Friend into a freedom of Talk, and then in∣form
it.



Enough And for fear of any mistake, make another step to
Bincaa.

And this Man thrive! O Lucian thy Gods! The Groans of deprest
Vertue, and loud Laughters of exalted Folly, gave first name to the
Fortunate Islands, where Men slept themselves away in the melancholy
Contemplations, between Vertue and Success.


You have prevented me I was just coming
To give you joy. The Senate have, at last,
Consider'd your Services.



And sent me a Gugaw,

and Medal, and shews it.
An empty Nothing Pth 




Beyond a Mark of Honour, and a Pledge
Of future Kindness.



He's a Beast that serves
A Commonwealth; for when he has spent his Blood,
And sunk his Fortune, to support the Pride
And Luxury of those few that Cheat the rest,
He streight becomes the Object of their Scorn
Or Jealousie.



How odly my Friend argues
Against himself. Have you not served the State
These Twenty Years? And can you think it Wisdom
To quarrel now? Or now, when reasonably
You might expect the Fruit of all your Hazards,
Arm them against you? Vertue, Merit, Worth,
Ne'er wanted Enemies; make not you more.



When they behold themselves through their false Opticks,
They swell a Gnat into an Elephant;
When others, how they turn the Glass, and lessen
A Mountain to a Mole-hill.



Are you the only Man has been so serv'd?
Who deserv'd better for a Law-giver,
Than Solon? Or Captain, than Thrasibulus?

Or Orator, than Demosthenes? Yet Athens,

Ungrateful Athens, banish'd the two first,
And slew the latter. Unto whom ow'd Rome



More, than to Manlius; who, when her Capitol

Was grown too hot for Jupiter, preserved it?
Or what might not Camillus have pretence to,
Who, when she was reduc'd to her last Stake,
Push'd it, and won it? What should I mention
Rutilius, Scipio, Hannibal, Themistocles,
Men, famous in their Ages? Yet they fell:
Fell, where they most deserv'd.



How my Blood curdles at it! And me-thinks,
I feel a kind of Currishness, shot through me;
And want no property of a Dog, but fawning,
Tho' necessary to a rising Man.



Is this that Fortitude, my Montalto?

This, that heroick Vertue you taught me?
Sure, 'tis not the Montalto I have seen,
When Victory sate perching on his Helm;
Or that Montalto, when Opprest by Numbers
He lost the Day, and yet brought Home more Glory,
Than if he had been Conqueror: Yet still,
Still the same even Temper; Unconcern'd
At Loss, or Vict'ry.



Wou'd it not heat a Man,
To view his Wounds, which, like so many Mouths,
Speak out his Wrongs the lowder? t'ave consum'd
Himself, to warm Ingratitude?




Of worthy Actions, is, to have done 'em;
And every Man, that will, may give't himself.



How can I stand my Breast, against a Torrent
Of adverse Fortune?



'Tis your greater Glory,
To stem that Flood. How 're you beholding to her,
That she cou'd pass the Heard, and single you,
To Combate her?



But she has cut my Sinews.



The more your Honour: I have heard you say,
That a Roman, was more Glorious in his scorch'd,
Than armed Hand. Do not distrust your self,
And you must Conquer her. The Constant Man
Is Master of himself and Fortune too.



Bless me! Thou glorious Woman, never made
Of common Earth! I am concern'd for thee.



To the World's Fondlings, be their World, with me,
My own Montalt' out-weighs the Apparition,
The Airy Dream, which, when they think a Substance,


Grasp at it, they awake, and find it nothing:
Sure, had it any thing worthy our Love,
It were a mind that can contemn it.




And who might'st bring Philosophy to manners.



If you call this Philosophy, 'tis what
Its first Inventers meant it, ere our Pedants
Had made it, rather difficult, than great.
Come, my Montalto, come; and let th' Example
Of others Virtue, now, engage your own;
Their Glory, your imitation.



Thou hast o'ercome my, Portia and I'll try
If that Content, the larger World denies,
May be found in our selves. Even Poverty,
If it can be content, has lost its Name.
He never has enough that gapes for more;
Opinion was never Rich, nor Content Poor.



Now how I love this rugged Honesty!
Like the first Matter, 't'as all the Seeds of Good,
Only wants Form and Order.









BElieve me, our Signiora has manag'd her Affair; and (if I un∣derstand
any thing of the World) well.



As how? 'Pray' instruct me against the good Time.



Sh'as brought my Don on's Knees; 'tis all now, as she'll
have it.



That all! a mighty Business! Ha'n't they been married
two Years? And does not he Love her? And she know it? Few
Women but would have done as much. Besides, (and 'tis every days
Experience) even the wisest Men, when they once come to Love in
earnest, turn generally half-witted.



You are to be instructed indeed, Scintilla. He is good na∣tur'd,
and does Love her. But there are a many stubborn Fools in the
World; and a Woman need have all her Wits about her, to keep
her own. But to get ground! I know it may be done, but not so
easie.



I warrant ye do but bring him to the right manage at first;
humour him in every thing, you can't hinder, and the rest follows; 'tis
not the point whether she Loves, but whether he believes so. There's
your Art, to get him play himself into the Nooze, and be proud
of't too.



Well, well the World is strangely alter'd since my time; Young
Girls then were not wont to be so knowing, but now, they
are even able to teach us.





Now Grannum, and my pretty Convenience.




Nothing down with you, but Squab-Pigeons; a likely Fellow, if
a Woman durst him But Men now a-days are so deceitful 




Get ye to Bianca I'll tell her you do so mousle one.



Fie, Signior Pansa, fie; is there no more, but fall on,
without so much as a short Grace: I'm sure it was not so 



The Year you lost your Maiden-head; and that was so long
since, you have by this time forgotten you ever had one.







Yet she'll not turn her Back to you now.



Nor a better than himself.



No anger, I beseech ye After the dull rate Men made Love
formerly, I should look upon a Petticoat, as one of the most defensible
Spots in Christendom So many Scarfes, Curtains, Portcullises,
Counterworks, and what not; but now, that we'ave a shorter cut, of
Surprize, Sapping, down-right Storm, or Springing a Mine; up goes
Scarfe, Curtain, Portcullis And hey da.



Well, Pansa, thou'lt never break thy Heart for Love.



Love! 'tis a kind of Cholick; as long as ye keep it under
Girdle, ye may linger on with't, and well enough; but if it once get
Breast-high, the whole Mass is infected, and I can only say (as Phy∣sicians
of their dying Patients) his Time is come; cover him up, and
send for a Parson.





Come, Scintilla, 'tis as thou saidst, here she comes, he's
a filthy Man, e'en leave 'em together.




B'w'ye Grannum And now, my best Girl Thou hast not
forgot, I hope.



I wish I had. My Lady was Abroad this Afternoon, and I
laid the Box as you directed; but when she came forth, she gave me
such a Look, ask'd me, who had been there, and particularly
named your Master.



Never the worse, she could not have done less. But thou
hadst the Grace to deny all?



D'ye take me for a Fool? But this I told her, A Gen∣tleman,
I never saw before, brought it, and pray'd me to lay it in her
  12
Closet, as I had done; and I hop'd, without Offence; if otherwise, I
was sorry.



And that clear'd all agen?



Quite contrary, I saw Fire in her Eyes, yet trembled,
and could hardly speak; at last, she commanded me to find you
out, and that you let your Master know, she must speak with him.



Must? my She Secretary.



Yes, must and out of hand. And if I lose my Place by the
Bargain, I have spun a fine Thread.



Fear nothing: Or if thou shouldst, my Master's a Gentleman,
and my Bed will hold two.



You Men consider nothing.



And you Women too much. I tell thee, my Master, the Knight,
shall make his Amour to thy Lady the Princess, while I Pansa the Squire,
put it in Practice with thee, Bianca, the Dam'sel.



Well now, and that's so fine But when will ye bring me
some of those Books. Beshrew me, but I should have broke my Heart
long ere this, if 'twere not for 'em.



Thou shalt have any thing; my Heart, my all.



'Tis not the first time you told me so. I But 



D'ye think I am bound to find ye fresh Oathes every time?



When shall I see ye at our House?



To morrow, without fail. And is not this better than put∣ting
all to the last? And what's that, but singing a Psalm under the
Gallows?



But be sure now; and, find out your Master presently, and
send him to my Lady.



Doubt not of either   'tis the best humour'd
thing; a jolly Pug, and well-mouth'd, none of the first or second
Rate, I must confess. He that sees her by Day, would hardly
break his Neck to come at her by Night. However she's good Mer∣chantable
Ware, and well Condition'd; and (how shy soever she now
and then makes it) serves my turn, when a better's out of the way.












MY private Instructions were to pervert, and enlarge the
Kingdom of Darkness: Nor have I been Idle. I thought
Marone might have given me some pains; but he was mine at first,
and has engaged to me, for his Brothers of the Bank. But this Mon∣talto,
 I much doubt, or rather fear him.


My Friend! welcom my better half, we're now concern'd, Body,
Soul, Interest.



And when I fail ye, I'll turn a new Leaf, and build Hospitals. But,
what progress have ye made with Montalto?



He's rugged, and will neither lead nor drive, but his own way;
and therefore I question, whether we had not better let him alone.



But he is poor and lofty, despair him not. This Gold! 'twill
make a Man do any thing. I never yet found Man or Woman
that withstood it long.



I wou'd you'd feel his pulse, and I'll advance the money.



That shall be least in the Case. And I'd willingly undertake
it, but that (as you know) there's no kindness between us: And for
me (but so much as to appear in it) may render it suspected; where∣as
from you, his Brother-in-Law, his Friend, it can't but pass.



I yield. It shall be so.



Then, if you find him cold, I'll discover it my self. Tell
me of's Vertue! A Rattle for Children; I hate it perfectly, and
him for it. Why should any man pretend to more than comes to
his share?



Now let me hug my Genius! and whom I love so well, that
were I not sped already, I'd go no farther than your Family.



Between our selves, give her a Fig, and see if I don't fit
ye, to your Wish.



O by no means, you run too fast.



You need not be asham'd of her, we are descended from
Marius, and have had some Crown'd Heads of the House; tho', I con∣fess
it, somewhat long since they have had any Sceptre in their Hands.



I judge it by your self.



Nor, to tell ye Truth, can every Man say so much; or wou'd
perhaps, be willing to hear all that may be said of his; and that's
the Reason, why so many of the Ancients were descended from the
Gods: For, when their Birth was so obscure, that they were asham'd
to own it, the Jade the Mother, or some blind Poet, found out a God,
to Father the Bastard. What, I pray', were Bacchus, Hercules, Ro∣malus
and several others? Story Lyes, or their Fathers were of the
doubtful Gender, and their Mothers of the Common. But this, by
the by. And, because I hear some Body coming, I'll withdraw, for




Devils, do they call us! Poor Devils, where have we been
bred! This one Marone may shame us all; and had I done no more,
is worth my Journey.



Health, and his own Wishes, to my Brother.


The same, and more, (were't possible) to you.



But I'm half angry, angry with my self,
That this Alliance, is not yet made Friendship.



No Man shall court it more. And such a one,
As loves the Man, and not his Fortune Such,
As can hide any thing, but his Love And whose
Mistakes, shall be of weakness, not design.



Now how you speak, my Soul! This empty World,
Is hollow, false, ungrateful, And Men live
As if 'twere made for them, they, for themselves.







Witness, those mangled Officers,
Maim'd Souldiers, wooden-legg'd Artillery-men,
Spies, and Intelligencers out at Heels.
Some, shewing their Wounds; others, numbring the Battles they
have been in, and the Estates they have lost. Some, muttering
Libels; others, modelling a Reformation; and not the least part
of them, studying where to get a meal upon Reputation.



And yet, there's not a private Souldier, but glories in his
Wounds, as having received them in Defence of his Country.



And no doubt but they call 'em, Worthy Deeds. But I say, they
are Deeds worthy of Repentance; and such are all Services paid to the
Ungrateful. To go no further than you self, What have you
got by all yours?



The satisfaction, of having done what I ought. Vertue, is
Theatre enough unto her self.



You have said well, and worthily. And because, he that is
pleased with anothers good, encreases his own. Give me leave,
  15

But it requires secrecy, and I must have your word for't.



I know not what it may be.



You're at your Liberty, if you don't like it.



You have my word.




Then thus, There is a Prince, whose Name must be as yet
conceal'd, is so sensible of your Merit, and this Republick's Ingra∣titude,
that he has order'd ye Ten thousand Pistoles, as a small Pledge
of his future Favour; and I'll advance the Money.





Ten Thousand Pistols! and from a Prince unknown! and
what must I do for all this?



Kings have their Reasons to themselves, too deep for private
Men to fathom. Who knows, but he may have a design upon
Italy. This or some other place; and, which is further in
my Instructions, has pitcht on you, as General for the Expedition.



How are you sure it has not taken wind?



Not a Man on this side the Alps, knows it besides our selves.



Or that your King will keep his Word, more than Genoa
has hers?



I have the money in the House. He's coming.




But is not this to betray my Country?



Give it another Name, and do't Who ever scrupled a safe
Revenge? Success, will call it Justice.







But, Ungrateful Country. That only is my Country, where
I am well. And, what think you?



That you have said too much for me to hear.
I lend a Hand to Slave my Country! No;
That won't Montalt', the disoblig'd Montalt';

Vertue forbid the Thought. Tho' she may 've lost
Th' affection of a Mother, she's my Mother:
And as she bears that Name, I must, and will
Support her, or lie buried in her Ruines.



Howe'er, I doubt not but I'm safe; your Word,
(The great Credential of Mankind) secures me.



Unlawful Promises oblige to nothing,
But a Repentance. And to keep mine, here,
Wou'd be a double Crime; and break those Laws
Of Piety, and Faith, my Country claims.



Country! A Thing of Chance, no Choice of yours:
Your Mother might have dropt ye any where: But if
You break your Word, you violate your Honour;
And that's your own.



Perish for me, that Honour;


Life, Estate, every thing, so she be safe:
And so my Sister-in-Law's Husband, no more Friend,
I'll not resolve ye what I'll do. But know,
'Twas not within my Word, not to prevent ye.




Bubbled! by this good Light, merely bubbled! and,
when (one wou'd have thought) I had him, all to nothing. Sure,
sure, our Masters lie under a great mistake; and Mankind were once the
ancienter Devils, and invented that Sham, of their Wives sending
them, only to frighten us, from vent'ring among them. 


 I hope she did not hear me.



And what (if I may be so bold) have my Wise Brother-in-Law
and you, been projecting? When d'ye set out?



For what? (my Dear) or whither?



Why for the Indies, in a Cock-boat; or France, on a
Millstone. I hope you'll go by the North-West Passage, and take a
Bait by the way, to hear the Meremaids sing? Your Friend, my
Sister's Husband, wou'd make a special General for the Expedition. Ten
Thousand Pistoles will do no hurt; you have it in the House,
and may advance it.



Betray'd too!   But why this to me? 'Pr'ythee,
my Dear. 



Methinks you're very Familiar. 




Nay, my best Wife, do but hear me.



Wife, Mary! You think I cannot read your Thoughts in
your Looks. You must be plotting, must ye!



If to raise thee to Grandeur, be ploting, I'm guilty. One
successful Work Al-a-mode, is a surer Game, than a Thousand good
Works.



I smell your Design, it is to ruine me. I was once told
by a Cunning Woman, beggary would be my End; and you take
the way to't.



I have enough, ne'er fear it.



Yes, and are free enough of it, to every one but me; and
there it goes from your Heart.



Thou know'st the contrary; it is but ask and have. Dost
want any thing?



As if a Woman must have nothing, but what she wants, and
asks; my Family were never wont to ask.



And I've been kind to them, for your sake. I have honou∣rably
bestowed two of your Sisters.



They cou'd have don't themselves.



Sent a Brother of yours into the Levant; another, for
  17France; a third, into Spain; and am now making Provision for a
fourth. So that, in effect, I have married a Tribe to Enjoy one.



Yes, to wit me with it. 



O Signior! that you had come a little sooner. Our Spouse and I
have been at Jingle-jangle. He knows I love him, and that's the
Reason.


Hough! Jangle with you! I hope, Sir, you did not lift
a finger, if you had 




I'd giv'n him two for one. 




And who are you?



Soy hydalgo come Il Re! My Name Don Hircio Zanzummim,
Gogmagog, lineally descended from the Dukes of Infantado, Trinidado, or
some Body else. And if you had! 



No. there was nothing like it.





I only say, if he had, my Great, Great, Great, Great-Grandfather's
Ashes (his that gave the Sultan the Lye, and took the
Cham of Tartary by the Whiskers Royal) would blush to see any of his
Posterity not true to Honour. You say he did not, and I'm sa∣tisfied.
 But if he had, or durst but offer't, Voto!



Come, Signior, I'll be his Security,





She has her Bravo too! Cowardly Devil that I was, not to
draw upon him; yes, and fright my Wife, who (which is some
sign of Love) did not aggravate it. Well, go thy ways, thou
hast thy Frolicks; yet it shall go hard, but I will hit thy Humour.









MY Husband is convinc'd, and so am I,
The Action, in all its Circumstances,
Must be Grimald's; for't can be none's but his;
And yet I'm rack'd between the two Extreams,
Of Friendship to him, and my just Resentments
To his false Nephew. All unknown to us,
The Generous Grimaldi has restor'd
My Husband's Fortune: His degenerous Nephew
Has taken this occasion, to renew
Enter Fieschi, as at a stand, and gazing on her.
His long rejected Love.




Has wrought Impossibilities, and added
New Graces to her Person, as if Infinity,
Cou'd be encreast.



I sent for ye, Fieschi;

But it had been more honourable in you,
Not to have giv'n me cause. Your worthy Uncle
Has, to his frequent Obligations,
Added a fresh I need not tell ye what.



And 'tis his satisfaction, that he wanted
Neither the Will, nor Means of doing it.



Debts are discharg'd with Payment. Benefits,
Pay what we can, there will be still Arrear.
But, for his Nephew to profane that Friendship,
I could be angry verily I could,
And wou'd, were't not to make an others ill
My own affliction.



Blame your Vertue then,

Montalto lov'd it. And the self-same cause
That absolves him, absolves Fieschi too.
He rested not in Speculation only;
And shall I turn Philosopher?




And only his; and therefore barr'd to you.



But Nature's free, and walks not by restraint,
But choice 



And I have mine. 




Those Bug-bear Words, of Honour, Jealousie;
She ne'er impal'd free Woman; or design'd
A thing so Excellent for one's Embrace.



Enough When that I ever heard ye was as much
Against my will, as the concealing it
Against my Duty No a Vertuous Woman
Takes no more Liberty than what she ought.



At least, blame Love, not me. I've often rais'd.
Your great Idea in my Soul; and (as
A Diamond only cuts a Diamond)
Set your own Vertue 'gainst your self, yet still
Love gets the upper-ground, and pours upon me:
So weak a Fence is Vertue against Love.



We still excuse our selves. The fault lies not
In Vertue, but our Resolutions:
Cou'd we once make our Actions work up
to our Intentions, the Work were done.


There take your idle whatsoever it be;


white Box, and throws it toward him.
I knew the hand too well, to open it.


And will you still torment me with the sight
Of a forbidden Good?



Not good to you,
Because forbidden. If you're wise, be gone.



You've said it, and I obey.






But take your Box wi'ye.
Sure I have done some Evil, and the Guilt
Sticks on my Brow. It must be so, or he
Had never offer'd this Amour to me.
Be't what it will, this I'm sure, my Will
Had nothing in't; yet how poor and cheap
Do even the appearances of Evil make us.





Deprive me of my Liberty.



In exchange, take mine.



The only Injury you ever did us:
For it has put us on the Necessity
Of living and dying Ungrateful.



A Benefit too great to be receiv'd.



Not for a Friend to give. 








'Thas overpaid it self.
To have done well, in hopes of a return,
Is the most sordid Usury. Allay
Does but embase the Coin; and such a thought
Had derogated from the Majesty
Of Friendship, and been Interest. 




Equality make the lasting Friendship?



Of Minds, I grant it. Friendship cannot stand
With Vice or Infamy. Degenerous mixtures
Seldom out-live the Birth. And as ours was
Founded on Vertue (like a true-built Arch)
May it grow up, until it knit at Top,
And bid Defiance to the Shocks of Fortune.



Thus you o'ercome us every way. 






What 'tis to be a Friend; one, without whom,
As a Man can't be happy, 'tis not his least
Unhappiness, he never knows his Friend,
But by being Unhappy himself. A Friend!
My earthly God! 



As you are mine, no more.
Come, let's enjoy this Salt of Life, this All,
That gives it relish, and without which, Life
Were but a dull Parenthesis of Time;
The World a Wilderness, and Man the Beast.
I've wanted Company in a Crowd Blest Friendship!
Thou Girdle of the World! Had I been Heathen,
I'd Sacrific'd unto no other Goddess.









TO say otherwise, were to belye him; and, as all Men have
their Faults, the worst of his, that I know, is, that he loves
me too well.



And such a Fault may be easily born with.



Thou'rt a meer Chicken, Girl; there may be as great
a mistake in loving a Woman too well, as in loving her too little. What
wou'd I care for a Man should court my little Finger, look Babies
in my Eyes, sit and admire me: That was not the Fashion of
my time. Men were Men then.



And there too, he's likely enough. Truss and well knit. But
why this to me?



Your Ladiship was wont to allow us this harmless Freedom.



Or, if I don't, you'll take it.



Without Offence then What Diversion have ye?



As pleases my Husband; and I have neither Eye nor Ear
to any thing else.



And a Friend wou'd study as much to please you.



I shou'd think one Husband were enough for any modest Wo∣man.
 Are there naughty Women?



Mary forbid it! Or that they should not be content
with one Eye, one Hand, one Leg.



But one's Husband tho', is the best Friend.



And the worst Company. Fie (Madam) you'll ruine the
Sex. Husband, say ye! A meer Thing, a Cover-slut of
Custom.



Has not every Well two Buckets? Every Ship two An∣chors?
  21
 Or did you never see two Cocks cruckling about one Hen,
and her, all the while picking of Straws, to make her own Nest?



Well said, my fine Girl! thou maist come to something in time.



How these Jades hit my humour!   O But wou'd
a Woman! a Vertuous Woman! a Woman of Honour! 



Do any thing, but say her Prayers.



Besides the Injury. 



To what? Or whom? You lose nothing, sell no houshold
Stuff, nor waste goods.



Or if the main house fall, do but keep up the dove-coat, and
you'll ne'er want Pigeons, till ye damn up the Loover.



But you know I seldom go Abroad, and for me to receive Visits,
wou'd make my Husband Jealous.







Or can he be so ill-natur'd, as when his own Belly's full, to
deny a Beggar his Leavings?



But People will be apt to talk of a Body.



For what? For going to Church! Can't you pre∣tend
a Vow of Devotion and Chastity, for three Days a Week?



And suppose he make the like for t'other four?



How willingly now wou'd she be perswaded into her own De∣sires.
   You're young, and the Town's full.



You could not set-up then with Partridge and Quail, for the
Year round?



No (by my Troth) cou'd I not; and yet I've but a puling
Stomach.



There's somewhat in't. What's every thing we do, but a
meer Circle of Variety, or Grand Oleo, disht-up several ways to sweeten
the wearisomness of one Pleasure by another? What's Imagination
or Desire, when once attain'd, but Surfeit? Fish of Four Days
old away with't.



Your Ladiship takes it very naturally. Don't the Men say
of us Women and Women and more Women but still
Women.



And shall Woman (Natures last hand, to shew what she could
do) she alone walk by her self? To one Dark-lanthorn? She
shut her Windows to the Sun, to pore over a farthing Candle? Which
of themselves does it? And shall I 



No (Madam) if the Men Ring the Changes, I know not why
we mayn't shufle, and cast Knaves agen?



Wellfare honest Mahomet! We read of no Couples in his
Paradise And yet young, juicy Girls, plump balmy and
never above Fifteen.











More sparkling than the Diamond.



I shou'd have thought the Cows Eye better. A demure Look
keep its own Counsel, and a little seeming Innocence cheats a Man into
a Fondness. The sparkling Eye may hit a stragling Fool; but 'tis the
melting, 'tis the dying Eye, that sweeps whole Ranks. Let's
see  set thine hold there there was a Look! so that
agen.




What? practising against the Ball? I fear me, I may have
disturbed ye.



Not at all, unless it be with your new Gravity. But whence?
whence this startch'd Face? or why?





Besides my former Disappointments, it is not many hours since
I left your Sister Portia. But the same Shaggreen still, like the
Parthian, she kills by flying.



Alas, poor Fieschi! thou'rt smitten: I thought how
ye lov'd me, and have found it.



You wrong me; there's nothing might have taken in that
sullen Fort, but I've attempted; made all the Approaches, Love,
back'd with Interest, could contrive, but all in vain.



The Necklace cost me Twelve Hundred Duckats.



That you had seen, with what Scorn she kickt it after me.



That all! she shall have a better Jewel.



To as much purpose. A Rock is not more immovable.



Yet I have known a Rock blown up.



Her Vertue is as firm, as her Face charming.



Away ye Fool, I have too many Charms of my own, to suspect
anothers; 'tis not her Beauty, but Vertue, quarrels me. That
half-fac'd Vertue, that has its Faults as well as others, but a better
way of hiding 'em.



Be't what it will, 't'as conquer'd me; and were't not for my
prior Love to you, I must have doted on her.



False Man. And when I think upon the thing I'd Curse, I'll
Name Fieschi.




Be merciful, and kill me, or forgive me. I'll yet attempt
her, I will, but she's your Sister.



What's that to my command? Only conquer her, and
wear my self, and Fortune. That Nature had made me a Man! Consider, I'll
return instantly.




If ever Man had a Wolfe by the Ears, I have one now. If
I renew my Attempts on Portia, and carry her, I hazard the Friend∣ship
between my Uncle and Montalto! and if I don't, I lose Imperia. Of
all Devils, defend me from a Womans Devil!






There's more Gold, and richer Jewels; and, as a farther pledge,
this,  and my Heart. Not yet resolv'd? Away.




I was meditating some new Contrivance. 'Tis done.



There spake my better Angel.







More but's? Has she no She-friend, no Woman (and
while I think on't, you may trust Bianca) your self no Wit, or these
no Rhetorick?





Once more, 'tis done as sure as Fate had seal'd it. And if
Pansa has wrought up Bianca, as I once design'd it, you'll say't your
self.









THey're all Abroad then?



Whether they are or not, you're out of hearing. But
what does your Master mean by all this? I over-heard them,
when he was last here; but never let him look to come agen.



Not without thee, Bianca.



I've had enough of it already; my Lady has not given me a
good Look ever since.



Patience (my Beloved) Time and Patience 



Will do no good with her. Besides you Men are so incon∣stant,
 if ye had your Wish to day, you'd have another to morrow.



And are not you Women the same; as fond of an old Sweet∣heart,
as a brisk Widow of her third Husband.



E'en thank your selves that taught us.



Sick of every thing but a new Face.



Your own Picture to a Hair.



And so fickle, fickle, fickle, a Man knows not where to
have ye.



Beshrew me now, but that's a Fib; where to have you,
's the Question: Once fill your Belly, and ye drop off.



And there I must confess, you have the 'vantage, you stick
the closer. And perhaps, though I spake too soon, what have
we got here?




Nothing of your's, I'll secure ye. I shall be married a
Tuesday next.



Still my good merry Girl! But say he find it?



You Men think you have all the Wit; but I can tell ye, some
Women come two, three, four, and sometimes five Months sooner than
ordinary of the first Child; but for the rest as right as others. You're
all for Nine Months at least, but I have known a nimble Fellow,
not married above Eight Weeks, and his Wife has brought him a
couple, and so like the Father too!



Still the same merry Rogue.



But hark ye tho', where are the Books you promis'd me? I
can't sleep for thinking of 'em.



And thou shalt have them in a day or two.



O! what a dainty thing it is, to see a Man here to day, and a
Thousand Miles off to morrow; mow Giants by the Waste, conquer
Armies, ov'r-run Kingdoms, and all for the Love of some distress'd
Princess he never saw; whilst she (poor Lady) apprehending it by
instinct, sits bemoaning him in some Castle-Grate; and if she can bor∣row
so much leisure from her Grief, Records his doughty Deeds to
Posterity, in Window-cushions and Coverlets.



And then, when over the Heads of Forty or Fifty Thousand
Men, all slain by his own Hand, he cuts his way to her Chamber, O!
what Sighs, Looks, Half-words, and I know not what! till the Lord
of the Castle, having reinforc'd his Guards, Surprizes him ere he can
recover Morglay; and from his Lady's Arms conveys him to a Dungeon,
where he's fed with nothing but Horse-bisket and Puddle-water, till
being fortunately releas'd by some Enchanter, his Friend, he's dropt in
an unknown Desart, whence, within Three Days, he becomes Master of
a great Kingdom, and within Four more (by some private mark)
proves the rightful Heir of't.



There were a Man for me! I hate your Sots that turn Her∣mits,
and can live Seven Years together on Nuts, Black-berries, and
Acorns. They Lovers! O that I were a Man! that I might ha'
been a Knight; or, being as I am, some little odd Princess.



And I have much of thy humour about me; for never had any
Man greater desire of Wealth and Command than my self, and that
only to eat well, drink lustick, care for nothing, and have my Flat∣terers
as other Men. But come, Bianca, though I cannot make thee
a Princess, I can put thee in the way, shall make thee as fine as a Prin∣cess.
 Two Hundred Pistoles would do no hurt, I take it.



Ay Mary! but where's the Money?



Thy Master now and then lies at his Country House, and do
thou but give my Master the opportunity of getting into your Lady's
Apartment, some such night, and I'll secure it thee.



To what purpose? I'm sure he will do no good.



Do thou thy part, he'll venture that; Two Hundred Pistoles
is Money:



And truly (to speak my Heart) I've often wonder'd how she
can be so unkind.




Good Nature thou must; and to let thee see he's in

Come, come, there are certain Critical minutes, when a Woman can
deny nothing.



But shall I be sure of the rest?



If thou hast it not, never trust Pansa more.



Well then, you speak in a lucky hour, for my Master goes
out of Town to morrow, and an hundred to one, if he return that
Night. Let your Master, and you, come about Midnight, and
you'll find the Street-door unlock'd, and me, ready to receive ye. But
be sure now 



That thou shou'dst doubt it! 








Enter Crispo and Mingo wiping their Faces.


HEre's a Clutter with all my heart; why sure, this Master of
ours is either running mad, or never thinks of returning.



Here was a Palace, as well furnish'd as the Duke's it self, such
Hangings, Pictures, Carpets, Plate, and every thing suitable; but
it seems they were not rich enough; we're all new from top to
bottom.



For my part, my Back's almost broke with Luggaging, and I
think thine's not much better. Wou'd 'twere her Neck, that has
been the cause of all.



Yet, what wou'd not a Man do that Loves his Wife?



Commend me to our old Home; we have no Wives there: And
(I've observ'd) here, those that so gild this Pill of Matrimony, to make
it go down the easier, never take it themselves.



The Truth is, neither of us need be fond of the Sex. But
every one is not our Imperia. A Wife, if you have Money, will
help to get more.



Or rather spend what you have.



If you're at Home, she'll bear you Company.



Or rather Scold ye out of Doors.



If you're Abroad 



Perhaps Cuckold ye, ere ye come home. But how now
Mingo, have ye forgot your Knitting-needles?



Nor your Trap-door meer Accidents.



I tell thee Brother of mine, A Devil of Clouts, wou'd ha' more
Wit; and I'm afraid, our Master has spoil'd thee.





So, so, ye have done well, ye have done more in a few hours,
than a dozen Lazy Block-heads wou'd ha' done in a Week. Yet,
methinks, the Rooms might have been better Perfum'd.



We reserv'd that, till last.



Never the worse Is the Musick come?



They only wait your call.




My Wife and I are Friends agen, and to confirm it, I've promis'd her
a Ball; and can't but laugh, to think how she'll be pleased, with the
Preparation I have made for't. She's but taking the Air, and can't
be long ere she return.




O my Dear! and am not I a good Wife now?
That thou'dst been with us at Duke Doria's Garden;
The pretty Contest between Art and Nature:
To see the Wilderness, Grots, Arbours, Ponds,
And in the midst, over a stately Fountain,
The Neptune of the Ligurian Sea,


Andrea Dorea; the Man, who first
Taught Genoa not to serve. Then to behold
The curious Water-works, and wanton Streams
Wind here and there, as if they had forgot
Their Errand to the Sea 



Thou sett'st off this
So well, I fansie thou'dst design a fairer.



Dear Husband try. And then agen, within
That vast prodigious Cage, to see the Groves
Of Myrtle, Orange, Gessamine, beguile
The winged Quire into a Native-Warble,
And Pride of their restraint Then, up and down,
An antiquated Marble, or broken Statue,
Majestick, even in ruine. 




To see thee pleas'd. 



And such a glorious Palace!


Such Picture! Carving! Furniture! my words
Cannot reach half the Splendor. And after all,
To see the Sea, fond of the goodly sight,
One while, glide Amorous, and lick her Walls,
As who wou'd say, come follow: But repulst,
Rally its whole Artillery of Waves,
And crowd into a Storm. But when (my Dear)
When will ye fansie me such a Retirement?



When I, like him that rais'd it, can command
The Spoils o'th' rifled Ocean, thou shalt.



Thou'st ever a Fetch for what thou'st no mind to How
can a Woman love ye?



Do but consider the House we now live in, is little inferior
to a Palace; and might become my Better.



A meer Hole and that so damp, musty, and raw 



You ne'er complain'd of it before; however, Fire and Per∣fumes
will rectifie the Air.



Yes to put a Woman into Fits.



Bating that Palace, there's not a House in Genoa better fur∣nish'd;
 and for Picture I dare almost vie Italy. Come and
I'll show thee.




What? Those in the Gallery? I saw 'em as I came in meer
Sign-post work.



How? Tuian's Venus! and Sign-post work?



A down-right Country Jone.



Raphael's Paris, and the Three Goddesses?



A Bumkin, and his Milk-maids.



What think'st thou then of Guido Rheni's Rape of Lucrece? Mich'el
Angelo's Leda? Or Corregio's Jupiter and Semele?



Enough to make a modest Woman look through her Fingers.



Wou'dst thou have nobler Actions? What say'st thou to Car∣rachio's
Perseus and Andromeda? Pietro Testa's Iphigenia? Or Mola's
Curtius?



What Mr. Dawber pleases.



Or, if thou lik'st Hunting there's Tempesta's Acteon!



E'en keep it to your self; for my part, I wou'd not put such
an Affront on my Friends, as to have 'em seen in my House. Picture,
d'ye call 'em!





Sir, the Company are now lighting at Door.










Nay Wife my dear Wife what will our Friends say? For
thy own sake, if not mine, be civil.




Say what they will shall I humour a Husband that can deny
me any thing. You'd as good let me go, or I'll spoil all. Let
me go I say.



Thou shalt have any thing Here take the Keys of all I
have and please thy self. 




You can make me do what you please that ye can.





Do but observe this Air. 

A Dance of all but Rod. and Imp.



Scraping you mean I'd 've made as good on a Gridiron.



Softly, my Dear 




And such a string-halt Dance.




WERE I to take Wife,
(As 'tis for my Life)
She shou'd be Brisk, Pleasant, and Merry;
A lovely fine Brown,
A Face all her own,
With a Lip, red, and round, as a Cherry.


Not much of the Wise,
Less of the Precise,
Nor over reserv'd, nor yet flying:
Hard Breasts, a streight Back,
An Eye, full and black,
But languishing, as she were dying.


And then, for her Dress,
Be't more, or be't less,
Not tawdry set out, nor yet meanly:
And one thing beside,
Just, just so much Pride,
As may serve to keep honest, and cleanly.



Whoo, ho, ho, hoo! here's a Voice! and a Song, I thank

You'd have you can't tell what.





O Madam, your Monkey has got into the next Room, and
overturn'd all your Cupboard of China.




Or I had don't my self, to spite my Don.



I beseech ye Gentlemen, let this make no disturbance I hope
you'll take share of a short Regale.









Poor Hen-peckt Devil, they might have said. The very
Boys will pelt me.  But is this Belphegor! this,
the once, Generalissimo! Yes  but subjected to
all the Conditions of Humanity and I must be contented, as well as
others at least, till I get my Keys agen: For to say Truth, my Ships
are longer out than was expected, and Bills come thick upon me; some
of them too, begin to be importunate. My comfort is, they're three
rich Cargoes, and any on's return will pay for all.









SHE's as good as her word. The Door was unlockt.



And I may trust her?



My Life ye may for she ever made it a matter of Consci∣ence,
to take a Gentleman's Money, and do nothing for't.





What shall we do, Sir? our Master's return'd but in his
own Apartment Consider.



It must be And why not now?



Then follow me close and softly and do you Pansa, stay
here till I return.




And if it hits, I'm made and who knows but I may marry the
Jade my self, for all her Tuesday next. O but but what? To
be a Cuckold. And how many are there in the World, yet live con∣tentedly?
 But your own Cuckold forestal the Market antidate
your own Fortune And what of that? I am not the first has don't,
and sha'n't be the last. This I am sure, I am the less deceiv'd. What
ere it be, Two hundred Pistoles, and my Masters Kindness,


Now Bianca, I was thinking, what if thou and I should join Jiblets, in
an honourable Way? What think ye of Matrimony Bianca?



No, Pansa, no for tho' I love ye well enough, you shall
never twit me with any thing of your own Knowledge but for old
Acquaintance, I'll recommend ye She is!



The very Mop of Modesty! But what has she?



Enough for you, and to spare. The truth is not above
Sixteen or Seventeen Thousand Duckats ready Money, and as much
more, after the Death of her Grannum But for Vertue!



The Lord knows what! But say, she won't ha' me?



I'll put in a good Word for ye. This for your comfort,
She'll sip Verdua privately tho' and then so good natur'd.



That's half the work: For I never knew the Devil at one end,
but his Dam was at t'other.








by another. He falls, and drops his Dagger.


Where am I? Blind Fortune assist my blinder self.


and exit by the Door he first came in at. Bianca peeps in
with her dark Lanthorn; sees the Dagger, takes it up, and gives
both to Pansa, then likewise peeping.


There bolt the Door t'ye, while I look out another way.



same Door Fieschi ran in at.



What's here! methinks I see a faint glimmering of a Light within
that Closet.  Bolted within too nay
then 


in the Face with his dark Lanthorn. Montalto fires at him, and
closes with him. Both fall. Pansa stabs him, and by that means
gets from him; but not without the loss of his Dagger. Exit Pansa
by the same Door as his Master: Montalto rises. Enter Servants
(with Lights and Swords) undrest.


Thieves, Thieves! 'waken my Lord, he may be kill'd in's
Bed.



Hold where he stands! He bleeds a Handkercher, to
keep the Wound from Air.



What needs this noise? One of ye stay with me another
get me a Chirurgeon. 



I run, I run.




The rest, look about the House 'tis almost impossible he
should escape.




The Street Door (my Lord) is open.




Nay, then the Bird is flown. However, see what Servants
  31
are wanting, or out of Bed. That Men knew when, to put on Arms.


gives it Montalto. He starts.


Here's some ones Bloody Dagger.



And I know whose I gave it him That
was unkind.





My Husband Bloody! What have I done, good Heaven! Now,
pity me And press me not with more than I can bear, or
give me strength 




Do not thou stab me too 

'Tis but a scratch, and thy Montalto lives:
Stay! stay my Portia! yet one minute stay,
And take me with thee.




She begins to stir, Sir.




Return, return! at least but give an Eye,
And see who calls thee back. 




Was on the Wing, and nothing, but that voice,
Had checkt its flight.



Do not torment thy self:
Thou maist accuse, but canst not alter Fate.
Heav'n, Earth, all Things, have their Period.



But Portia has resolv'd, she will be Portia,

In not surviving you.




Ev'ry Wound is not Mortal; or if 'twere,
Who comes to his last Period, dies old.
If l've liv'd well, it's enough; if ill, too long:
Life's measur'd, not by Years, but Actions.



But to be thus rent from me 



If I must leave the Town, what matter is't
What Port I go out at? Or which way I die?
Death has a Thousand Roads, but all of then
Meet at the Journeys end How happy then
Is Man, that he can neither lose his Way,
Nor pass it twice.




The Chirurgeons (Sir) are coming.



Bring them into the next Room Come (my Dear) I hope
there's no danger However, happen what will, it sha'n't sur∣prize
me.







'TIS what I fear'd my Levant Merchant taken by the
Turks my French-man sunk at Sea my Spaniard lost
at Dice. And what's worse? My Credit is at Stake my Cash in
my Wife's Hands, and if she prove cross, there's no more to be said I
must break.


To him Don Hircio.


I am a Gentleman, Sir and the King's no more.




Heaven maintain it, Sir.



Maintain me! I have an Estate somewhere beyond the
Mountains in my own Country; and where a Pigeon House once stood;
which, were it standing, as it is now fall'n, well-stock'd with Pigeons,
and removed to Madrid, might be worth to me a brace of Thousand
Mareveds yearly 



That is to say, about Twenty Shillings English.












Yet think it no Dishonour to converse with our Jews in black∣hats,
here Somewhat below me, I must confess but I am now
and then serviceable to 'em, and they thank me.



I remember ye, Sir Your commands to me.



That's as you please You are Signior, a Man of Fortune,
which makes them Envy you. In short, 'tis given out, your Ships
are miscarried, and now, one taxes this, another that, a third,
your Cattamountain, (my Relation) your Lady.



Alas, poor Fool! must she suffer too?



I was once about to have made them eat their Words but
Prudence (as sometimes it shou'd) interpos'd. Upon the whole,
if you pay 'em not Forty Thousand Duckats, you'll be Arrested ere
Night.



Neither my Ships nor that, will much affect me.



The more's my Joy But, since they are such Scoundrels,
name me the Man ye do but doubt and he's dead.



By no means, Signior However, as an acknowledgment of
your Respect be pleas'd 





Now cou'd I quarrel you my self, in that you dare not trust my Ho∣nour
 but I can take nothing ill from so Noble a Patron; and when
you have any such occasion, let me oblige ye.




Her Relation, he said a worthy one! And yet it may be
true as he says; and who knows, but he might be sent to set me. My
last Comfort is, I have Cash enough in the House, but the Keys of it
hang at my Wife's Girdle.



 Never more welcom, tho' to unwelcom News.


Your Ships you mean 'Tis every where.



I'm happy yet in such a partner of my Cares All will do
well agen Lend me thy Keys.



For what, I wis' your Wife (it seems) is not fit to be trusted?



Thou knowest the contrary; but I have some Bills charg'd
on me, that require speedy payment, or they'll be protested; and
then, where am I?



Ev'n where you please But Keys, you get none of me the
Fool has more Wit.



I shall be ruin'd else.



Better you than I She'll provide for one.



I have enough to bear Fourty such Losses.



Yes in your great Iron Chest. Away, you pitiful Don with
what Face cou'd ye cheat me with a parcel of Stones and Brick-bats,
instead of Coin? Was this the Treasure? These the Doubleoons
ye talkt of?



I tell thee, Woman, 'tis all good Silver; and more Gold than
the best of thy Family, thou so much tatlest, e'er saw together.



My Family, Gentleman! I was finely hope up, when all
the Pride of Italy courted me, to marry a Tramontane, a beggarly
Don, Don Roderigo Castiliano! the first of his House, and the last of his
Name. Blot my Blood with your damn'd Morisco! That Mo∣letto
Face, might have fore-warn'd me. But, alas, poor me I
lov'd.




Thou hast a Prince Incognito in me.



The Devil I have! Ha, ha, hah!



Provoke me not, for fear thou find'st me such.



And what wou'd my poor Pug? I have a Charm shall lay
ye, good Sir Devil. A Circle, shall cool your Courage.




How now who's this?



Who shou'd she be? my Tire-Woman: She brings me
Knots, Gloves, Ribbons, Points, every thing.




his hand in the Box, finds a Letter, she snatches in from him, and
throws it back; the Tire-woman takes it up, and Exit running.
Mighty fine! And from whom, I pray'?



What's that to you Jealous! o' my Conscience, Jealous! I
see a mousled Hood, rumpled Tippet, or tumbled Petty-coat wou'd
not down with you! my Lord Dick, or my Lord Tom, stick in your
stomach. Jealous, my Life! Jealous! Know Tramontane, Jea∣lousie
is the effect of Weakness; whereas, he that's Vertuous himself,
belives the same of another.



Give me my Keys, I say agen and that Letter Or 




But, shall I have 'em agen?



Upon my Honour thou shalt I'll only take what will serve
My present Occasion.



Shall I indeed La?  And will ye never,
be angry with your Wife agen?







Well then I'll try for once 

and beats him about the Stage; and as she hears Company entring,
she drops the Sword, and takes to her Handkerchief.
Murder! Murder! Help! Murder:
Enter Five or Six Women.
Sure all Women ha'n't such Husbands.



Now fie upon him for a Villain, beat his Wife!



Draw upon a Woman!


All fall upon him, and beat him
down; and having well pomell'd
him they go up to Imp. and Exe∣unt
with her. Rod. rises.


Do but hear me.



That were wise work indeed.



I hope you are not hurt. 



Nor all Men sure such Wives. What shall I do? Debts,
threaten me Abroad my Wife's at Home stay here, I cannot and
return, I dare not   And live with her Ten Years
(if possible) That blest Parenthesis, if possible.
But yet, to fall thus tamely Be outwitted;
And, by a Woman! By the drowsie Lethe,


Cocytus, Acheron, or whatever worse,
Than Fables ever feign'd, or Fear conceiv'd,
I'll make her know me better; make her know,
What an Italianated Devil can do.







I am told, Sir, it requires no Answer.




Your House is beset with Bailiffs Consult your Safety Haste,
if you're wise. How I command, how the dull Slaves obey.








Attend me without what shall a poor Devil do? But might
not Friends take up the matter? Yes and your House be∣set.
  35
 I'd come to any Terms, but the Letter said, Haste. I
have a Loop-hool yet but never more to maintain my Figure. Haste,
was the word; but must I leave thee? I will yet stand
it. Men and their Wives have quarrell'd, and been Friends agen 

Runs his Head against the Wall.
Recovers, and Exit.
They're got into the House.
The best of't is, I have not far to go.





their Hands to their Swords.


SIgnior Crispo? Mio multo illustre.





Min' Here Mingo? Vestre tres humble. That Comerades
shou'd know one another no better?



And which becomes us, least of all others. Us, that shou'd
unite against the Common Enemy, Mankind.



Thou'rt right. And now, that we're Pot-valiant, what
think'st thou of a Frolick?



And kill the next we meet.



My very thought. A match   Our
Master will not hear of our return; and if I'm hang'd, 'tis what I wou'd.



And better far, than living under the Dominion of this super∣devilified
Imperia.



Poor Belphegor I have known him somewhat in my time,
but now, so sotted on her, he's not himself; and all this to please her,
that will be pleas'd with nothing.



How one may be mistaken? I remember, while he court∣ed
her, Almond-butter wou'd not melt in her mouth so innocent,
she'd have blusht t'ave seen her own Hand naked and a Voice so low,
she cou'd not hear her self. But not Three Days married, ere
(like an Alarm Clock) the House rang of her.



I'm sure I bear her marks. Time was, I cou'd have bolted
through a Key-hole; cut Capers on the point of a Needle; giv'n the
Double-Somerset on a Pins-head; felt no more blows than a Sack of
Wool; but now she'as beaten me to mash.



And made me meer Gut-founder'd and I'm afraid, our Ma∣ster
(return when he will) will make but a ragged Accompt of it.



My only hopes are, he'll be weary in time, and leave her behind
him; for if ere she come among us below, we break up House for certain.



A Lion (they say) runs from a Cock; and well may the Devil
from a Crowing Hen.



I am glad to see this amendment, Friend Mingo, and hope
now, you are not so matrimonially inclin'd, as once you were?



I tell thee, Crispo, I know not what to make of 'em. Some
are so skittish, no ground will hold 'em. Others so resty, one can
bring 'em to nothing. And others agen (like a Rattle at a Dogs
Tail) run where you will, and it still follows ye.



When all's done, there's nothing like an honest private Friend:
And (between our selves) I have such a piece.



As mine, I warrant ye so loving!



So careful of her Honour, yet so obliging!



As if I did not know your old Flora a meer Rag of a Jade;
I wonder thou durst venture on her, for fear of Navel-gauling.



And, I think, you have not much reason to brag of your greasie
Tripe-wife▪ for my part, I hate Bog-trotting.



What need this reservedness among Friends. Upon Ho∣nour
now who shall say first.



And wound Reputation! Fie.





You may believe Neighbours, there's somewhat more than or∣dinary,
that I am here in person. Every man wou'd not have
don't. But see, who are those Fellows running there follow,
follow. There is a dangerous Plot now brewing, and I know who has
a Finger in it up to the Elbow. Follow, follow 'em.








I Have heard of your Quality, and great Losses But your Wife
say you? Alas, poor Gentleman! I lost mine about a month
since, and tho' I have no great reason to brag, find a miss of her.



I'll change with ye; my living Wife, for your dead Wife.



Not too much of that neither I had, had one before; and
she was well enough. But this last! such a I'll tread lightly on
her Grave, for fear she 'wake.



And what difference found ye' between a good Wife, and a
bad one.



I said not, she was good, but well enough tho' I think the
difference be much the same, as between a wild Rabbet and a tame Rab∣bet.
 However, at last, I found the way of beating the Devil
out of mine.



And I should ha' thought, there was more danger of beating
him in. But, Sir, you don't consider the Catch-poles; they fol∣low
  37
upon a fresh scent; do but preserve me from 'em, I'll make ye a
man for ever.



Nor shall you repent the putting your self under my Protecti∣on
 Look ye Sir   you see those parings
of Vines, creep under them, and I'll cover ye up.  Rod. creeps, Mat.
covers him.] When they are gone, I'll give you notice. A hand∣some
Fellow, and wears good Clothes. If it miscarry, I have lit∣tle
to lose; and if it succeed, I'm made for ever.


 Pray Gentlemen don't trample my Vines Who are ye?


We are the States Officers, in quest of a Gentleman we are sure
took this Road.



And cannot be far behind him. At your Peril be it, if you
conceal him.



My House is open to ye.




Pr'y thee be honest to us, and thou shalt snack.



We can afford him Forty Duckats and that's more than
thou'lt get in haste by diging.



Forty Duckats Gentlemen, wou'd to me a kindness.



And if we take him I'll be thy Pay-master I'm sure thou
knowest me and I'll be true to thee.




Signior Bricone, if I mistake not.



Thou hast me right and therefore doubt not thy money.



Well then he is




The same And if he's about thy House, shew him us, and
here's thy money down.









I rather wish he were But d'ye see that blind side Road, on
the left hand of my Vineyard, as ye came.



And were I to have fled for my Life, I'd have taken't my self.



There did I see such a Person, and one other with him, ride
by, about an hour since. And now I better consider on't he was
the great Merchant, that lost some Ships t'other day.



The same, the same To Horse, to Horse.




 They're gone, and Roderigo's Wishes follow 'em. He told me,
he'd make me a man for ever, and (I hope) he'll be as good as his
word, and not lick himself whole agen, by non-performance. Hoe
Signior! the Coast is clear, you may advance.




I fansie I hear them still Hark! what was that?



Nothing but the Wind among the Leaves. I have per∣form'd
  38
form'd my promise, and you're safe: Tho' (if you over-heard us, as
you needs must) to my disadvantage.



I did, and doubly thank you, nor shall it ever be said, that I
forgot mine. But first, 'tis requisite, that you understand my Con∣dition
 Know then, I am not what I appear to you but in few
words a very Devil.



A Devil!  and afraid of Bailiffs!



Yet so it is I was sent to Earth by special Command, subject
nevertheless to all the Conditions of Humanity; but more particularly
oblig'd to marry a Wife.



Keep your Wife to your self, I have no mind to Cuckold the
Devil.



And now, what with her insulting peevish Humour, my Losses
at Sea, my Correspondence failing, and Creditors pressing, you see to
what Condition I'm brought.



Is't come to this! The Sham wo'n't pass on me Come,
come uncase   A man for ever! A
Devil wou'd ha'been more honest.



Have but a minutes patience, and if I don't convince you of what
I told ye, and you don't find me the most ingenuous, grateful, and as
Gentleman-like a Devil, as you could wish, I am contented you deliver
me up to my Creditors. And, without your consent, part from
ye I will not.









Dance an Antick about Mat. and
Exeunt. Mat. all the while trembling.Paganuccio, Fortibrand! Fear
nothing, they sha'n't hurt ye.



Fear nothing said ye? I'm not yet secure, but my Soul may
slip out at the wrong end.



I've shewn you what I am; and now consider, what Devil of a
Thousand would not such Circumstances have try'd? But to my
promise   Huisht, huisht my
Wife that Wife, whom now I dread, more than ere I doated on her.



A Tittle tattle of mine; I know her Voice.



My promise, I was saying you know the Lady Ambrosia?



And what of her? She's rich And do you but make a match
for me there, I'll release you your promise.



I am no go-between; but this I'll do as soon as I leave this
place, I'll instantly possess her; and, on the Faith of an oblig'd Devil,
will never leave her, till you come and force me from my Quarters. And
so, you know how, to make the Terms.



But which way must I go about it?



Sputter any thing, and that shall do't And besides, good
brisk Nonsence, with a little Balderdash, and the Gravity of a gradu∣ated
Goose, to set it off, will give ye the Vogue, among the greater
  39
number; who, like Socrates's Children, take more after the Mother
than the Father.



My Noble Patron, I see you are in earnest; and, because you
and I must be better acquainted, your Name (I beseech ye) and Qua∣lity
in the other World?



Belphegor; Generalissimo of the Subterranean Forces: But this Con∣dition
of Humanity, has so discompos'd me, that I'm asham'd to own
what I was.



Generalissimo! a Friend at Court, may (if he please) stand a
man in stead. But pray, Sir, what do ye do below?



Much after the rate ye do here; ever speaking well of our selves,
and ill of others. And for Friendship, as we profess not much, for
what we do, we observe it as little as your selves.



A wise People! But how do men get thither? Have ye no
Standing-Porters to attend the Service.



By no means No man comes thither but of himself, or his
Wife's sending. I wo'n't deny, but when a Devil meets a man with
his Skates on, he may give him a push forward. But I'm uneasie.




There's no danger. What kind of People are ye?



A Hotch-potch of all Tongues, Nations, and Languages: We
speak the Lingua Franca, keep open House, and never shut our Gates to
any, that had either Wit or Money; and that's the reason we have so
many Wits and Usurers among us.



And no Women? For notwithstanding all, I am no profest
Enemy to the Sex.



They're the best Customers we have; they seldom come alone,
with their own Lading Some bring more, some less; not one in ten
without a Liver and a Gizard; two Friends, at least, besides Followers.



But have ye no Divines, Physicians, Lawyers? What have ye?



Of that, when we meet next.



And you'll forget you will.



Upon Parole, I wo'n't   With this fur∣ther
 when ever you hear of any Lady possest, be sure it is your Hum∣ble
Servant, and no other.












OUR Gentleman (it seems) is gone to take the Air, and I
can look about me now, without asking leave.



He took so little with him, I wonder we hear nothing of him his
proud Spirit will come down in time.



But to run away in such a hurry!



That last Note I sent him did the business.



What made a Gentleman of his Wealth and Credit, go off so
soon?



I was privy to none of his Actions; however, so foresaw it, as
to secure his Estate to my self.



And (with your Ladiship's leave) are you not bound in Honour
to set him up again?



If I thought he might not be troublesom, I'd perswade my
Lady to take him home agen, and keep him in Pocket-money, for her
own Credit.



No, no I'd better remove privately and secure what I have;
and that the rather, for if ever I heard any thing in my Life, I heard
his tread in my Chamber last Night.



So have I fansied a man in bed with me, but when all came to
all, 'twas nothing but a Night-mare. However (Madam) remove
where you will, a Man is some Credit to a House, and ours (methinks)
seems naked without him.



These Girls never consider, we shou'd have him rummaging
the next Bandbox agen.




 Terrachino! The Thousand Crowns I formerly presented your
Ladiship, emboldens me Ha, ha, hah! My Lord Lack-land! There 
 Tell her, that brought it, I
have forgot the Token, and he must send it agen, or't wo'n't do.




Now out upon him! had he the Impudence to believe o∣ther!
 No (Madam) you have it seven Years yet good to take;
and after that, you may truck, barter, or (at worst) give.





Ye may keep within call And now, Fieschi we have no
more Excuses sure? And how? Was my Sister Complaisant? Has
good Nature yet brought her about?



Judge of me, as you think I deserve. I had found all open
Approaches as troublesom as Fruitless, and therefore resolv'd on Stra∣tagem.
 To this purpose, I follow'd the hint you gave me, and en∣gag'd
her Woman to give me the opportunity of getting into her Apart∣ment,
which (not many Nights since) I attempted: And tho' no one
knew the House better than my self, yet being in the dark, it was my
Misfortune to mistake his Apartment for hers Montalto heard me,
and sprang out; I (as well I might) fled, and by another mistake,
  41
fell down Stairs; He pursu'd; I, recover'd the fall, and got off. 



As to give ye your due, you had ever the discretion, to save
one.



I thank your Ladyship, In short, my Servant, endea∣vouring
to make up with me, engaged Montalto; wounded him, and
got off himself: And (I know not by what accident) is since, taken;
Or you might have been sure, I'd waited on ye sooner.



Wou'd thou, wert in his room A pretty Story! And
I believe't? No, thou silly nothing 'Twas thou, that hir'dst thy
Servant, to kill Montalto to make room for thy self You were
there? The same, was I I've heard the Story A mere Inventi∣on
of your own, to excuse your self, and cheat me.



You do me wrong That my design miscarry'd, is not my
fault.



You might have laid it better.
Did I command ye to a Night-Adventure?
I, bid ye Murder? No my spotless Honour,
Cannot be blasted, by a Villain's tongue:
Send me the Jewels, and the Gold I lent ye;
Or you will rue the time, that I send for 'em:
And so As far as Honour, still command me;
Further than that Your humble Servant.





Hey-day! Perfidious Woman! and I the Fool,
To think, there ever was, or cou'd be other:
How, like Egyptian Temples, do they at distance,
Strike Reverence, and Admiration!
How Beautiful! How Glorious! Approach 'em,
And view the God You find a Cat, or Ape,
A weeping Crocodile, or perhaps a Goat:
Forgive me Vertue, but a just revenge,
And I'll abjure (That fair defect of Nature)
The very Sex; And never think on't more,
But, as men do, of Debts, and Sins, to curse 'em.

And now, for that revenge My Servant's in hold, and I know
not, how soon it may be my turn; but that I think him honest, and
Montalto (as 'tis said) in no great danger Help me Invention   I have it.



I thought my Lady had call'd however, I am glad to see
your Worship so well I have often tasted of your Bounty, and would be
glad; it were in my power, to deserve it.



Thou hast an honest Face, and I ever found thee trusty.



And shall (I hope) continue so And for my Face; 'tis all
as you see: Let them, be beholding to slops, that want 'em.



Nay, there is somewhat in it; for Signior Guido, is so concern'd
for thee! thou'lt scarce believe it.



Indeed Sir! I am beholding to him, for his Well-wishes.



What wilt thou say now, if I make it a Match between
ye?



Ha, ha, ha, But how shall we live together?



He has an hundred ways of getting Money: Only (like other
Men) an Hundred and fifty of spending it, besides drinking But a
Wife, will take him off, that.



And a discreet Woman, will bear, with a small Fault.



Well then There is small Job, which thou may'st, and
canst (if thou wilt) do for me: And that once done, Let me alone
for thine.




And if I don't: never trust Woman again, for my sake.



Your Lady But thou'lt laugh And I, are all to
pieces.



Mary forbid it! Why, I have known ye play together
like two Kittens; And as often told ye, Playing, commonly ended in ear∣nest
 If that be all, I bring ye together again; and she'll love ye, the
better.



To move it to her, were to set her the father off But
thus Tell her, there's an Outlandish Prince, new come to Town, and
that he's so enamour'd of her, that he intends her a rich Damask Bed,
and Cup-board of Plate, which he'll send in to Morrow; and wait on
her himself at Night: Now, this Prince will I personate; let me a∣lone
for the Disguise.



Impossible! She stands upon her Honour. She receive
a Night-visit! From a Stranger! And by her own Consent! Be∣sides,
your Tongue will betray ye.



Tell her, the Prince understands no Italian; and therefore,
she need not speak to him; nor take more notice of him, than if he
were her Husband And we shall have such laughing next Morning.
 Come Thou must.




What contrivances you Men have, to betray poor Women!
 Well then If you'll run the hazard; send in your Present to Mor∣row;
and come your self at Midnight; because we are to remove in a
day or two; for she fansies, the House is haunted.



I'll venture, that too only, do thou thy Part.



You are resolved; And be it so. In the mean time, you shall
see how I'll work her We Women, can do much together But I'd
almost forgot What's you Prince's Name?







Then say, and hold Polacco You'll find me ready.




What Fools, a Man must sometimes, be beholding to! And
if I am not even with her Ladyship, I'll forgive her That once
over, I will endeavour, by some worthy Action, to expiate my past
Folly.









'Twas a sad accident; and I fear me, more, than a bare
Chance. I hear, you took, th'Examinations.



The Friendship (Madam) I ever ow'd your Husband, might
have commanded more The rest, Signior Grimaldi, has appoint∣ed,
to be taken here.



And what d'ye' think? Was my poor Sister? I love her
with my Soul Is there any thing reaches her?



Directly, nothing; But a single, uncertain Evidence, her Ser∣vant
Bianca Tho'to deal freely with ye', I suspect it Men of my
Station, can see day, at a little hole: Letters, make Words, and Cir∣cumstances,
Things.



Alas! Alas! Tho' yet, my private thoughts, don't contradict
ye What wou'd she have done, had she had my Beast? But,
he was my Husband And the more unfortunate me I lov'd him.
But pray What ground have ye?



Enough, if not too much. Montalto's Estate (however it
went in my Name) was dipt in the Bank, for thirty Thousand Duckats.
 Fieschi, pays the Money: His Servant, gave Montalto his Wound:
And whether, your Sister, and Fieschi, were absolute Strangers I leave
it to your Ladyship.



I am afraid, y'ave gone too deep.



I'll not give a rush for that Man, that cannot pick any thing
out of nothing At least, bring it in, by an Innuendo. Men of Bu∣siness
(Madam) are not so much to seek, as the World takes them.



And truly, I tremble, while I speak it I wish there were
no design, of taking off, a Husband, to make room, for a Gal∣lant.



My Conscience, tells me, y'ave hit the Nail.



And shall I own that Sister? Vertue, forbid it!





According to my appointment, I am come Yet thought it,
not altogether unfit, that this Lady, who is most concern'd, shou'd
hear the matter.



And pray Sir, how goes it with our Friend, Montalto? Is
there no hopes?



Yes truly: and as far as I conjecture, the greatest danger of
his Wound, lies in the Chirurgeon's hard words All of them agree,
it fortunately slanted, on a Rib.



This worthy person inform'd me, it was his desire, the Exa∣minations
might be taken here, which made me willing, to come my
self.



And that (perhaps) too soon, for somebodies credit.



Whose e'er it be, I can hear it with more grief, than trouble.



Peradventure your own, or some ones else; who knows.



I beseech you, Madam (To Imperia) What mean ye?



How ill, this had become another?



If any modest Woman, might have resented, an Husband's
injuries, I, ought not to have sat down, with Roderigo's to me But
when I consider'd, he was my Husband, that Name soon covered all I
pray'd, no Gallant's Aid.



What's here! The Devil washing his Face! O Woman!
What canst thou not!




What vertuous Woman ever did?



Recollect your self I never doubted your Wit.



Add Patience, to my Innocence good Heaven!



No more I beseech ye And pray (Sir) how d'ye find it?



I met a person t'other night Incognito; whom (not giving me
a good account of himself) I committed: He's now without.



And being informed; that Bianca was found in her Cloaths,
at that late hour, when this accident happen'd, I thought fit to examine
her; and all I cou'd get from her, was, there were other-guise
persons concern'd, than Thieves I sent her t'ye.



The same, she says to me: And more She's without too:



Let's have her in.




Within there! Bring in Bianca But wer't not con∣venient
that Portia withdrew?



She can say nothing, shall shame me to hear.





Now Bianca you remember what yo've said. Who
were those other-guise Persons?



My Lady will be angry.



Speak boldly Woman Let Truth come out, tho' I pe∣rish.



Fieschi, and my Lady, had made an Assignation, and I was
privy to it But it seems my Master sitting up later than ordinary,
and Fieschi making some noise, my Master rusht upon him, and in the
Scuffle, receiv'd that Wound, from him.



Fieschi! I'll cut him from my Blood.



My Sister! Her Vertue sure, knew better things!



And does, Imperia My Innocence, is above Scan∣dal.



And no one with him, but himself?



Not that I saw, or heard.



Take her back again 


The other (perhaps) may tell you more I've kept them asunder,
and neither knows, of the others being apprehended.



It was discreetly manag'd Bring him in Fieschi! Villain! Whom
shall a Man put Faith in!



 His Servant too! What mischief (Sirrah) have your Master,
and you, been contriving?


None, I yet hope However, 'come what will of me,
I will declare the Truth About three Nights since, Bianca and I,
had appointed a Meeting, at her Master's House, when stealing by
his Appartment, it was my misfortune, to make a stumble; he hears
me; I fled; He pursu'd; I got into a Closet; He sees a Glympse of
my Lanthorn, and fires thro' it; I got out, and glar'd him in the
Face; He fires a second Pistol, and closed with me; and having
no other possibility of escaping, I was forc'd, to that unfortunate Stab,
which yet, I put not so home, but that he wrench'd my dagger from
me.



This agrees word for word, with what Montalto told me I
wish tho', I could have seen the Dagger.



It was my Master's, who having left it carelesly on his Ta∣ble,
and I, considering there might be danger in the Streets, put it
in my Pocket And with that Dagger, made the Blow.



Where was your Master?



Had he been there, it is not to be thought, I'd take anothers
guilt upon my self.



This Cloud will break by degrees, and I am glad, we're got
so far into't Take off your Prisoner.



Or rather, confront him with Bianca.




You said ere while, that you saw no one but Fieschi, And Pansa says
'twas himself only, and that by appointment between you two.



By this token, that she, hearing the noise, put me into the
Closet, and bid me bolt it on the inside.





If th'ast a mind to hang thy self do Yes he was there And
I believe with a design of robbing the House.



Pry'thee speak Truth Whoever was there, Did your Lady,
know any thing of it?




Good (Madam) forgive me You're innocent.




Take them away, and keep them severally.




And now Sister judge favourably of me:
Poor me, whom, nothing, but a quiet Conscience,
Had kept from sinking This, is the true joy;
And this, we give our selves; This makes us bear,
A mind, above our Sex: Fortune may clear,
The Visage, only this, can fill the Soul.



Your Servant Sir, and occasion offers, I'll wait on ye.


Grimaldi, leading Portia, by one door. Marone and Imperia
by another. Manet, Quartilla.


And now, when all's done, Fieschi, for my Money He's
scarce half rid of a Surfeit, and yet vent'ring, on the same dish a∣gain
 He has a passion for her, that's certain, or otherwise, A
Love-fit at this time, were inexcusable Well his Present is sent in,
and that, so noble, I am afraid, he does not intend, to come often.





What's all that Luggage in the other Room?



A Damask Bed, with massy Fringe, and every thing suitable!
besides, a rich Cupboard of Plate! And no other name for't, but Lug∣gage?
 I wish your Ladyship had such another to Morrow, we'd
find it House-room.



I must confess it noble But whence came it?



No Terrachino, I dare warrant ye It is the humble Pre∣sent
of the Outlandish Prince, new come to Town; Il Signior Principi
Polacco Your Ladyship, understands the rest But did ye know,
how I enhanc'd the affair Husband Relations Reputati∣on
 Honour And to all this, your utter averseness You'd say,
I was no Fool







What matters that? his Present, is However, to satisfy ye
 He's as handsome a Man, as the best of us need wish, to lie Board,
and Board by for my part, I could sink by his side.



When will he be here?



At Midnight And you'll be asleep.



But, to a Man I never saw? How shall I look next Morning?



Just as you did before Or you may, if you think fit, cry
out, your Woman has betray'd ye No body will hear ye.
 tho' yet, if ye shou'd, he understands no Italian.



Thou sha't supply my place All Petticoats, are Sisters
in the dark.



I wou'd it were not, to wrong your Ladyship come
(Madam) no more Words: Do you but leave him one side of your
Bed, he'll find, the rest, himself.



Well we'll further consider it, within.







his Mustachios. Strutting, and viewing himself.
IT is the same Of a better Edition tho' And truly (to give
the Devil his due) He has shown himself, much a Gentleman; which
is more, than I'll say of every Man I have already dislodg'd him,
from two great Ladies; and if it holds, but one Year, how shall I
dispose of this good Fortune? My Boy An arrant Crack-rope;
Fathers own Son I'll breed him, to my own new Trade; and
send him abroad, to take his Degree My Daughter Let me
see she shall Marry some Count, or other. 


But hold who knows, but here may be another Customer and if
so, I must stand off, to raise the Price.



Our Duke (Sir) is so well assured, of your more than ordinary
faculty, at Exorcism, that (the Lady Julia) a Neice of ours, being at
this time, a Demoniack, he sent me, to pray your help, and further,
assure you, of as large a Reward, as your self could wish, or the ob∣liging
a Prince may merit.




I shall be proud, Signior, if my poor Talent, might contribute
any thing, to his Serenities, or your Service How far have you pro∣ceeded?



Try'd all, that Religion, or Physick could propose.



Have ye erected a Scheme, to know, under what direction, the
Lady lies; and what kind of Devil it is, that possesses her?







The reason I ask ye, is, Because there are diversities of De∣vils
 some, so easie, gentle, quiet, ye may do what ye will with
'em Others agen, so sullen, refractary, cross-grain'd, that neither
Threats, Enchantments, nor Devotion it self, will do any good on
'em.



I leave it wholly to ye.



Then the first thing I'll do, shall be to erect one; both, as to
the Horary Question, and the matter it self; And when I've done that,
I'll make a step to the Lady (as Incognito) and give ye, my Judgment
of it.



And, credit me, it shall be gratefully acknowledg'd.




So so; here's more Money coming A Count, did I say.
 We'll better consider it.


 Thy Fist my Mephestophilus! And what? Thou'st left the Lady
Julia asleep, to see a Friend?


Thy self, thou mean'st But how cam'st thou to know it?



You see, how I improve, by your Acquaintance 'twas kind∣ly
done And now, your Parole What sort of People have ye, in the
other World?







Have ye any Divines among ye?



Why truly we were once afraid of 'em; And were ever and
anon, making Laws against'em: 'till at last finding, we were more a∣fraid,
than hurt; we left them at their Liberty, to come, or go But
for the School-men, we ever shackle them, for fear they make as
much disturbance there, as they have already done, here.







And they too (for several Years together) had sent us so many
on their Errand, that we grew jealous of them, as that, they design'd
a Party: 'till coming to a better understanding, we have ever since, not
deny'd 'em House-room, for past Services.







What should they, do there? The poor Devils, have no Mo∣ney,
and the Rich, will part with none And yet we want not their,
Company too But (alass!) Let 'em get what Estate soever here, they
bring not a Groat with 'em, as not doubting, but to raise another, a∣mong
us: But there, the case is alter'd.



Have ye any Poets?



Of Pretenders, not the least Number: And even there too,
some few, who (regarding Glory, more than Profit) in studying, to di∣vert
others, slipt their Opportunities, and lost themselves.



Have you any Philosophers?



What They sell Hawks-Bells, and Rattles?







We are, with them (like Rome of old, with their Figure-fling∣ers)
ever banishing 'em, but never rid of 'em However, we rec∣kon
them, among the Vutuosi.



What are those Virtuosi?



They study Nature As why a Fly, should have six Legs;
and a Dromedary but four Why a Cat, when she's pleas'd, holds
her Tail an end; And a Dog wags his Why Crabs go backward; and
the like.



And very useful Enquiries What Painters have ye?



The Truth is, we had once banisht 'em, for painting us, more
  49
ugly than we are; 'till Michael Angelo's Day of Judgment, complemented
us, with a Master of the Ceremonies; and Parmasano, and Carrachi,
with their Improvements upon Aretine: Pieces (I assure ye) of as much
Service to us, as their others of Devotion, had like to have done us
mischief.



But what becomes of Tyrants, and others, those common Pests
of Mankind? A sort of Men, we read of, in old Story, though I think
the Race, be wholly run out now.



'Twould make ye laugh, to see 'em One, cobling of old
Shooes; another, heeling of Stockings; a third, rubbing the Sweat in
Hot-houses.



Have ye, the Pox, there too?



Millions, of Millions: For they that bring it not with them, are
sure to get it, on their first Landing.



Well, thou'rt a merry Devil; and I must say, an honest Devil.
 But heark ye I must beat up your Quarters once more.



What? never have done?



You know I deliver'd ye from the Talons of the Law, and
then, you told me, what a grateful, Gentleman Devil, you'd prove.
 Prethee oblige me, this once, in quitting the Lady Julia, And I
release thee of all demands whatever.



And I have paid ye sufficiently.



But I'm concern'd in this, beyond a Retreat Prethee, this once
or I must say too, thou art not, that grateful Devil I expected.



How Sirrah! Tax me with Ingratitude! Have ye forgot, 'twas
I that made your Fortune? I that gave ye the occasion, of that Aphoris∣matical
Cane? And reform'd your greasie Shamois, into Silks, and Sattins?
 And are ye now grown Insolent? I'll make ye know, I can take back, as
well as give: or otherwise, call me the most pitiful, poor-Spirited Ra∣scal
of a Devil 



Nay, let's not part in Anger: A word, with ye.



As many words as you please; but no more stark Love, and
Kindness.




Now Sirrah too And since, nothing else will do it, I'll e'en re∣turn
ye to your Wife. They struggle, Rod. sinks under him, and leaves a
dead Body.

Now shall I be hang'd for killing this Rascal There's no more to be
done, but cut of his Head, and bury him; and then (perhaps) wanting
a Retreat, he may quit the Lady, of himself I'll run for a Hatchet, and
do it.



Hoh Hoh Hoh 


rises with horror. Mat. returns with an Hatchet, trembles, drops it,
and crowds himself up to the Wall.






My old Colleague, and Friend, Belzebub!



Which, I, abjure we've heard of ye; Thou poor,
Thou pitiful, Hen-hearted, sneaking Devil!


Thou, General! A Scandal to the name:
Where's all that Fable of the Giants War,
Thou hast so often boasted, as thy Story?



And 'tis my Glory yet.




Thou, ever threw'st Ossa, on Pelion!

Away, thou changeling! No thy best Pretence,
Is the degenerate Off-spring, of their Gore;
Their, Earth-born Gore: And all thy former Soul,
Is dwindled, to a Gloe-worm Thou, a Devil!
A very Shame, t'us all.




Follows the temper of the Body; And I,
Was out, in mine.



Thou mightest have chosen better:
How many brave Bandits, were there hang'd, yearly,
That durst have trod, the utmost Brink of Space;
Have fought the Devil, on a Precipice;
Brav'd Fate; And stood, a second, and third Thunder.
And thou, to take, such a tame, sniveling Slave!



Men have no Windows in their Breast; and what
Could I, judge of a Carkass? He was handsome,
And so, a step, to get a Wife; which you well know,
Was the first thing, I was obliged to do.



And thou hast, got one, with a Vengeance!
Mistaken Fool! As if Women knew not, what a Smock-face meant?
 They take him, for one of themselves; only, that Nature, mi∣stook
him in the Coineage if ever they, loved any thing, it was
a rough-hewn Fellow, that knew, what was fit for 'em, and let 'em
have it But never, their Wills If they once get that Bitt between their
Teeth, they run away with ye.



I was to become, in all things, as a Man; And did not more
than what other Men did and, if your, Grand Cabal, knew 'em
so well, why was I sent hither?



As an honourable Spy Thou hadst the World before thee;
Every Lap, was thy Chapel of Ease; nor wert thou bound, to Resi∣dence.



And yet, to marry, One?



As, those other Men; for fashion-sake You may easily believe,
we design'd no Breed But where lay the obligation of loving her, more
than other Men, their Wives? But to doat on her! 'tis thy Eternal Blot.



There had been no quiet without it.



Unthinking Sot! Could there be any, with it? If so, what
makes thee, shifting thus? What's become of your Million of Duckats?



My Wife has either spent, or cheated me of 'em.



Beast of a Devil! Must we, torment the Bowels of the Earth,
  51
Or from our Treasure of the Ocean, the spoils of Wracks and Tem∣pests,
furnish thee? Thy Folly, or thy Wife's, never to be satisfied I
know not what?



Ye left me to my self; and I, was guided by others What
Counsel ever drew his own Conveyance?



But thou, contrary, to all Rules of Practice, hast given thy
self, Physick.




As his Pennance then, even take the Doctor.



Stand off, thou less than Man, and unworthy, the name, of
Devil. I hate a Trimming▪ Devil keep off.



You, are no competent Judge; you, were never Married, your
self I submit all to Lucifer.



And when your time's expir'd, you shall be heard.



But if either my Wife, or Creditors catch me in the mean
time, I must, and will return, at all adventures.



That, at your Peril And remember, I tell it ye.



and lifts it at him.


Now Sirrah, remember for what, you brought this Hatchet But
I'm a Gentleman Live And trouble me no more.




A fair Escape But what shall I say to Grimaldi though Why
 he's a noble Person, and if I tell him the Truth, he may (perhaps) be
satisfied; at least, for a while And if I don't out-wit my Devil, at
last, I give him leave to brain me.









'TIS the most I can gather Pansa, stands firm, to his first
Examination; and Bianca, more and more, clears her Lady.



Nor can any thing please me better, but that, my Friend's get∣ting
up agen.



Would I could say as much, of Roderigo.







He's broke; and run away.



What? he that darkned all our Stars! Impossible!







Yet, how you magnify'd him!



His great dealings, and punctual Payments, might have cheat∣ed
any Man, as well as me.



Was the Sum considerable?



Two hundred thousand Duckats at least.



'Tis a wonder, no more follow him: for it is often with Mer∣chants,
as Nine-Pins; Hit but your first, and second right, and 'tis odds
but two Parts in three, tumble.



That (I'm afraid) shall I, for one He owes me, ten thousand
  52
Duckats; And when I went to his Lady this Morning, she told me, he
had left her, a Beggar.



And yet you know, he was Wise, Prudent, Vertuous, and once,
your Glory, he called ye Friend and shall a little Dirt part ye? Come your
Credit, will set him up again.



If it would to the Gallows, l'd venture as much more.



Your Friend you wou'dn't sure?



My Friend A very Rogue: A meer cheating, beggarly,
bankrupt Rascal.





Roderigo (Sir) attempting to have got home last night, in a dis∣guise,
was met by the Bailiffs, who secur'd him; and coming to him
this Morning, found him dead.



Nay then, farewell my ten thousand Duckats, if yet, that were all.



And there were found in his Pocket, some Papers purporting a de∣sign,
of betraying this City, wherein you seem concern'd; upon which,
the Senate have issu'd Warrants against you, and seiz'd your House, and
Goods, for Moneys (as 'tis said) due to the Bank.




Roderigo! my Papers! the Bank! What shall I do?



Consult your Vertue A Vertuous Man, is ever present to himself;
and proof, against the worst, of Fortune.








I was at your House, to have adjusted, some Accounts between
us, and they directed me hither.




Roderigo! I'm o'er-joyed They've bely'd my Friend We'll
never part.








Defend me Heaven! What's this?


 't has half bereft me of my self.



A Gentleman (Sir) they call him, the Devil-Doctor desires to speak
with you.




Sure Hell's broke loose, this year.

 The dreadful Object's not yet digested.



I was with the Lady according to my promise, but (like a Dog
by a Gloyer) the Devil smelt me out from all the Company Ecce signum.




I'm sorry for't But the Duke, will send ye, a healing Plaister.



And I, more sorry, that the Lady, lies under such an ill direction.
 Strange Configurations The Planets in their Detriment, Retrograde,
and Malevolent; nor do I remember, to have seen, a worse Aspect of
Heaven Saturn, and Jupiter, Sir. 



No Canting I beseech ye I believe it.



And for the Spirit, that possesses her There has not such an ill∣contriv'd,
capricious, hectoring Devil, broke-loose, these three last Cen∣turies;
I believe the Fathers are sensible of it.



The truth is, they have had a hard tug with him.



He is perversus Haereticus, Bell, Book, and Candle! He danc'd a
Jigg to't And for Holy Water! he made no more of it, than I'd
have done, of a Bottle of Montefiasco upon the whole matter; I judge him
some Devil of Quality; and then, I have no Power over him: All mine,
are poor Devils.



This will not do If you please to free her, it will be well ac∣cepted,
and better rewarded If not, be sure, the Duke will have ye in
the Inquisition, and make ye set forth, by what new way, unkown to the
Church, you have delivered the two former. Or (who knows) Inquire
de Vita, & moribus, and hang your self.



Will ye then hear me, without canting, and I'll discover all?



Hear ye, I will; but promise, nothing.



I ask no more And who d'ye think this Devil is? even
Roderigo, our late, great Merchant.



Convince me of that, and thou say'st somewhat.



The Story is too large, to tell you now; but thus, in short 't
as by compact between us for a prior Service, of which I'll give ye an
account anon and on that score, and no other, was it, that I freed those
Ladies of him.



Then thou maist the better do this.



I once, thought it: But since you spake to me, we met; and I pro∣pos'd
to him, the quitting the Lady Julia, as the last kindness I'd demand of
him; and he not only refus'd me, but profest himself my mortal Enemy:
And if this,

be the Token of a Friend, I leave it to you.



I am inclin'd to believe thee for 'twas not a Minute before you
came, but he was here, and gave me that Evidence of what you say, I'll
never desire, to see't agen. But what shall we do with the Duke?



Do not despair I've yet a trick, shall do the Business Get me
a large Stage, with a full throng of People: Fifes, Flutes, Cornets, Trum∣pets,
Sackbuts, Drums, Kettle-drums, Hautboys, and Bagpipes; and let
the Lady Julia, be brought on the Stage well attended; and when I throw
up my Hat, let 'em all strike up together, and when I cry Advance, let
a Lady in a Veil, whom I'll appoint for that purpose, enter with another
shout: And this, with some other Ingredients that I have, will (I doubt
not) send him packing.



Appoint your time, and place, all shall be ready.



I leave that, to your pleasure.



What think you, of t'Morrow, and the Duke's great hall for th'place



None better, and I'll attend ye there.











IT takes, as right as wish Quartilla, was just to her hour;
and in the dark, I shuffled my Signior Principi's, Hand, into hers,
instead of mine; and there's no doubt, but she has put them together 
  54
He's a brawny Fellow, and like enough, to please her But for fear the
Jade, should be fond of him, next Morning, he has his Lesson, not to an∣swer
her any thing, but broken Gibberish The Jews sent in the Bed, and
Plate on Roderigo's account, as new furniture for his House, and (as I
am told) are resolv'd to seize it And if my Signior Principi has not de∣ceiv'd
me, we shall have Rable enough, about the House, presently) I'll
take a turn or two, to see the issue.




I say 'twas your Folly Brother, to send it, hand over Head.



We have had greater dealings with him, and his payment, was
ever good.



But Men, may not be the same, at all times It was conside∣rable,
and you should have inquir'd.



You, knew his Broker: And I, saw the Goods deliver'd.



But he was broke before.



How could I, know that? Men don't proclaim it.



Had we been bitten by a Snap, 'twere somewhat But by a
prodigal Fool! The Town, will laugh at us.




Let's not make it worse, by talking Come Gentlemen, stand
close; and as the door opens, enter.




'Morrow Gentlemen; you're early Men.



Business, must not be neglected.



And if I mistake not, your Attendants, speak where it lies.



It is too late, to conceal it now we're miserably cheated.



What? beaten at your own Weapon! Roderigo sure, is a Man
of Estate, and Credit.



Time was, he might have commanded all we have, But now
 the Bird is flown.



Gone, as a Man may say, in fumo!



He left enough behind, unless his Wife has sold it.



There's the Danger Knock harder.




I have no small concern with him, my self, which brought me
hither too; tho' not so well provided But

if ye can I'll
give ye. 




When we have serv'd our selves, we're yours.





What rude Hand profan'd this Sanctuary?



And who are you?




I'm the righter of Wrongs, and undoer of Injuries Heart of
Steel, and Arms of Brass.



And what Figure do you make in this House?



Only engag'd, in Roderigo's absence And (like the Dragon of
old) I watch the golden Fruit, 'till his return Still, true to Honour,
and will fight her Battles.



As thus, with that Baboons Snout.




Voto! Had it been under the Ear, y'ad measured your length.



Sirrah! Begone And take to your old Trade of knitting Gaps,
  55
making Hair-buttons, Tooth-picks, and false Dice, which you learnt, of your
Comerogues of the Galleys.


following with a Paring-Shovel.


Why Villains! Rogues! Jews! Is there no consideration of
a Ladies Honour?



Keep her Honour to her self, and give us, our Goods.



And thou Polacco! Oh me!




I hope, your Lady had a good Night of it.








Picaro! Picaro! make haste Picaro! Execution, stays for ye.



What was that? Picaro!




I'm but buttoning my Coat, and will be with ye, instantly.



Come down! come down! There will be no Sport, 'till you
come.




Ah Rogue! art thou there! Have we refus'd Velasco, Tedesco,
di Parphar, di Laco! 




The Devil and all!



And now, to be shamm'd, by the Common-Hangman!


a large Knife stuck in it.


Picaro! Picaro! Picaro! Picaro!



Is this your Principi Polacco! Poveraccia! Poveraccia, pec∣catrice
me! I could eat thee.


Thou a Gentleman! You said you'd make a Whore of me, too; but,
why don't you Sirrah? why dont ye?



The Fool, raves And so Picaro; I hope you lik'd your Bedfellow?



So well (Sir) I owe ye another Job; and that, for nothing She
was such Flesh and Blood!



And shall I, see Honour thus trampled on, and yet wear trusty
Steel, on Thigh! Let me, come at the Rogue I'll pinck his
Doublet, and make a Sieve, of's Skin.


twich him behind. He draws. They tye a Cracker to him.





the Floor. They, fire the Cracker, and hollow.
 I say Rogues, Dogs in Doublets, Were ye more renown'd, than
Palmerin of England; or valiant, than his Cousin, D'Oliva: More un∣daunted,
than the twelve Peers of France; or greater Bullies, than King
Arthur's Round-Table Men: More adventurous, than Valentine and Or∣son;
or Invincible, than Don Bellamis of Greece: Nay were the whole
Mirrour of Knighthood contracted in ye I'd make ye know 

he is ranting, Picaro and another, slip the Paring-Shovel between his
Legs, hoise him on their Shoulder, carry him round the Stage, and
Exeunt the Boys hollowing▪ Manet Fieschi.



'Twas somewhat sharp, but just Her Treachery,
Deserv'd no better from me And, now no more,
But a long, long Farewel, to every thing
That looks like Woman; 'till, some worthy Action,


Compound, for my past Folly To repent,
Is the next step, to being Innocent.
Men are no Angels Somewhat, must be indulg'd
To Passion, Error, or Mistake: The best,
Are not without their Faults; and the fairest Life,
Has some leaves in it to be read without Favour.

Marone sure! 'tis he 'twas said, the Devil had carried him away,
and now (be-like) has thrown him back, as not worth keeping.



Where am I? Or whence, came I? O Signior! I
have wonders to tell ye Roderigo is a Spirit A very Devil.



And make you, a good use, of your Escape from him.



I will, I will: And never more, oppress any Man, but having
got clear of the Senate, what I once, said in scorn, I'll now perform, in
earnest I'll build an Hospital.



To lodge those, your self first Beggar'd.



Give what I have to Charitable Uses.



That is to say you'll sleep upon't, and look out, for another
Mortgage, next Morning Charity (you know) begins at home.



Respite your Censure, 'till you hear my Story That I had
hearkned to your good, vertuous Uncle!



Whom, under my present Circumstances, I'll never see If
ever Man lost his reason in a Petticoat, 'twas I, the poor, unfortunate,
mistaken Fieschi.









YOu're a Man of your word.



And pray believe, I made not those Scruples, out of
any repugnancy, or want of Will to serve ye, but, that in case my en∣deavours,
answer not my desires, you might judge, the more favourably
of me Are all things ready?



They are; and if you, want nothing, I'll go for the Lady.



I only wait her But be sure, you follow the Directions I gave ye.



They shall be observ'd.




And now, assist me thou great Patron of Mankind, Impudence!
 I have some ends of Latin my self, besides a Bushel of hard Words,
I learnt from others, if I can hit 'em right However (like them) I'll
trowl it of boldly, and enough of it: Nor shall that triflng Circumstance,
of Sense, and Pertinence, be any Rub in my way Ha'n't I heard a Man
quote the Books he never read; and cited Authors, that never were? And
ha'n't it past? What should hinder it?




Are you, there? I'll conjure ye Unhand me Villains.



And you too, nor Man, nor Devil: Semibovem{que} virum, Semi∣virum{que}
bovem  Belphegor; dear Belphegor; you know
I once serv'd ye, at a dead lift Come be yet, civil, and depart if not
 this, is the last time of asking.



I forbid the Banes; both Parties, are not agreed Have I, gra∣velled
so many Doctors, to turn out now, for a pitiful Vinerollo? Let
me, come at him.



Then know, foul Fiend Conjuro, & commando tibi, by St. Hugh's
Bones, St Luke's Face, and venire St. Gri. And by all the occult Quali∣ties,
of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, I once more, command, and conjure
ye, that ye make me direct answer, touching your self, your Tatterde∣mallions,
and Puggs, and forthwith depart this Lady, with all your
Signatures, Tricks, Trinkets, and Trumperies, from the Crown of her
Head, to the Soal of her Foot: Under the pain, that I releage, and con∣sine
ye, to your dismal Lake, for a Thousand Years, yet more, than
were ever decreed ye.



The Rogue's pleasant; and I'll humour him.




Tell me I say, and conjure ye as before What are ye?



Shame faw him that speers, and kenns sa'wele.



Your Name I say.



Monsieur Devile: Don, or Signior Diavolo: Mine Here Tifle: He∣renagh
mac Deul; or Sir Duncan, in the Devil's Name.



What's here? Philippus, Aureolus, Theophrastus, Paracelsus, Bom∣bastus
of Hoenhayim? How many are there of ye?



Ten hundred thousand Tun.







Like other Bodies-aggregate; of none, nor ever reducible under any.



At least, your Superior's Name.



I never own'd any.



Tell me I say; and Jubeo! Is there Absoluta Potentia Asmodei,
sive cujusvis alii; or a vitium Corporis, as say the Learned What made
ye first, possess her?



Look on her, and answer your self: She's young, and handsome.




This, will work, presently  How long have ye been there.



Much about the time, you crackt a Commandment, with your
Taylor's Wife  Are ye concern'd Gentlemen! Ha, hah!



Bring me the Flagellum Daemonum I'll taw ye.



Or rather, give your self, the first Discipline, and I'll help, to
lay it on Ha, hah, ha!



Once more, I say, turn out Or by the Phoberon Phoberotaton;
Ton de Apomeibomenos; And Heautontemorumenos Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon,
Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae I'll 



What? my new Conjurer, what? Hoh, hoh!



I lead ye about the Country, like a Bear by the Nose; make
ye turn Spits, like a Dog in a Wheel: And if that won't do't▪ have ye
  58
Chain'd, like a Flea, in a Box And therefore, dispatch; and let me
know, what sign, you'll give of your departure.



Thunder, Thunder, Thunder, as thus, Rascal.




I'll have ye bound over, for Bloodshed, and Battery.



I fear no Justice, under Heaven.



I'll bring ye into th' Spiritual Court, and have ye Excommunicated.



I am no Member of your Church: Or if I were, have no Mo∣ney,
to pay Fees.



I'll have ye burnt in Effigie, with Brimstone, Galbanum, Aristo∣lochia,
Hypericon, and Rue; in a more terrible Cap, and painted Coat,
than the Inquisition, yet ever thought of And if all this fail; I'll send
ye back, to your Wife.



You told me so, once before; but now (I hope) you'll stay, 'till
you catch me Yet, I don't like the Rogue.




Then I'll bring her to you.


is heard, with a Shout, without


What would this Peasant be at? I have more than once, view'd
all the Pomp of Heaven, nor am I ignorant, of what's most formidable
in Hell: But what means this? Prethee, Matheo, what is it?



Are ye come to your Prethee, Sirrah? Either march off ci∣villy,
or know; that Will, or Nil, you shall Alas poor Roderigo;
your Wife's in chase of ye, and is just coming up stairs Advance Impe∣ria! 


Julia springs at him, and falls, as dead. It thunders. All startle


'Tis she, she'as found me out.



Fear nothing; the Work is done and now take care of the
Lady.



I'll see it done: And having made the Duke laugh, it shall be
my next business, to see you gratify'd.





And if I get no more, 'tis no great matter I have lin'd my self,
pretty well, already: And now, all things consider'd, I think my self,
happy enough, that I have 'scap'd Hanging, at last: And if in spight of
my Stars, I set up for a Doctor, who can help it.









I heard it from my Friend; and must confess,
Not without some surprize: I've here, and there,
Read of the Devil's Power, to condense
A Cloud; t'assume, and actuate a Body;
But never came near the Experiment, till now:
Where were ye, in that absence?




No more of that, than how, I was thrown back.



You wou'd do well to make a Scrutiny


Into your self, and where you guess the Cause,
Unlearn that, first.



And if you chance to find,
You have opprest the Poor; make restitution;
And by what's past, correct, what is to come.



I'd once, such thoughts: But, when I consider'd,
I only took, what Law, had given me,
I thought, there was no such great haste, or need.



The greater the Oppression, when Law,
Is made the Stale to't. This of Roderigo.

For ought you know, was given ye, as a Caution.



And had there been no Malice of his own,
I should have thought so: But, he ow'd me Money;
Ten thousand Duckats; And, o' my Conscience,
Thought to have frighten'd me, to a Release;
And, if I've giv'n him one, I'll plead, per dures.

However, this I'm resolv'd That, and other, the like Debts, I'll
give 'em all, to Pious Uses But for Restitution Alas, my Estate's
but small, and I cannot.





That is, you will not Nor (perhaps) repent,
The late intended Treachery to your Country:
A Vertuous Man (like Sceva in the Breach)
Combats an Army, singly, for her, safety;
Inseparably they stand, and fall together:

Cato, wou'd not survive, his Countreys Liberty;
Nor did that Liberty, out-live Cato.

Make me think better of ye yet, begin;
Delay, is just so much time lost.




My Doctor here, has giv'n him a third remove.



And I hope, there will be no occasion, of Shooing him round.



He'll tell ye the Story within; and, not unworth your hearing 
In the mean, I cannot, too often congratulate, your recovery.



Nor I, acknowledge, your Friendship.
I'll tell ye News Good News (for there's nothing,
We must not share) Methinks, I am become
Another Man; And this small quiet, pleases,
Beyond the noise, of Crowds Now, I can see,
The great ones, heave like Moles, and at next turn,
Heave out themselves; Another (Mushrome like)
Spring in a Night, and cropp'd ere Noon; A third,
Snatch at a Booty, which, a fourth, strikes from him,
And unconcern'd, my self.




Lies not in Greatness, but an honest Mind,
Not fram'd, of Accidents, nor subject to 'em.
A serene Breast; and such a life, as is not
Asham'd to live, nor yet afraid, to die.



And yet, how does the World, turmoil it self!
How do they play away their days! and trifle,
Their time in parts, 'till they have slipp'd the whole!
One business breeds another; Hope, desire;
And that, makes room for more: How they afflict
Themselves, and envy others! Restless in War,
And ev'n in peace unquiet! Compass with Care,
What they possess, with more Anxiety!



To them that love it, be't I neither, like,
The Merchandise, nor price, What is't to him,
That can't dissemble? Him, that cannot flatter?
That's not ambitious, by Indignities,
To rise to Dignities, and lose himself?
Whereas Retirement, as it costs us nothing,
Is much the shorter cut, to Heaven it self.






Help, Help me, Sister! Can ye forgive me you can't, you can't
 Whither shall I run He'll ha'me, he'll ha'me.



You never injur'd me, or if you had, I have (as I ought) forgot it.



Our House is more than haunted.



Sister Sister I've marry'd the Devil See! where he stands!



Bless the poor miserable Woman, good Heaven!



His Eyes, as big as Pumpkins.  And a Mouth, like
any Baker's Oven Let me alone good Devil, and take my Lady she's
younger Flesh.




See See The House cracks The Walls, are coming together
 That Beam, was shot at me.



I'm your old Servant Quartilla good Devil.



There too The Ground opens I'll at him tho' Dost thou
yet brave me Time was, thou fear'dst me more I'll give ye back,
your Keys Dost thou yet yet 



I see nothing, Sister pray walk in with me my Innocence, dares
speak to him.



There, there, the greater Devil, Fieschi!



Poor afflicted Woman Her hurt Imagination, conceives any
thing Pray go in with me; I'll bear ye Company.



No no, I'll out, at that Window.


and Quart. shriek, and run off. Portia follows. Rod. makes up to
Marone, He gets behind Montalto. Mon. steps out.


Horror! Be Man, or Devil, I'll know what thou art.





Thy Vertue is beyond the Power of Hell Be safe And if you
have not heard my Story, there's one  can tell it
ye And so, my Embassie is at an end, per-force.



And your Creditors, may speak to ye, upon even terms.



No more of that On what account, I first assum'd this Body,
  61
you  know how I liv'd among ye, ye all know
 And why, I went off so soon, my Wife, best knows In short, I have
found Earth the greater Hell, and being obliged to no more than my
own Experience, must declare, that Mens Souls, are in the right, and 'tis
their Wives, that send them thither. And for my self, promise ye, I'll
never again repent me, at so dear a rate.




Stupendious! And the more I consider it, the more, I'm at a
loss My first surprise, is now, astonishment.



I'm of Opinion, his two Servants, that were taken up the other night,
may be the same, as their Master, and therefore I order'd Picaro, to
bring them hither, as if they were to be put upon the Rack: Perhaps,
they'll tell ye more.



It can be no hurt; tho', nothing yet appears against em.



I would, I could say as much of my unfortunate Nephew, that
was; and whom, Imperia's last words, unwillingly brought to my Me∣mory
 Can ye, as I have, and ever will, forget him.



And more than that I have forgiv'n him; do you the same He
is not, naturally, Vicious, and who knows, what his future actions
may be whatever were the Injury design'd, it was to me My Portia is
safe and I'm reveng'd enough The dismal Object once agen!




But stay suppose 



Are you, come agen! Nay then advance Bailiffs!




Beware sirrah, how you fool, once too much Suppose I say
(my Term, being not a full third part expir'd) they'll not receive me be∣low?
 Why I must find somewhere, to put my Head For the Wo∣men,
I bar 'em, Bye, and Main: Who knows, but I may have better luck
among the Men? I have (I must confess) learn'd some Wit among ye;
and according to your frank, open, wonted Simplicity, I'll tell ye my de∣sign;
cross-bite it, if you can.



That could I, sirrah, if I durst.





I'll buz Fears, and Jealousies, among Citizens Factions, among
Country Gentlemen Grumblings, among Younger Brothers Heart∣burnings,
among Courtiers And Sedition, among the Common People.
 But, suppose again, my Citizens Wife, work her Husband, into a
good Trade? My Country-Gentleman, be made a Justice of the Peace?
 My Younger Brother, become an Elder Brother? My Courtier,
stumble on a good Office; or, be taken off, with a Feather in his Cap? The
common People, get another Opinion by the end? And at last
Necessity force every Man, to comply, with what he is? Then am I but
where I was. And (as I said before) in the greater Hell And there∣fore
Gentlemen, 'till we meet again, Buconos Nochios.




It yet, amazes me.



Do not believe him, it is not the first time he has shewn me,
that trick.





I have brought them (Sir) according to your commands: But,
if I may be believ'd, in my own Trade; the first stretch, will pull 'em
in pieces.



However, give 'em the Question What are ye?



The same our Master was And since (as I see) he has giv'n us
the slip; what have I to do, but follow him?



The same will trusty Mingo. Tell us of Racks! As I, came
whole among ye, be assur'd, I'll not hazard, a Joynt, to satisfie, a
World-Ev'n take 'em all together.



And mine to boot.




'Tis what I thought Those Bodies, were assum'd See if you
know 'em; perhaps, they may have past your hand.




As likely, as not;

 Why truly Sir, it is no
Countrey Work, and whoever did it, need not be asham'd of't Once
more The Knot, is in the right place; and now I better consider, it 'tis
all my own work; this Roderigo I remember him his name, was
Scabbalucchio, a Neapolitan Bandit; I made his Passport for t'other World,
about four Years since But a more cowardly Rogue, I never saw He
hung an Arse, more than a Bear, going to a Stake; and was three
quarters dead, ere he got half the Ladder. But for the other two,
I know no more of them, but that it was my Work too; and for Plain-Work,
I dare justifie it.



Well, take them off, and throw 'em together, into some hole or
other.




And let 'em lye, 'till I enquire after them.



And beware you, how ye venture another trip, to Terra damnata.



But the Mob (I'm told) are got into my House, and rifling,
what the Bank has left.



'Tis natural to 'em, when they cannot cudgel the Ass, to vent
their rage against the Pack-Saddle Go, make your Peace with the
Senate, and for the rest, time may obliterate your Oppressions, and the
next Age forget, their Fathers were undone by ye.




Poor comfortless Woman; she's fall'n asleep at last.



I think 'twould do well, to send her, and all the Women, to
the Convertiti.



And for Pansa, I'll secure him, the Galleys. And now Sir,
give me leave to tell ye in private, what yet, I have in charge from
the Senate. Our Duke, having absolv'd his two Years Government,
the Senate, is at last become so sensible of your Merit, that they have
elected you, Duke, in his room: A more solemn Message, will sud∣denly
attend ye.



Tempt not your Friend, with a fair gilded Pill.
All bitterness within: I am content,


And what can Providence add more.

Caesar himself, The Master of so many,
Is yet, the Servant of more.



And why should my Montalto seek elsewhere,
What he may give himself? If ever Ambition
Were justifiable, 'tis the Ambition,
Of being rather good, than great.



Let Snakes, and Worms (the Emblems of Self-Love)
Circle themselves, into themselves; while Nature
Minds more, the Preservation of the whole,
Than any single Birth Your Country calls,
And you must once more, serve her.



Why should I waste my small remain of Life,
In blind pursuit, of what, can only serve me,
To furnish out, an Epitaph? Yet must,
Subject me, to the World, and lash of Fortune.



Fortune. Who'd trust her, that has ever heard,
A Triumph, turn'd into a Sacrifice?
Or a swoll'n Favourite, whom the same day,
Saw worshipp'd, by the Senate, and ere night,
Torn piece-meal, by the People.





We'll find some nobler Object; one, on which
She has no Empire.





And let the World, from his Example, learn.
Crimes may be fortunate, while Vertue creeps;
And (like a Flower, opprest with Morning Dew)
Droops its neglected Head; but it will, rise;
Rise, under the dead weight; when t'others shall
(Like mighty Ruins) break themselves, on what they fall.




