





NOT a Husband to be had for mony.
Come, come, I might have been a better House-Wife for my self (as the World goes now,) if I had dealt for an Heir with his Guardian, Uncle, or Mother-in-Law; and you are no better than a Chouse, a Cheat.



I a Cheat Madam.



I am out of my Mony, and my Patience too.



Do not run out of your patience whatever you do,
'Tis a necessary virtue for a Widow without
A Joynture in truly.



Vile Woman, though my Fortune be something
Wasted, my Person's in good repair;
If I had not depended on you, I had had a Husband
Before this time; when I gave you the last five pound,
Did not you promise I should be Marryed by Christmass.



And had kept my promise if you had Cooperated.



Cooperated, what should I have done?

  2Tis well known no Woman breathing could use more
Industry to get her a Husband than I have;
Has not my Husbands Scutcheon walk'd as much ground
As the Citizens Signs since the Fire,
That no quarter of the Town might be ignorant
Of the Widow Flippant,




'Tis well known Madam indeed.



Have I not own'd my self (against my Stomach) the relict of a Citizen to credit my Fortune?







Have I not constantly kept Covent-Garden-Church, St. Martins, the Play-Houses, Hide-Park, Mulbery-Garden, and all other the publick Marts where Widows and Mayds are expos'd?



Far be it from me to think you have an Aversion to a Husband;
But why Madam have you refus'd so many good Offers?



Good Offers Mrs. Joyner, I'll be sworn I never had an Offer since my late Husbands; if I had had an Of∣fer Mrs. Joyner; there's the thing Mrs. Joyner.



Then your frequent, and publick detestation of Marriage, is thought real;
And if you have had no Offer, there's the thing Madam.



I cannot deny, but I always rail against Marriage
Which is the Widows way to it certainly.



'Tis the desperate way, of the desperate Widows, in truly.



Wou'd you have us as tractable as the Wenches that eat Oatmeal; and fool'd like them too.



If no body were wiser then I, I should think, since the Widow wants the natural alurement which the Virgin has, you ought to give men all other incouragements in truly.



Therefore on the contrary, because the Widows For∣tune (whether suppos'd, or real) is her chiefest Bait, the more chary she seems of it, and the more she withdraws it, the more eagerly the busie gaping frye will bite: with us Widows Husbands are got like Bishopricks, by saying no; and I tell you, a young Heir is as shie of a Widow, as of a Rook, to my knowledge.



I can alledge nothing against your practice,
But your ill success; and indeed you must use

  3Another Method with Sir Simon Addleplot.




Will he be at your House at the hour?



He'll be there by ten, 'tis now nine,
I warrant you he will not fail.



I'll warrant you then I will not fail,
For 'tis more then time I were sped



Mr. Dapperwit has not been too busie with you, I hope your experience has taught you to prevent a mischance.



No, no, my mischance (as you call it) is greater then that; I have but three Months to reckon, e're I lye down with my Port and Equipage; and must be delivered a Woman, a Foot-man, and a Coach-man. For my Coach must down, un∣less I can get Sir Simon to draw with me.



He will payr with you exactly if you knew all.




Ah Mrs. Joyner, nothing grieves me like putting down my Coach; for the fine Cloathes, the fine Lodgings; let 'em go; for a Lodging is as unnecessary a thing to a Widow that has a Coach, as a Hat to a Man that has a good Peruque, for as you see about Town she is most properly at home in her Coach, she eats, and drinks, and sleeps in her Coach; and for her Visits she receives them in the Play-house.



Ay, ay, let the Men keep Lodgings
(As you say Madam) if they will.

Gripe and Sir Simon Addleplot following him as his Man in the Habit of a Clarke at one door, and Mrs. Martha at the o∣ther.



Do you think if things had been with me as they have been, I would ever have hous'd with this counter fashion Brother of mine, (who hates a Vest as much as a Surplice) to have my Patches assaulted every day; at Dinner my Free∣dom sensured, and my Visitants shut out of Doors; poor Mr. Dapperwit cannot be admitted.



He knows him too well to keep his Acquaintance.



He is a censorious ridged Fop, and knows nothing.



So, so  Behind.



He is hear. Aside.

To my Lady Flip. Nay with your pardon Madam, I must contradict you there. He is a prying Common-Wealths-man, an implacable Majestrate, a sturdy pillar of his cause, and 
But oh me is your Worship so near then? if I had 
To Gripe. Thought you had heard me 



Why, why Mrs. Joyner,

I have said as much of my self e're now,
And without vanity I profess.



I know your Virtue is proof against Vain-glory;
But the truth to your face, looks like flattery in your Worships servant.



No, no, say what you will of me in that kind,
Far be it from me to suspect you of flattery.



In truly your Worship knows your self,
And knows me, for I am none of those 



Now they are in  Aside.

Mrs. Joyner I'll go before to your House,
You'll be sure to come after me. 
Exit Flippant.




Immediately; but as I was saying,
I am none of those 



No Mrs. Joyner, you cannot sew Pillows,
Under Folks elbows; you cannot hold a Candle to the Divel; you cannot tickle a Trout to take him, you 



Lord how well you do know me indeed;
And you shall see I know your Worship as well,
You cannot backslide from your Principles;
You cannot be terrify'd by the laws;
Nor brib'd to Alegiance by Office or Preferment;
You 



Hold, hold, my praise must not interrupt yours.



With your Worships pardon, (In truly) I must on.



I am full of your praise, and it will run over.



Nay sweet Sir, you are 



Nay sweet Mrs. Joyner, you are 



Nay good your Worship, you are Stops her mouth with his Hand∣kerchief.



I say you are 



I must not be rude with your Worship.



You are a Nursing mother to the Saints;
Through you they gather together;
Through you they fructify and encrease; and through you
The Child cries from out of the Hand-Basket.



Through you Virgins are marryed or provided
For as well; through you the Reprobates Wife
Is made a Saint; and through you the Widow is not
Disconsolate, nor misses her Husband.







Indeed you will put me to the blush



Blushes are badges of Imperfection,
Saints have no shame: You are the flowr of Matrons Mrs. Joyner.




You are the Pink of curtious Aldermen.



You are the Muffler of Secresy



You are the Head-band of Justice.



Thank you sweet Mrs. Joyner, do you think
So indeed? you are 
You are the Bonefire of Devotion.



You are the Bellows of Zeal.



You are the Cup-board of Charity.



You are the Fob of Liberality,



You are the Rivet of sanctify'd Love or Wedlock.



You are the Picklock and Dark-Lanthorn of Policy;
And in a word, a Conventicle of Virtues.



Your Servant, your servant sweet Mrs. Joyner,

You have stopt my mouth.



Your Servant, your servant sweet Alderman,
I have nothing to say.



The half Pullet will be cold Sir.



Mrs. Joyner you shall Sup with me.



Indeed I am engag'd to Supper with some
Of your man's Friends; and I came on purpose.
To get leave for him too.



I cannot deny you any thing; but I have forgot to tell you what a kind of Fellow my Sisters Dapperwit is; before a full Table of the Coffee-house sage• he had the impudence to hold an Argument against me in the defence of Vests and Pro∣tections; and therefore I forbid him my house; besides when he came, I was forc'd to lock up my Daughter for fear of him, nay, I think the poor Child her self was afraid of him: come hither Child, were you not afraid of Dapperwit?



Yes indeed, Sir, he is a terrible man.
Yet I durst meet with him in the Piazzo at midnight. Aside.




He shall never come into my doors again.



Shall Mr. Dapperwit never come hither again then?







I am afraid he will.







I warrant you then I'le go to him. Aside.

I am glad of that, for I hate him as much as a Bishop.



Thou art no Child of mine, if thou dost not hate Bi∣shops and Wits: Well, Mrs. Joyner, I'le keep you no longer. Jo∣nas, wait on Mrs. Joyner.



Good night to your Worship.



But stay, stay Mrs. Joyner, have you spoken with the Widow Crossbite about her little Daughter, as I desir'd.



I will to morrow early, it shall be the first thing I'le do after my Prayers.



If Dapperwit should contaminate her; I cannot rest till I have redeem'd her from the Jaws of that Lyon, good night.




Exeunt Gripe and Martha.


Manent Sir. Simon Addleplot and Joyner.


Hah, hah, ha, Mrs Joyner.



What's the matter, Sir Simon?



Hah, hah, ha  let us make haste to your House, or I shall burst, faith and troth to see what Fools you and I make of these people.



I will not rob you of any of the credit, I am but a feeble Instrument, you are the Engeneer.



Remember what you say now when things succeed, and do not tell me then, I must thank your wit for all.



No in truly, Sir Simon.



Nay I'm sure Dapperwit and I have been partners in many an Intrigue, and he uses to serve me so.



He is an ill man to intrigue with, as you call it.



I, so are all your Wits; a pox, if a mans understand∣ing be not so publick as theirs, he cannot do a wise action but they go away with the honour of it, if he be of their acquain∣tance.



Why do you keep such Acquaintance then?



There is a Proverb, Mrs. Joyner, You may know him by his Company.



No, no, to be thought a man of parts, you shou'd al∣ways keep Company with a man of less wit then your self.



That's the hardest thing in the world for me to do, saith and troth.



What, to find a man of less wit then your self?
Pardon my Raillery, Sir Simon.




No, no, I cannot keep Company with a Fool, I wonder how men of parts can do't, there's something in't.



If you cou'd all your wise actions wou'd be your own, and your money wou'd be your own too.



Nay, faith and troth that's true; for your Wits are plaguely given to borrow; they'l borrow of their Wench, Coach-man, or Link-boy their hire. Mrs. Joyner, Dapperwit has that trick with a vengeance.



Why will you keep Company with him then, I say? for to be plain with you, you have followed him so long, that you are thought but his Culley; for every Wit has his Culley, as every Squire his lead Captain.



I his Culley? I his Culley Mrs. Joyner!
Lord that I should be thought a Culley to any Wit breathing.



Nay do not take it so to heart, for the best Wits
Of the Town, are but Culleys themselves.



To whom, to whom, to whom, Mrs. Joyner.



To Sem'steresses, and Bawds.



To your knowledge, Mrs. Joyner.

There I was with her.



To Taylors and Vintners, but especially to the French Houses.



But Dapperwit is a Culley to none of them for he ticks.



I care not; but I wish you were a Culley to none but me, that's all the hurt I wish you,



Thank you Mrs. Joyner; well I will throw off Dap∣perwits acquaintance when I am marryed, and will only be a Culley to my Wife, and that's no more then the wisest Husband of 'em all is.



Then you think you shall carry Mrs. Martha?



Your hundred Guineys are
As good as in your Lap.



But I am afraid this double plot of yours
Should fail, you wou'd sooner succeed,
If you only design'd upon Mrs. Martha,

Or only upon my Lady Flippant.




Nay then you are no Woman of Intrigue, faith and troth 'tis good to have two strings to one Bow; if Mrs. Martha be coy; I tell the Widow I put on my disguise for her; But if Mrs. Martha be kind to Jonas, Sir Simon Addleplot will be false to the Widow, which is no more then Widows are us'd to, for a promise to a Widow is as seldome kept as a Vow made at Sea, as Dapperwit says.



I am afraid they shou'd discover you



You have nothing to fear, you have your twenty Guineys in your pocket for helping me into my Service, and if I get into Mrs. Martha's quarters you have a hundred more, if into the Widdows fifty, happy goe luckey, will her Ladiship be at your house at the hour.







Then you shall see when I am Sir Simon Addleplot and my self, I'll look like my self, now I am Jonas I look like an Ass; you never thought Sir Simon Addleplot cou'd have look'd so like an Ass by his ingenuity.



Pardon me Sir Simon.



Nay do not flatter faith and troth.



Come let us goe 'tis time.



I will carry the Widdow to the French house.



If she will goe.



If she will go; why, did you ever know a Widow refuse a treat? no more then a Lawyer a Fee faith and troth; yet I know too.
No treat, sweet words, good meen, but sly Intrigue





The scene changes to the French House, a Table, Wine, and Candles.





Pray, Mr. Ranger, let's have no drinking to night.



Pray, Mr. Ranger, let's have no Dapperwit to night.







A pox, I hate his impertinent Chat more then he does the honest Burgundy.



But why shou'd you force Wine upon us? we are not all of your gusto.



But why shou'd you force your chaw'd jests, your damn'd ends of your mouldy Lampoones, and last years Sonnets upon us, we are not all of your gusto?



The Wine makes me sick, let me perish.



Thy Rhymes make me spew.



At Reparty already, come Vincent, I know you would Gives him the Glass. rather have him pledge you here Dapperwit; but why are you so eager to have him drink al∣ways.



Because he is so eager to talk always, and there is no other way to silence him.




Here is a Gentleman desires to speak with Mr. Vincent.








He may drink because he is obliged to the Bottle, for all the wit and courage he has, 'tis not free and natural like yours.



He has more courage then wit, but wants neither.



As a Pump gone dry, if you powr no Water down you will get none out, so 



Nay I bar similes too, to night.



Why is not the thought new, don't you apprehend it.



Yes, yes, but 



Well, well, will you comply with his sottishness too, and hate brisk things in complaisance to the ignorant dull age? I believe shortly 'twill be as hard to find a patient friend to communicate ones wit to, as a faithful friend to communicate ones secret to. Wit has a few true Judges as painting I see.



All people pretend to be judges of both.



I they pretend  but set you aside,
And two more. 



But why has Vincent neither courage nor wit.



He has no courage because he beat his Wench for giv∣ing me les douces yeux once; and no wit because he does not comprehend my thoughts; and he is a Son of a Whore for his ignorance; I take ignorance worse from any man then the Lye, because it is as much as to say I am no Wit.
Vincent Returns.

You need not take any notice, though, to him of what I say.



Ranger there is a Woman below, in a Coach wou'd speak with you.








This Ranger, Mr. Vincent, is as false to his Friend as his Wench.



You have no reason to say so,
But because he is absent.



'Tis disobliging to tell a Man of his faults to his face, if he had but your grave parts, and manly wit, I shou'd adore him; but a pox he is a meer Buffon, a Jack-pudding let me perish.



You are an ungrateful fellow, I have heard him main∣tain you had wit, which was more then ere you cou'd do for your self; I thought you had own'd him your Maecenas.



A pox he cannot but esteem me, 'tis for his honour; but I cannot but be just for all that, without favour or affection, yet I confess I love him so well, that I wish he had but the hun∣dredth part of your courage.



He has had the courage to save you from many a beating to my knowledge.



Come, come, I wish the man well, and next to you, better then any man, and I am sorry to say it, he has not a courage to snuff a Candle with his fingers; when he is drunk indeed, he dares get a Clap, or so  and swear at a Constable.



Detracting Fop, when did you see him desert his Friend.



You have a rough kind of Raillery Mr. Vincent, but since you will have it, (though I love the man heartily, I say) he deserted me once in breaking of Windows, for fear of the Constable, Ranger Returns.
 but you need not take notice to him, of what I tell you; I hate to put a man to the blush.



I have had just now a visit from my Mistress, who is as jealous of me, as a Wife of her Husband when she lies in; My Cosin Lydia, you have heard me speak of her.



But she is more troublesom then a Wife that lies in, because she follows you to your haunts; why do you allow her that priviledge before her time?



Faith, I may allow her any priviledge and be to hard for her yet; how do you think I have cheated her to night? Women are poor credulous Creatures, easily deceived.



We are poor credulous Creatures, when we think 'em so.



Intending a Ramble to St. James's Park to night, upon some probable hopes of some fresh Game I have in chase, I ap∣pointed her to stay at home, with a promise to come to her within this hour, that she might not foil the scent and prevent my sport.



She'll be even with you when you are married I war∣rant you: in the mean time here's her health Dapperwit.



Now had he rather be at the window writing her Anagram in the Glass with his Diamond, or biting his nails in the corner, for a fine thought, to come and divert us with at the Table.



No a pox I have no wit to night, I am as barren and hide-bound as one of your damn'd scribling Poets, who are sotts in company for all their wit, as a Miser poor for all his mony; how do you like the thought.







Well I can drink this, because I shall be repreiv'd presently.



Who will be so civil to us.



Sir Simon Addleplot, I have bespoke him a Supper here, for he treats to night a new rich Mistress.



That Spark who has his fruitless designs upon the bed∣ridden rich Widow, down to the sucking Heiresses in her pissing cloute; He was once the sport, but now the publick grievance of all the fortunes in Town; for he watches them like a younger Brother that is afraid to be mump'd of his snip, and they can∣not steal a Marriage, nor stay their stomachs, but he must know it.



He has now pitch'd his Nets for Gripe's Daughter the rich Scrivener, and serves him as a Clerk to get admission to her, which the watchful Fop her Father, denies to all others.



I thought you had been nibling at her once, under pre∣tence of love to her Aunt.



I confess I have the same design yet, and Addleplot is but my Agent whilst he thinks me his; he brings me Letters constantly from her, and carries mine back.



Still betraying your best friends.



I cannot in honour but betray him (let me perish,) the poor young Wench is taken with my person, and wou'd scratch through fowr walls to come to me.



'Tis a sign she is kept up close indeed.



Betray him, I'll not be a Traytor to Love for any man.


Sir Simon Addleplot to them with the Waitor.



Know 'em, you are a sawcy Jack-straw to question me, (faith and troth) I know every body, and every body knows me.



Sir Simon, Sir Simon, Sir Simon.



And you are a welcom man to every body.



Now son of a Whore, do I know the Gentlemen? a dog, he wou'd have had a shilling of me before he wou'd let me come to you.



The Rogue has been bred at Court sure;

  13Get you out Sirrah.



He has been bred at a French house, where they are more unreasonable.



Here's to you Sir Simon.



I cannot drink, for I have a Mistress within, though I wou'd not have the people of the house to know it.



You need not be asham'd of your Mistresses, for they are commonly rich.



And because she is rich, I wou'd conceal her, for I never had a rich Mistress yet, but one or other got her from me presently faith and troth.



But this is an ill place to conceal a Mistress in, every Waiter is an Intelligencer to your Rivals.



I have 'trick for that, I let no Waiters come into the Room, I'll lay the Cloth my self rather.



But who is your Mistress.



Your Servant,  your Servant,  Mr. Ranger.



Come will you pledge me?



No, I'll spare your Wine, if you will spare me Dap∣perwits company, I came for that.



You do us a double favour, to take him and leave the Wine.







Do not go unless he will suffer us to see his Mistress too.








Would you have me so incivil as to leave my company; they'll take it ill?



I cannot find her talk without thee; pray Gentlemen perswade Mr. Dapperwit to go with me.



We will not hinder him of better company.



Yours is too good to be left rudely.



Nay Gentlemen I wou'd desire your company too, if you knew the Lady.



They know her as well as I, you say I know her not.



You are not every body. Aside.



Perhaps we do know the Lady Sir Simon.



You do not, you do not, none of you ever saw her in your lives; but if you cou'd be secret, and civil. 



We have drunk yet but our Bottles a peice.



But will you be civil Mr. Vincent?



He dares not look a Woman in the face under three Bottles.



Come along then, but can you be civil Gentlemen? will you be civil Gentlemen? pray be civil if you can, and you shall see her. 
Exit Sir Sim.


Returns with my Lady Flippant and Mrs. Joyner


How has he got his Jilt here?Aside.



The widow Flippant!  Aside.



Is this the Woman we never saw. Aside.



Does he bring us into company, and Dapperwit one? though I had marryed the Fool, I thought to have reserv'd the Wit as well as other Ladies. Aside.



Nay, look as long as you will Madam, you will find them civil Gentlemen and good Company.



I am not in doubt of their civility but yours,



You'll never leave snubbing your Servants, did you not promise to use him kindly. Behind.




We wanted no good company, Sir Simon, as long as we had yours.



But they wanted good company, therefore I forc'd them to accept of yours.



They will not think the Company good they were forc'd into certainly.



A pox I must be using the words in fashion though I never have any luck with 'em, Mrs. Joyner help me off.



I suppose, Madam, he means the Gentlemen wanted not inclination to your company, but confidence to desire so great an honour, therefore he forc'd 'em.



What makes this Bawd here? sure Mistress you Bawds should be like the small Cards, though at first you make up the Pack, yet when the play begins, you should be put out as use∣less.



Well, well, jibeing companion, you wou'd have the



Pimps kept in only? you would so?



What they are quarrelling?



Pimp and Bawd agree now a days like Doctor an Apo∣thecary.



Try Madam if they are not civil Gentlemen, talk with e'm, while I go lay the cloath no Waiter comes here:
My Mother us'd to tell me, I should avoid all occasions of talk∣ing before my Mistress, because silence is a sign of love as well as prudence. Aside.



Methinks you look a little yellow on't 
Sir Simon lay∣ing the Cloath.
 Mr. Dapperwit; I hope you do not sensure me because you find me passing away a night with this Fool; he is not a man to be jealous of sure.



You are not a Lady to be jealous of sure.



No certainly, but why doe you look as if you were jealous then.



If I had met you in Wheatstones-Park with a drunken Foot-Soldier, I should not have been jealous of you.



Fye, fye, now you are jealous certainly, for people al∣ways when they grow jealous, grow rude; but I can pardon it since it proceeds from love certainly.



I am out of all hopes to be rid of this eternal old ac∣quaintance, when I jear her, she thinks her self prais'd, now I call her Whore in plain english, she thinks I am jealous Aside.



Sweet Mr. Dapperwit be not so sensorious, I speak for your sake, not my own, for jealousie is a great torment, but my honor cannot suffer certainly.



No certainly, but the greatest torment I have is your Love.



Alas sweet Mr. Dapperwit, indeed Love is a torment, but 'tis a sweet torment; but Jealousie is a bitter torment; I do not go about to cure you of the torment of my love.



'Tis a sign so.



Come, come, look up man, is that a Rival to contest with you?



I will contest with no Rival, not with my old Rival your Coach-man, but they have heartily my resignation, and to do you a favour, but my self a greater, I will help tye the knot



you are fumbling for now, betwixt your Culley here, and you.



Go, go, I take that kind of jealousie worst of all, to suspect I would be debauch'd to beastly Matrimony; but who are those Gentlemen pray?  are they men of Fortunes Mrs. Joyner.







Do you believe so indeed; Gentlemen. 


Advancing towards Ranger and Vincent.


If the civility we owe to Ladies, had not controul'd our envy to Mr. Dapperwit, we had interrupted e're this your private conversation.



Your interruption, Sir, had been most civil, and obliging, for our discourse was of Marriage.



That is a subject Madam, as grateful as common.



O fye, fye, are you of that opinion too? I cannot suf∣fer any to talk of it in my company.



Are you married then Madam?







I am sure so much Beauty cannot despair of it.



Dispair of it 



Only those that are married, or cannot be married, hate to hear of marriage.



Yet you must know, Sir, my aversion to marriage is such, that you nor no man breathing, shall ever perswade me to it.



Curs'd be the man shou'd do so rude a thing as to per∣swade you to any thing against your inclination; I wou'd not do it for the World, Madam.



Come, come, though you seem to be a civil Gentleman, I think you no better then your Neighbours; I do not know a man of you all, that will not thrust a Woman up into a cor∣ner, and then talk an hour to her impertinently of marriage.



You wou'd find me another man in a corner, I assure you, Madam, for you shou'd not have a word of marriage from me, whatsoever you might find in my actions of it; I hate talk∣ing as much as you.



I hate it extreamly.



I am your man then, Madam, for I sind just the same fault with your Sex as you do with ours; I ne're cou'd have to do with a Woman in my life, but still she wou'd be impertinent∣ly talking of marriage to me.



Observe that, Mrs. Joyner.Aside.



Pray Mr. Ranger let's go, I had rather drink with Mr. Vincent, then stay here with you; besides 'tis Park-time.





Since you are a Lady that hate marriage, I'll do you the service to withdraw the company, for those that hate marriage, hate loss of time.



Will you go then, Sir, but before you go, Sir, pray tell me is your aversion to marriage real?



As real as yours.



If it were no more real then mine. Aside.







But do you hate marriage certainly?Plucks him back.







Come, I canot believe it, you dissemble it, only because I pretend it.



Do you but pretend it then, Madam?



I shall discover my self  Aside.
I mean, because I hold against it, you do the same in complai∣sance; for I have heard say, cunning men think to bring the coy and untractable women to tameness, as they do some mad peo∣ple by humoring their frenzies.



I am none of those cunning men, yet have too much wit to entertain the presumption of designing upon you.



'Twere no such presumption neither.



Come away, 's death don't you see your danger?



Those aims are for Sir Simon, good night, Madam.



Will you needs go then? the gentlemen are a going, Sir Simon, will you let 'em.



Nay, Madam, if you cannot keep 'em, how should I?



Stay, Sir, because you hate marriage, I'll sing you a new Song against i•.





A Spouse I do hate,
For either she's false or she's jealous;
But give us a Mate,
Who nothing will ask us, or tell us.


She stands on no terms,
Nor chaffers by way of Indenture,
Her love for your Farms;
But takes her kind man at a venture.


If all prove not right,
Without an Act, Process, or Warning,
From Wife for a night,
You may be divorc'd in the morning.


When Parents are Slaves,
Their Bratts connot be any other;
Great Wits, and great Braves,
Have always a Punk to their Mother.





Though it be the fashion for women of quality to sing any Song whatever, because the words are not distinguish'd; yet I should have blush'd to have done it now, but for you, Sir.



The Song is edifying, the Voice admirable, and once more, I am your servant, Madam.



What, will you go too, Mr. Dapperwit?



Pray, Mr. Dapperwit, do not you go too,







Well, if we cannot have their company, we will not have their Room, ours is a private back Room; they have paid their reckoning, let's go thither again.



But pray, sweet Mr. Dapperwit, do not go; keep him Sir Simon?



I cannot keep him. 
Exeunt Vin. Ran. Dap.
It is impossible; (the World is so,
One cannot keep ones Friend, and Mistress too. Ex. Omnes.











HAng me if I am not pleas'd extreamly with this new fashioned catterwouling, this midnight cours∣ing in the Park.



A man may come after Supper with his three Bottles in his head, reel himself sober, without reproof from his Mother, Aunt, or grave relation.



May bring his bashful Wench, and not have her put out of countenance by the impudent honest women of the Town.



And a man of wit may have the better of the dumb shew, of well trim'd Vest, or fair Perruque; no man's now is whitest.



And now no woman's modest, or proud, for her blushes are hid, and the rubies on her lips are died, and all sleepy and glim∣mering eyes have lost their attraction.



And now a man may carry a Bottle under his arm, instead of his Hat, and no observing spruce Fop will miss the Crevat that lies on ones shoulder, or count the pimples on ones face.



And now the brisk reparty ruins the complaisant Cringe, or wise Grimace, something 'twas, we men of virtue always lov'd the night.















And for the Muses.



When I was a Boy I lov'd the night so well, I had a strong vocation to be a Bellman's Apprentice.







And I to attend the Waits of Westminster, let me perish.



But why do we not do the duty of this and such other places, walk, censure, and speak ill of all we meet?



'Tis no fault of mine, let me perrish.



Fye, fye, Satyrical gentlemen, this is not your time, you cannot distinguish a Friend from a Fop.



No matter, no matter, they will deserve amongst 'em the worst we can say.



Who comes here, Dapperwit?



By the toss of his head, training of his People walking slowly over the Stage. feet, and his elbows playing at bo-peep be∣hind his back, it should be my Lord Easy.



And who the woman?



My Lord, what d'ye call's Daughter
That had a Child by 



Dapperwit, hold your tongue?



How are you concern'd?



Her Brother's an honest Fellow, and will drink his Glass.



Prithee, Vincent; Dapperwit did not hinder drinking to night, though he speak against it; why then shou'd you inter∣rupt his sport? now let him talk of any body.



So he will, till you cut his throat.



Why shou'd you in all ocasions thwart him, contemn him, and maliciously look grave at his jests only?



Why do's he always rail against my friends then, and my best friend a Beer-glass?



Dapperwit, be your own Advocate, my Game I think is before me there?
Exit Ran.



This Ranger, I think has all the ill qualities, of all your Town Fops, leaving his company for a spruce Lord, Or a Wench.



Nay, if you must rail at your own best friends, I may forgive you, railing at mine.

Lydia and my Lady Flippant walking over the Stage



False Ranger, shall I find thee here?Aside.



Those are women, are they not?
To Dap.



The least, seems to be my Lucy sure. Aside.



Faith, I think I dare speak to a woman in the dark, let's try.



They are persons of quality of my acquaintance; hold.



Nay, if they are persons of quality of your acquain∣tance, I may be the bolder with 'em.


The Ladies go off, they follow them; Lydia and Flippant re-enter.



I come hither to make a discovery to night.



Of my love to you certainly; for no body but you cou'd have debauch'd me to the Park certainly; I wou'd not return another night, if it were to redeem my dear husband from his grave.



I believe you, but to get another Widow.



Another Husband, another Husband, soh!



There does not pass a night here, but many a match is made.



That a woman of honour shou'd have the word match in her mouth: but I hope, Madam, the fellows do not make honourable Love here, do they? I abominate honourable Love, upon my Honour.



If they should make honourable Love here, I know you would prevent 'em.
Vincent and Dapperwit Re-enter and walk slowly towards them.

But here come two men will inform you what they do.



Do they come? are they men certainly?



Prepare for an assault, they'l put you to't.



Will they put us to't certainly? I was never put to't yet; if they shou'd put us to't, I shou'd drop down, down certainly.



I believe, truly, you wou'd not have power to run away.



Therefore I will not stay the push they come, they come, oh the fellows come!
Flippant runs away, Lydia follows, and Vincent, and Dapperwit after them.
Flippant Re-enters at to'th•r door alone.

So I am got off clear, I did not run from the men, but my com∣panion, for all their brags, men have hardly courage to set upon us, when our number is equal; now they shall see I defie 'em,



for we women have always most courage when we are alone; but a Pox  the lazie Rogues come not, or they are Drunk and cannot run: Oh drink, abominable drink instead of in∣flaming Love, it quenches it, and for one Lover it incourages, it makes a thousand impotent. Curse on all Wine, even Re∣nish-Wine and Sugar 



But Fortune will not see me want, here comes a single Bully, I wish he may stand;
For now anights the jostling Nymph is bolder,
Then modern Satyr with his Cloak o're shoulder.
Well met Sir. She puts on her Mask.




How shall I know that, forsooth, who are you? do you know me?



Who are you? don't you know me?




Not I faith and troth.



I am glad on't, for no man e're lik'd a woman the better for having known her before.




I, but then one can't be so free with a new acquain∣tance, as with an old one; she may deny one the civility.



Not till you ask her.




But I am afraid to be deny'd.



Let me tell you, Sir, you cannot dis-oblige us women more, then in distrusting us.




Pish, what shou'd one ask for, when you know on's meaning? but shall I deal freely with you?



I love of my life men should deal freely with me; there are so few men will deal freely with one 




Are you not a Fireship? a Punk, Madam?



Well, Sir, I love Raillery.




Faith and troth I do not railly, I deal freely.



This is the time and place for freedom, Sir.








Jone's as good as my Lady in the dark certainly; but men that deal freely, never ask questions certainly.



How then! I thought to deal freely, and put a wo∣man to the question, had been all one.



But let me tell you, those that deal freely indeed, take a woman by 




What, what, what, what?



By the hand and lead 'em aside.




Now I understand you come along then.




What unmannerly Rascals are those that bring light in∣to the Park? 'twill not be taken well from 'em by the women certainly; still disappointed  Aside.




Oh the Fidles, the Fidles, I sent for them hither to oblige the women, not offend 'em; for I intend to Serenade the whole Park to night; but my Frolick is not without an intrigue, faith and troth; for I know the Fidles will call the whole Herd of vizard Masks together; and then shall I discover if a stray'd Mistress of mine be not amongst 'em, whom I treated to night at the French-house; but as soon as the Jilt had eat up my meat, and drank her two bottles, she run away from me, and left me alone.



How! is it he! Addleplot, that I cou'd not know him by his faith and troth. Aside.




Now I wou'd understand her tricks, because I in∣tend to Marry her, and shou'd be glad to know what I must trust to.



So thou shalt, but not yet. Aside.




Though I can give a great guess already; for if I have any intrigue on sense in me, she is as arrant a Jilt, as ever pull'd pillow from under husbands head (faith and troth) more∣over she is bow-legg'd, hopper-hipp'd, and betwixt Pomatum and Spanish Red, has a Complexion like a Holland Cheese, and no more Teeth left, then such as give a Haust-goust to her breath; but she is rich (faith and troth.)



Oh Rascal! he has heard some body else say all this of me; but I must not discover my self, lest I should be disappointed of my revenge, for I will marry him. Aside.

The Torches and Musick approaching.





What gone? come then, strike up my lads.


Addleplot for the most part standing still in a Cloak and Viz•rd, but sometimes going about peeping, and examining the Womens cloaths; the Dance ended.







Nay, if you stay any longer, I must leave you again. To Lydia.



We have over-taken them at last again, Flip. going off.
 these are they, they separate too, and that's but a challenge to us.



Let me perish Ladies 



Nay, good Madam, let's unite, now here's the common enemy upon us.



Dam me Ladies 



Hold, a Pox you are to rough, let me perish Ladies.



Not for want of breath, Gentlemen, wee'l stay rather.



For want of your favour, rather sweet Ladies.



That's Dapperwit, false villain; but he must not know I am here; if he should, I should lose his thrice agreeable com∣pany, and he would run from me, as fast as from the Bayliffs. What you will not talk with 'em I hope?



Yes, but I will.



Then you are a Park-woman certainly, and you will take it kindly if I leave you.



No, you must not leave me. Apart.



Then you must leave them.



I'le see if they are worse company then you first.



Monstrous impudence, will you not come?
Pulls Lydia.



Nay, Madam, I never suffer any violence to be us'd to a woman, but what I do my self; she must stay, and you must not go.



Unhand me you rude fellow.



Nay, now I am sure you will stay and be kind; for coy∣ness in a woman is as little sign of true modesty, as huffing in a man, is of true courage.



Use her gently, and speak soft things to her.



Now do I guess I know my Coxcomb. Aside. Sir, I am extremely glad I am fallen into the hands of a Gentle∣man, that can speak soft things; and this is so fine a night to hear soft things in; moring I shou'd have said.



It will not be morning, dear Madam, till you pull off your Mask; that I think was brisk  Aside.



Indeed, dear Sir, my face would frighten back the Sun.



With glories, more radient then his own;
I keep up with her I think. Aside.




But why wou'd you put me to the trouble of lighting the World, when I thought to have gone to sleep?



You only can do it, dear Madam, let me perrish.



But why wou'd you (of all men) practice Treason against your friend Phoebus, and depose him for a meer stranger?



I think he knows me. Aside.



But he does not do you justice, I believe, and you are so positively cock-sure of your wit, you wou'd refer to a meer stranger your Plea to the Bay-tree.



She jears me, let me perish. Aside.



Dapperwit, a little of your aid, for my Lady's invincibly dumb.



Wou'd mine had been so too. Aside.



I have us'd as many arguments to make her speak, as are requisite to make other women hold their tongues.



Well, I am ready to change sides, yet before I go, Ma∣dam; since the Moon consents, now I shou'd see your face, let me desire you to pull off your Mask, which to a handsom Lady is a favour, I'm sure.



Truly, Sir, I must not be long in debt to you the obliga∣tion; pray, let▪ me here you recite some of your verses, which to a Wit, is a favour I'm sure.



Madam, it belongs to your sex to be oblidg'd first; pull off your Mask, and I'll pull out my paper.
Brisk again of my side. Aside.



'Twou'd be in vain, for you wou'd want a Candle now.



I dare not make use again of the lustre of her Aside. face: I'll wait upon you home then, Madam.



Faith no, I believe it will not be much to our advan∣tages, to bring my face, or your Poetry to light, for I hope, you have yet a pretty good opinion of my face, and so have I of your wit; but if you are for proving your wit, why do not you write a Play?



Because 'tis now no more reputation to write a Play, then it is honour to be a Knight: your true wit despises the title of Poet, as much as your true gentleman the title of Knight; for as a man may be a Knight and no Gentleman, so a man may be a Poet and no Wit, let me perish.



Pray, Sir, how are you dignifi'd or distinguish'd amongst the rates of Wits? and how many rates are there?



There are as many degrees of Wits, as of Lawyers; as there is first your Sollicitor, then your Aturney, then your Pleading-Counsel, then your Chamber-Counsel, and then your Judge; so there is first your Court-Wit, your Coffee-Wit, your Poll-Wit or Pollitick-Wit, your Chamber-Wit or Scribble-Wit, and last of all, your Judg-Wit or Critick.



But are there as many Wits as Lawyers? Lord, what will become of us? what employment can they have? how are they known?



First, your Court-Wit is a fashionable, insinuating, flat∣tering, cringing, grimacing, fellow; and has wit enough to sollicit a suit of Love; and if he fail, he has malice enough to ruin the woman with a dull Lampoon, but he rails still at the man that is absent, for you must know, all Wits rail; and his wit properly lies in combing Perruques, matching Ribbonds, and being severe as they call it, upon other peoples cloaths.



Now, what is the Coffee-Wit?



He is a lying, censorious, gossiping, quibling wretch, and sets people together by the ears over that sober drink Coffee; he is a Wit, as he is a commentator upon the Gazet, and he rails at the Pyrats of Algiere, the Grand Signior of Constantinople, and the Christian Grand Signior.



What kind of man is your Poll-Wit?



He is a fidgeting, busie, dogmatical, hot-headed Fop, that speaks always in sentences and proverbs, (as others in simi∣litudes) and he rails perpetually against the present government; his Wit lies in projects and monopolies, and penning speeches for young Parliament men.



But what is your Chamber-Wit or Scribble-Wit?



He is a poring, melancholy, modest Sot, asham'd of the world; he searches all the Records of Wit, to compile a breviate



of them for the use of Players, Printers, Book-sellers, and some∣times Cooks, and Tabacca-men; he imploys his railing against the ignorance of the age, and all that have more mony then he.







Your Judg-Wit or Critick, is all these together, and yet has the wit to be none of them; he can think, speak, write, as well as all the rest, but scorns (himself a Judg) to be judg'd by posterity; he rails at all the other Classes of Wits, and his wit lies in damming all but himself: he is your true Wit.



Then, I suspect you are of his Form.



I cannot deny it, Madam.



Dapperwit, you have been all this time on the wrong side, for you love to talk all, and here's a Lady wou'd not have hin∣dred you.



A pox, I have been talking too long indeed here; for Wit is lost upon a silly weak woman, as well as courage. Aside.



I have us'd all common means to move a womans tongue and mask; I call'd her ugly, old, and old acquaintance, and yet she wou'd not disprove me: but here comes Ranger, let him try what he can do, for since my Mistress is dogged, I'll go sleep alone. Exit.





Ranger! 'tis he indeed; I am sorry he is here, but glad I discovered him before I went, yet he must not discover me, lest I should be prevented hereafter, in finding him out, false Ranger.Aside. Nay, if they bring fresh force upon us, Madam, 'tis time to quit the Field. 
Ex. Lyd. Flip.



What, play with your quarrey till it fly from you·



You frightned it away.



Ha! is not one of those Ladies in mourning?



All women are so by this light.



But you might easily descern it, don't you know her?







Did you talk with her?



Yes, she's one of your brisk silly Baggages.



'Tis she, 'tis she, I was afraid I saw her before, let us follow 'em, prithee make haste. Exeunt. 'Tis Lydia.Aside.

  28Lydia, my Lady Flippant return at the other door,

Ranger, Dapperwit, following them at a distance.



They follow us yet I fear.



You do not fear it certainly, otherwise, you wou'd not have encourag'd them.



For heavens sake, Madam, wave your quarrel a little; and let us pass by your Coach, and so on foot to your acquain∣tance in the old Pell-mell; for I wou'd not be discover'd by the man that came up last to us. Exeunt.








For Heavens sake undress your self, Madam; they'l not return to night, all people have left the Park an hour agoe.



What is't a Clock?











I thought, that time had only stolen from happy Lovers; the Disconsolate have nothing to do but to tell the Clock.



I can only keep account with my misfortunes.



I am glad they are not innumerable.



And truly my undergoing so often your impertinency, is not the least of them.



I am then more glad, Madam, for then they cannot be great, and it is in my power, it seems, to make you in part happy, if I cou'd but hold this villanous tongue of mine, but then let the people of the Town hold their tongues if they will, for I cannot but tell you what they say.



What do they say?



Faith, Madam, I am afraid to tell you, now I think on't.



Is it so ill?



Oh, such base unworthy things.



Do they say, I was really Clerimont's Wench as he boast∣ed; and that the ground of the quarrell betwixt Valentine and him, was not Valentines vindication of my honour, but Clerimonts jealousie of him.



Worse, worse a thousand times, such villanous things to the utter ruin of your reputation.







Faith, Madam, you'l be angry, 'tis the old trick of Lovers to hate their informers, after they have made 'em such.



I will not be angry.



They say then, since Mr. Valentines flying into France, you are grown mad, have put your self into Mourning, live in a dark room, where you'l see no body, nor take any rest day or night, but rave and talk to your self perpetually.







But the surest sign of your madness is, they say, be∣cause you are desperately resolv'd (in case my Lord Clerimont should dye of his wounds, to Transport your self and Fortune into France, to Mr. Valentine, a man that has not a groat to re∣turn you in exchange.



All this hitherto, is true; now to the rest.



Indeed, Madam, I have no more to tell you, I was sorry, I'm sure, to hear so much of any Lady of mine.







This is some revenge for my want of sleep to night; so I hope my old second is come; 'tis seasonable relief. Aside.

Knocking at the door.


Unhappy Valentine, cou'dst thou but Exit. Isabella. see how soon thy absence, and mis-fortunes have disbanded all thy Friends, and turn'd thy Slaves all Renegades, thou sure wou'dst prize my only faithful heart.






Hail faithful Shepherdess; but truly, I had not kept my word with you, in coming back to night, if it had not been for this Lady, who has her intrigues too with the fellows, as well as you.



Madam, under my Lady Flippants protection, I am con∣fident to beg yours; being just now pursu'd out of the Park, by a relation of mine, by whom it imports me extreamly not to be discover'd; but I fear he is now at the door.
Knocking at the door.  30
Let me desire you to deny me to him couragiously, 
To Isabel going out.
 for he will hardly believe he can be mistaken in me.



In such an occasion where impudence is requisite, she will serve you, as faithfully as you can wish, Madam.



Come, come, Madam, do not upbraid her with her as∣surance, a qualification that only fits her for a Ladies Service; a fine Woman of the Town, can be no more without a woman that can make an excuse with an assurance, then she can be with∣out a glass certainly.



She needs no Advocate.



How can any one alone manage an amorous intrigue; though the Birds are tame, some body must help draw the Net; if 'twere not for a Woman that could make an excuse with assu∣rance, how shou'd we whedle, jilt, trace, discover, countermine, undermine, and blow up the stinking fellows, which is all the pleasure I receive, or design by them; for I never admitted a man to my conversation, but for his punishment certainly.



No body will doubt that, certainly.





Madam, the Centleman will not be mistaken, he says you are here, he saw you come in; he is your Relation, his name's Ranger, and is come to wait upon you home; I had much ado to keep him from coming up.



Madam, for Heavens sake help me, 'tis yet in your power, if but while I retire into your Dining-room, 
To Christina. you will please to personate me, and own your self, for her, he pursu'd out of the Park; you are in Mourning too, and your Stature so much mine, it will not contradict you.



I am sorry, Madam, I must dispute any command of yours; I have made a resolution to see the face of no man, till an unfortunate Friend of mine, now out of the Kingdom, return.



By that Friend, and by the hopes you have to see him, let me conjure you to keep me from the sight of mine now; Dear Madam, let your charity prevail over your superstition.



He comes, he comes Madam.




Lydia withdraws and stands unseen at the door.



Ha! this is no Lydia.



What unworthy defamer has encouraged you to offer me this insolence.



She is liker Lydia in her style, then her face; I see I am mistaken, but to tell her I follow'd her for another, were an affront, rather then an excuse; she's a glorious creature. Aside.



Tell me, Sir, whence had you reason for this your rude pursuit of me, into my Lodging, my Chamber; why should you follow me?



Faith, Madam, because you run away from me.



That was no sign of an acquaintance.



You'l pardon me Madam.



Then it seems you mistook me for another, and the night is your excuse, which blots out all distinctions: but now you are satisfyed in your mistake, I hope, you will go seek out your Woman in another place.



Madam, I allow not the excuse you make for me; if I have offended, I will rather be condemned for my love, then pardon'd for my insensibility.







What do you say?



Though the night had been darker, my heart wou'd not have suffer'd me to follow any one but you; he has been too long acquainted with you, to mistake you.



What means this tenderness; he mistook me for her sure?behind.



What says the Gentleman? did you know me then Sir?



Not I, the Devil take me, but I must on now. Aside. Cou'd you imagine, Madam, by the innumerable crowd of your admirers, you had left any man free in the Town, or ig∣norant of the power of your Beauty.



I never saw your face before, that I remember.



Ah Madam! you wou'd never regard you humb'lest Slave; I was till now a modest Lover.



Falsest of men. behind.



My woman said, you came to seek a Relation here, not a Mistress.



I must confess, Madam, I thought you wou'd sooner disprove my dissembled error, then admit my visit; and I was resolv'd to see you.







Indeed, when I follow'd you first out of the Park, I was afraid you might have been a certain Relation of mine, for your Statures and Habits are the same; but when you enter'd here, I was with joy convinc'd: Besides, I would not for the world have given her troublesom love, so much encouragement, to have disturb'd my future addresses to you; for the foolish wo∣man do's perpetually torment me, to make our relation nearer; but never more in vain, then since I have seen you, Madam.



How shall I suffer this? 'tis clear he disappointed me to night for her, and made me stay at home, that I might not dis∣appoint him of her company in the Park. behind.



I am amaz'd! but let me tell you, Sir, if the Lady were here, I wou'd satisfie her, the sight of me shou'd never frustrate her ambitious designs upon her cruel Kinsman.



I wish you cou'd satisfie me. behind.



If she were here, she wou'd satisfie you, she were not capable of the honour to be taken for you (though in the dark) faith, my Cousin is but a tolerable woman to a man that had not seen you.



Sure to my Plague, this is the first time you ever saw me?



Sure to the Plague of my poor heart, 'tis nor the hun∣dredth time I have seen you; for since the time I saw you first, you have not been at the Park, Play-house, Exchange, or other publick place, but I saw you; for it was my business to watch and follow you.



Pray, when did you see me last at the Park, Play-house, or Exchange.



Some two, three days, or a week ago.



I have not been this month out of this Chamber.



That is to delude me. behind.



I knew you were mistaken.



You'll pardon a Lovers memory, Madam.
A pox, I have hang'd my self in my own line, one would think, my perpetual ill luck in lying, should break me of the quality; but like a loosing Gamster, I am still for pushing on, till none will trust me. Aside.



Come, Sir, you run out of one error into a greater, you would excuse the rudeness of your mistake, and intrusion at this hour, into my Lodgings, with your gallantry to me, more un∣seasonable and offensive.



Nay, I am in Love I see, for I blush, and have not a word to say for my self.



But, Sir, if you will needs play the Gallant, pray leave my House before Morning, lest you should be seen go hence, to the scandal of my honour.



Rather then that shou'd be, I'll call up the House and Neighbours to bear witness, I bid you be gon.



Since you take a night-visit so ill, Madam, I will never wait upon you again, but by day; I go, that I may hope to return, and for once, I will wish you a good night without me.



Good night, for as long as I live. 
Ex. Ranger



And good night to my Love, I'm sure. Behind.



Though I have done you an inconsiderable service, I assure you, Madam, you are not a little oblig'd to me.
Pardon me dear Valentine. Aside.



I know not yet, whether I am more oblig'd then in∣jur'd; when I do I assure you, Madam, I shall not be insensible of either.



I fear, Madam, you are as liable to mistakes, as your Kinsman.



I fear, I am more subject to 'em, it may be for want of sleep, therefore I'll go home.



My Lady Flippant, good night.



Good night, or rather good morrow, faithful Shep∣herdess.



I'll wait of you down.



Your Coach stays yet, I hope.










I was a faithful Sentinel, no body came out, let me perish.



No, no, I hunted upon a wrong scent; I thought I had follow'd a Woman, but found her an Angel.



What is her name?



That you must tell me; What very fine woman is there lies hereabouts?



Faith, I know not any, she is I warrant you some fine wo∣man, of a Terms standing or so in the Town; such as seldom ap∣pear in publick, but in their Balcones, where they stand so con∣stantly, one would think they had hir'd no other part of the House.



And look like the Pictures, which Painters expose to draw in Customers; but I must know who she is, Vincents Lodg∣ing is hard by, I'll go and enquire of him, and lye with him to night; but if he will not let me, I'll lye with you, for my lodg∣ing is too far off 



Then I will go before, and expect you at mine. Ex.









Your Mistress, dear Valentine, will not be more glad to see you; but my wonder is no less then my joy, that you wou'd return ere you were inform'd Clerimont were out of danger; his Surgeons themselves, have not been assur'd of his recovery, till within these two days.



I fear'd my Mistress, not my Life; my Life I cou'd trust again with my old enemy Fortune; but not longer, my Mistress, in the hands of my greater Enemies, her Relations.



Your fear was in the wrong place then, for though my Lord Clerimont live, he and his Relations, may put you in more danger of your life, then you Mistresses Relations can of loosing her.



Wou'd any cou'd secure me her, I wou'd my self secur my life, for I should value it then.



Come, come, her Relations can do you no hurt; I dare swear, If her Mother shou'd but say, your Hat did not cock hand∣somly, she wou'd never ask her blessing again.



Prythee leave thy fooling, and tell me, if since my de∣parture, She has given evidences of her love, to clear those doubts I went away with, for as absence is the bane of common and bastard Love; 'tis the vindication of that, which is true and generous.



Nay, if you cou'd ever doubt her love, you deserve to doubt on; for there is no punishment great enough for jealousie, but jealousie.



You may remember, I told you before my flight, I had quarrell'd with the defamer of my Mistress, but thought I had kill'd my Rival.



But pray give me now the answer, which the suddenness of your flight deny'd me; how cou'd Clerimont hope to subdue her heart, by the assault of her honour?



Pish, it might be the stratagem of a Rival, to make me desist.



For shame, if 'twere not rather to vindicate her, then satisfie you, I wou'd not tell you, how like a Penelope she has behav'd her self in your absence.







Then know, the next day you went, she put her self in∣to mourning, and 



That might be for Clerimont, thinking him dead, as all the world besides thought.



Still turning the daggers point on your self, hear me out; I say she put her self into mourning for you  loc'kd up her self in her chamber, this month for you  shut out her barking Relations for you  has not seen the Sun, or face of man, since she saw you  thinks, and talks of no∣thing but you  sends to me daily, to hear of you  and in short (I think) is mad for you  all this I can swear, for I am to her so near a Neighbour, and so inquisitive a friend for you 


  36Servant to them.



Mr. Ranger, Sir, is coming up.



What brings him now? he comes to lye with me.







Yes, pray retire a little, till I send him off, unless you have a mind to have your arrival publish'd to morrow, in the Coffee-houses.



What, not yet a-bed? your man is laying you to sleep
Valentine retires to the door behind.

with Usquebaugh or Brandy, is he not so?



What Punk will not be troubled with you to night, therefore I am, is it not so?



I have been turn'd out of doors indeed just now, by a Woman, but such a Woman, Vincent 



Yes, yes, your women are always such women. 



A Neighbour of yours, and I'm sure the finest you have.



Prythee do not asperse my Neighbourhood with your acquaintance; 'twould bring a scandal upon an Alley.



Nay, I do not know her, therefore I come to you.



'Twas no wonder, she turn'd you out of doors then; and if she had known you, 'twould have been a wonder she had let you stay; but where does she live?



  He whispers.











  Does she live there, do you say?



Yes, I observ'd them exactly, that my account from you, might be as exact; do you know who lives there?



Yes, so well, that I know you are mistaken.



Is she not a young Lady scarce eighteen, of extraor∣dinary beauty, her stature next to low, and in mourning?







She is; but if you saw her, you broke in at window.



I chas'd her home from the Park, indeed, taking her for another Lady who had some claim to my heart, 'till she shew'd a better title to't.







Was she at Park then? and have I a new Rival?Behind.



From the Park did you follow her, do you say? I knew you were mistaken.



I tell you I am not.



If you are sure, it was that house, it might be perhaps her woman stollen to the Park, unknown to her Lady.



My acquaintance does usually begin with the Maid first, but now 'twas with the Mistress, I assure you.



The Mistress! I tell you, she has not been out of her doors since Valentines flight; she is his Mistress, the great Heiress Christina.



I tell you then again, I followed that Christina from the Park home, where I talk'd with her half an hour, and intend to see her to morrow again.



Would she talk with him too?behind.







Christina, do you call her? faith I am sorry she is an Heiress, lest it should bring the scandal of interest, and design of lucre upon my Love.



No, no, her face and vertues will free you from that cen∣sure; but however, 'tis not fairly done to Rival your friend Valentine in his absence; and when he is present, you know 'twil be dangerous, by my Lord Clerimont's example; faith if you have seen her, I would not advise you to attempt it again.



You may be merry, Sir, you are not in Love; your ad∣vise I came not for, nor will I for your assistance; good night.



Here's your Penelope, the woman that 
Ex. Ranger. had not seen the Sun, nor face of Man, since my departure; for it seems she goes out in the night, when the Sun is absent, and faces are not distinguish'd.



Why, do you believe him?



Shou'd I believe you?



'Twere more for your interest, and you wou'd be less deceiv'd; if you believe him, you must doubt the chastity of all the fine Women in Town, and five miles about.



His reports of them, will little invallidate his testimony with me.



He spares not the Innocents in Bibs and Aprons (I'le secure



you) he has made (at best) some gross mistake concerning Chri∣stina, which to morrow will discover; in the mean time let us go sleep.



I will not hinder you, because I cannot enjoy it my self;
Hunger, Revenge, to sleep are petty Foes,
But only Death the jealous Eyes can close. Exeunt.

















Good morrow; but why up so early good Gossip?



My care and passionate concern for you, and yours, wou'd not let me rest (intruly.)



For me and mine?



You know, we have known one another long; I think it be some nine and thirty years since you were marryed.



Nine and thirty years old Mistress? I'de have you to know, I am no far born Child; and if the Register had not been burn'd in the last great fire alas; but my face needs no Register sure: nine and thirty years old said you, Mistress?



I said you had been so long marryed; but, indeed, you bear your years as well as any she in Pepper-Alley.



Nine and thirty, Mistress.



This it is; a woman now-adays, had rather you should find her faulty with a man, I warrant you, then discover her age, I warrant you.



Marry and 'tis the greater secret far; tell a Miser he is rich, and a Woman she is old; you will get no money of him, nor kindness of her: to tell me I was nine and thirty (I say no more) 'twas unneighbourly done of you, Mistress.



My memory confessess my age, it seems, as much as my face, for I thought 



Pray talk, nor think no more of any ones Age; but say, what brought you hither so early?



How does my sweet God-daughter? poor wretch.







Ah sweet Creature; alas, alas, I am sorry for her.



Why, what has she done to deserve your sorrow, or my reprehension?

Lucy comes to the door.



What are they talking of me?behind.



In short, she was seen going into the Meeting-house of the Wicked, otherwise called the Play house, hand in hand, with that vile fellow Dapperwit.



Mr. Dapperwit; let me tell you, if 'twere not for Master Dapperwit, we might have liv'd all this Vacation upon Green Cheese, Tripe, and Ox-cheek; if he had it, we should not want it; but poor Gentleman, it often goes hard with him, for he's a Wit.



So then, you are the Dog to be fed, while the house is broken up; I say beware, the sweet bits you swallow, will make your daughters belly swell, Mistress; and after all your Junkets, there will be a bone for you to pick, Mistress.



Sure, Master Dapperwit is no such manner of man?



He is a Wit, you say, and what are Wits? but contem∣ners of Matrons, Seducers, or Defamers of married Women, and Deflourers of helpless Virgins, even in the Streets, upon the very Bulks; Affronters of midnight Magistracy, and Breakers of Windows in a word.



But he is a little-Wit, a modest-wit, and they do no such outragious things, as your great Wits do.



Nay, I dare say, he will not say himself he is a little-Wit, if you ask him.



Nay, I cannot hear this with patience; with your Aside. pardon mother, you are as much mistaken, as my God-mother in Mr. Dapperwit; for he is as great a Wit as any, and in what he speaks or writes, as happy as any; I can assure you, he con∣temns all your tearing Wits, in comparison of himself.



Alas, poor young wretch, I cannot blame thee so much as thy mother, for thou art not thy self; his bewitching Ma∣drigals



have charm'd thee into some Heathenish, Imp with a hard name.



Nymph, you mean God-mother.



But you Gossip, know what's what; yesterday, as I told you, a fine Old Alderman of the City, seeing your Daughter in so ill hands as Dapperwits, was Zealously, and in pure Charity, bent upon her redemption; and has sent me to tell you, he will take her into his care, and relieve your necessities, if you think good.



Will he relieve all our necessities?







Mine, as well as my Daughters?







Well fare his heart; d'y here Daughter, Mrs. Joyner has satisfy'd me clearly; Dapperwit is a vile fellow, and in short, you must put an end to that scandalous familiarity between you.



Leave sweet Mr. Dapperwit  Oh furious ingratitude! was not he the man that gave me my first Farrenden Gown, put me out of Worsted Stockings, and plain Handkerchiefs, taught me to dress, talk, and move well.



He has taught you to talk indeed; but Huswife, I will not have my pleasure disputed.



Nay, indeed you are too tart with her, poor sweet Soul.



He taught me to rehearse too, wou'd have brought me to the Play-house, where I might have had as good luck as o∣thers: I might have had good Cloaths, Plate, Jewels, and things so well about me; that my Neighbours, the little Gentlemens Wives, of Fifteen hundred, or Two thousand pound a year, should have retir'd into the Country, sick of th' envy, of my prosperity and greatness.



if you follow your mothers counsel, you are like to enjoy all you talk of sooner; then by Dapperwits assistance; a poor wretch that goes on tick for the Paper he writes his Lampoons on; and the very Ale and Coffee that inspires him as they say.



I am credibly informed so, indeed, Madam Joyner.



Well, I have discharg'd my Conscience; good morrow to you both. Exeunt.






This is the Cabinet, in which I hide my Jewel, a small house, in an obscure, little, retired street too.







Nay, I hid my Mistress, with as much care, as a Spark of the Town do's his money from his Dun, after a good hand at Play; and nothing but you cou'd have wrought upon me for a sight of her, let me perish.



My obligation to you is great; do not lessen it by de∣lays, of the favour you promised.



But do not censure my honour, for if you had not been in a desperate condition for as one nail must beat out another, one poyson expel another, one fire draw out another, one fit of drinking cure the sickness of another; so the Surfeit you took last night of Christina's eyes, shall be cured by Lucy's this morn∣ing, or as 



Nay, I bar more similitudes.



What, in my Mistresses lodging? that were as hard as to bar a young Parson in the Pulpit, the fifth of November, railing at the Church of Rome, or as hard as to put you to bed to Lucy, and defend you touching her, or as 



Or as hard as to make you hold your tongue  I shall not see your Mistress, I see?



Miss Lucy, Miss Lucy  Knocks at the door, and returns. the Devil take me, if good men (I say no more) have not been upon their knees to me, to see her, and you at last must obtain it.



I do not believe you.



'Tis such a she, she is beautiful, without affectation, amorous without impertinency, airy, and brisk without impu∣dence, frolick without rudeness; and in a word, the justest crea∣ture breathing to her asignation.



You praise her, as if you had a mind to part with her; and yet you resolve, I see, to keep her to your self.



Keep her, poor Creature, she cannot leave me; and ra∣ther then leave her, I wou'd leave writing Lampoons or Son∣nets almost.



Well, I'le leave you with her then.



What, will you go without seeing her?



Rather then stay without seeing her.



Yes, yes, you shall see her; but let me perish if I have not been offered a hundred Guinnies, for a sight of her; by  I say no more.



I understand you now; if the favour be to be Aside. purchased, then I'le bid all I have about me for't.



Fye fye, Mr. Ranger, you are pleasant i•faith; do you think I would sell the sight of my rarity? like those Gentlemen who hang out Flags at Charing-cross, or like 



Nay, then i'm gone again.



What, you take it ill I refuse your money? rather then that shou'd be, give us it; but take notice I will borrow it; now I think on't, Lucy wants a Gown, and some Knacks.







But I must pay it you again; I will not take it, unless you engage your honour, I shall pay it you again.



You must pardon me; I will not engage my honour for such a trifle; go fetch her out.



Well, she's a ravishing Creature, such eyes, and lips, Mr. Ranger.







Such neck and breasts, Mr. Ranger.







Such, feet, legs, and thighs, Mr. Ranger.



Prethee let me see 'em.



And a mouth no bigger then your Ring; I need say no more.



Wou'd thou wer't never to speak again.



And then so neat, so sweet a Creature in bed, that to my knowledge, she do's not change her Sheets in half a year.



I thank you for that allay to my impatience.



Miss Lucy, Miss Lucy, Miss. Knocking at the dore.



Will she not open?



I am afraid, my prety Miss is not stirring, and therefore will not admit us.



Fye, Fye, a quibble next your stomach in a morning; what if she shou'd hear us, wou'd you lose a Mistress for a quib∣le? that's more then I cou'd do, let me perish.



Is she not gone her walk to Lambs Conduit?



She is within, I hear her.



But she will not hear you; she's as deaf, as if you were a Dun or a Constable.



Pish, give her but leave to gape, rub her eyes, and put on her day-Pinner; the long patch under the left eye; awaken the Roses on her cheeks, with some Spanish wool, and warrant her breath with some Lemmon Peil; the dore flies off of the hindges, and she into my arms; she knows there is as much Ar∣tifice to keep a victory, as to gain it; and 'tis a sign she values the conquest of my heart.



I thought her beauty had not stood in need of Art.



Beauty's a Coward, still without the help of Art, and may have the fortune of a Conquest, but cannot keep it; Beau∣ty and Art can no more be asunder, then Love and Honour.



Or to speak more like your self, wit and judgment.



Don't you hear the dore wag yet?







Miss, Miss, 'tis your slave that calls; come, all this trick∣ing for him; lend me your Comb, Mr. Ranger.



No, I am to be preferred to day, you are to set me off; you are in possession; I will not lend you arms to keep me out 



A Pox, don't let me be ungrateful; if she has smugg'd her self up for me, let me Prune, and Flounce my Perruque a little for her; there's ne're a young fellow in the Town but will do as much, for a meer stranger in the Play-house.



A Wits Wig, has the priviledge of being uncomb'd in the very Play-house, or in the presence 



But not in the presence of his Mistress; 'tis a greater neglect of her then himself; pray lend me your Comb.



I wou'd not have men of Wit, and Courage, make use of every Fops mean Arts, to keep, or gain a Mistress.



But don't you see every day, though a man have ne're so much Wit and Courage, his Mistress will revolt to those Fops that wear, and Comb Peruques well; i'le break off the bargain, and will not receive you, my Partner.



Therefore you see I am setting Combs his Perruque. up for my self.



She comes, she comes, pray, your Comb.









Bargain, what are you offering us to sale?



A Pox, is't she? here take your Comb again then. Returns the Comb.



Wou'd you sell us? 'tis like you y'fads.



Sell thee, where shou'd we find a Chapman? go prithee mother, call out my dear Miss Lucy▪



Your Miss Lucy; I do not wonder you have the Con∣science to bargain for us behind our backs, since you have the impudence to claim a propriety in us, to my face.







Come, come, this Gentleman will not think the worse of a Woman, for my acquaintance with her; he has seen me bring your Daughter to the Leur with a Chiney Orange, from one side of the Play-house to the other.



I wou'd have the Gentleman, and you to know, my Daughter is a Girl of reputation, though she has been seen in your company; but is now so sensible of her past danger, that she is resolv'd never more to venture her Pitcher to the Well, as they say.



How's that Widow? I wonder at your new confi∣dence.



I wonder at your old impudence, that where you have had so frequent repulses, you shou'd provoke another, and bring your Friend here to witness your disgrace.



Hark you Widow a little.



What, you have Mortgaged my Daughter to that Cen∣tleman; and now wou'd offer me a snip to joyn in the security.



She over-heard me talk of a bargain; 'twas unlucky; Aside. your wrath is grounded upon a mistake: Miss Lucy her self shall be judge, call her out pray.



She shall not, she will not come to you.



Till I hear it from her own mouth, I cannot believe it.



You shall hear her say't through the dore.



I shall doubt it, unless she say it to my face.



Shall we be troubled with you no more then?



If she command my death, I cannot dis-obey her.



Come out Child. Lucy (holding down her head) to them.




Your Servant dearest Miss, can you have? 



Let me ask her.



No, I'le ask her.



I'le throw up Cross or Pile who shall ask her.



Can you have the heart to say, you will never more break a Cheese-cake with me, at New Spring-garden, the Neat-house, or Chelsey; never more sit in my lap at a New Play, never more wear a Suit of Knots of my choice; and last of all, never more pass away an afternoon with me again, in the Green Garret? in  do not forget the Green Garret.



I wish I had never seen the Green Garret; Demm the Green Garret.



Demm the Green Garret, you are strangely alter'd.



Tis you are alter'd.



You have refus'd Colby's Mulberry Garden, and the French-houses, for the Green Garret; and a little something in the Green Garret, pleas'd you more then the best Treat the o∣ther places cou'd yield; and can you of a sudden quit the Green Garret?



Since you have a design to Pawn me for the Rent, 'tis time to remove my Goods.



Thou art extremely mistaken.



Besides, I have heard such strange things of you this morning 







I blush to speak 'em.



I know my Innocence, therefore take my charge as a favour; what have I done?



Then know vile Wit, my mother has confess'd just now, thou wer't false to me, to her too certain knowledge; and hast forc'd even her to be false to me too.



Faults in drink, Lucy, when we are not our selves, shou'd not condemn us.



And now to let me out to hire like Hackney; I tell you my own dear mother shall bargain for me no more; there are as little as I can bargain for themselves now-adays, as well as pro∣perer women.



Whispering all this while; beware of his snares again, come away Child.







Bargain for me; you have reckon'd without your Ho∣stess, as they say, bargain for me, bargain for me. 
Exit. Lucy.



I must return then, to treat with you.



Treat me no treatings, but take a word for all; you shall no more dishonour my Daughter, nor molest my Lodgings, as you have done at all hours.



Do you intend to change 'em, then, to Bridewel, or Longs powdering-Tub.



No, to a Bailifs house, and then you'll be so civil, I presume, as not to trouble us.



Here, will you have my Comb again, Dapperwit?



A pox, I think women take inconstancy from me, worse then from any man breathing.



Pray, Sir, forget me, before you write your next Lampoon. Ex. Cros.


Sir Simon Addleplot in the dress of a Clark. To Ranger and Dapperwit.



Have I found you? have I found you, in your by-walks, faith and troth? I am almost out of breath in following you; Gentlemen when they get into an Alley, walk so fast; as if they had more earnest business there, then in the broad streets.



How came this Sot hither? Fortune has sent him to ease my choler. Aside.
You impudent Rascal, who are you? that dare intrude thus on us. Strikes him.




Don't you know me, Dapperwit? sure you know me. Softly.



Wilt thou dishonour me with thy acquaintance too? thou rascally, insolent, pen and ink-man. Strikes him again.




Oh, oh sure, you know me, pray know me.




By thy sawcy familiarity, thou shou'dst be a Marker at



a Tennis-court, a Barber, or a Slave that fills Coffee.








What art thou?Kicks him.




Nay, I must not discover my self to Ranger, for a kick or two; oh, pray hold, Sir, by that you will know me.

Delivers him a Letter.







Mum, mum, make no excuses man, I wou'd not Ran∣ger shou'd have known me for five hundred  kicks.



Your disguise is so natural, I protest, it will excuse me.




I know that, prythee make no excuses, I say; no ceremony between thee and I man; read the Letter.



What, you have not open'd it?




Prythee don't be angry, the Seal is a little crack'd; for I cou'd not help kissing Mrs. Martha's Letter, the word is, now or never, her Father she finds will be abroad all this day, and she longs to see your friend, Sir Simon Addleplot: faith, 'tis a prety jest; While I am with her, and praising my self to her, at no ordinary rate; let thee and I alone, at an intrigue.



Tell her, I will not fail to meet her, at the place, and time, have a care of your charge; and manage your business like your self, for your self.








The gaining Gripes Daughter, will make me support the loss of this young Jilt here. Aside.







A Servant, to a Friend of mine.



Methinks, he something resembles our acquaintance, Sir Simon, but it is no complement to tell him so; for that Knight, is the most egregious Coxcomb, that ever plaid with Ladies Fan.








The most incorrigible Ass, beyond the reproof of a kicking Rival, or a frowning Mistress; but if it be possible, thou dost use him worse, then his Mistress, or Rival can; thou dost make such a Culley of him.








Go friend, go about your business, 
Ex. Sir. Simon.  42
a pox, you wou'd spoil all, just in the critical time of pro∣jection; he brings me here a Summons from his Mistress, to meet her in the evening; will you come to my Wedding?



Don't speak so loud, you'll break poor Lucies heart; poor creature, she cannot leave you, and rather then leave her, you shou'd leave writing of Lampoons, or Sonnets  almost.



Come, let her go, ungrateful baggage; but now you talk of Sonnets; I am no living Wit, if her love has not cost me two thousand Couplets at least.



But, what wou'd you give now, for a new Satyr against women, ready made; 'twou'd be as convenient to buy, Satyrs against women, ready made, as it is to buy Crevats ready ty'd.







Hay, come away, come away, Mr. or as  Exeunt.





Peace, Plenty, and Pastime be within these Walls.



'Tis a small House you see, and mean Furniture, for no Gallants are suffer'd to come hither; she might have had ere now, as good lodgings, as any in Town; her Moreclack-Hangings, great Glasses, Cabinets, China embroider'd Beds, Persia Carpets, Gold-plate, and the like, if she would have put her self forward; but your Worship may please, to make 'em remove to a place, fit to receive one of your Worships quality; for this is a little scandalous in truly.



No, no, I like it well enough, I am not dainty; besides privacy, privacy, Mrs. Joyner, I love privacy, in opposition to the Wicked, who hate it?



What do you look for, Sir?Looks about.



Walls have ears, Walls have ears; but besides, I look for a private place to retire to, in time of need; oh her's one con∣venient. Turns up a Hanging, and discovers the slender provisions of the Family.



But you see poor innocent Souls, to what use they put it, not to hide Gallants.



Temperance is the nurse of Chastity.



But your Worship may please to mend their fare; and when you come, may make them entertain you, better then, you see, they do themselves.



No, I am not dainty, as I told you; I abominate Enter∣tainments; no Entertainments, pray Mrs. Joyner.







There can be no entertainment to me, more Luscious and Savoury, then the communion with that little Gentlewoman; will you call her out, I fast till I see her.



But intruly your Worship, we shou'd have brought a bottle or two of Rhenish, and some Naples Bisket, to have entertain'd the young Gentlewoman; 'tis the mode for Lovers to Treat their Mistresses.



Modes, I tell you Mrs. Joyner, I hate Modes and Forms.



You must send for something to entertain her with.



Again entertaining; we will be to each other a Feast.



I shall be asham'd, intruly your Worship; besides, the young Gentlewoman will despise you.



I shall content her, I warrant you, leave it to me.



I am sure you will not content me, if you will not con∣tent her; 'tis as impossible for a man to love, and be a miser, as to love and be wise, as they say. Aside.



While you talk of Treats, you starve my eyes; I long to see the fair One; fetch her hither.



I am asham'd she shou'd find me so abominable a lyar; I have so prays'd you to her, and above all your Vertues, your Liberality; which is so great a Vertue, that it often excuses Youth, Beauty, Courage, Wit, or any thing.



Pish, Pish, 'tis the vertue of Fools, every Fool can have it.



And will your worship want it then? I told her 



Why wou'd you tell her any thing of me? you know I am a modest man; but come, if you will have me as extravagant as the wicked; take that, and fetch us a Treat, as you call it.



Upon my life a Groat, what will this purchase?



Two Black Pots of Ale, and a Cake, at the next Cel∣lar;



come, the Wine has Arsenick in't.



Well, I am mistaken, and my hopes are abus'd; I never knew any man so mortify'd a Miser, that he would deny his Letchery any thing; I must be even with thee then another way. Goes out.Aside.



These useful old Women are more exorbitant, and craving in their desires, then the young ones in theirs; these Prodigals in white Peruques, spoil 'em both; and that's the rea∣son when the Squires come under my cluchess; I make 'em pay for their folly and mine, and 'tis but Conscience: Oh here comes the fair One at last.






Oh Lord, there's a man God-mother!



Come in Child, thou art so bashful 



My mother is from home too, I dare not.



If she were here, she'd teach you better manners.



I'm afraid she'd be angry.



To see you so much an Ass; come along I say.



Nay, speak to her gently; if you won't, I will.







Pretty Innocent, there is I see, one left yet of her age; what hap have I! sweet, little Gentlewoman, come and sit down by me.



I am better bred, I hope, Sir.



You must sit down by me.



I'd rather stand, if you please.



To please me, you must sit, Sweetest.



Not before my God-mother, sure.







A poor bashful Girl, Sir; I'm sorry she is not better taught.



I am glad she is not taught; I'le teach her my self.



Are you a Dancing-master then, Sir? but if I shou'd be dull, and not move as you wou'd have me, you wou'd not beat me, Sir, I hope?



Beat thee, hony Suckle; I'le use thee thus, and thus,



and thus; ah, Mrs. Joyner, prethee go fetch our Treat now.




A Treat of a Groat, I will not wag.



Why don't you go? here, take more money, and fetch what you will; take here, half a Crown.



What will half a Crown do?



Take a Crown then, an Angel, a Piece; be gone.



A Treat only will not serve my turn, I must buy the poor Wretch there some toys.



What toys? what? speak quickly.



Pendents, Neck-laces, Fans, Ribbonds, Poynts, Laces, Stockings, Gloves 



Hold, hold, before it comes to a Gown.



Well remember'd, Sir, indeed she wants a Gown, for she has but that one to her back; for your own sake you should give her a new Gown; for variety of Dresses, rouses desire, and makes an old Mistress seem every day a new one.



For that reason she shall have no new Gown; for I am naturally constant, and as I am still the same, I love she shou'd be still the same; but here take half a piece for the other things.



Half a Piece 



Prethee be gone, take t'other Piece then; two Pieces, three Pieces, five; here, 'tis all I have.



I must have the Broad-Seal Ring too, or I stir not.



Insatiable Woman, will you have that too?
Prethee spare me that, 'twas my Grandfathers.



That's false, he had ne're a Coat; so now I go; this is but a violent fit, and will not hold. Aside.



Oh, whither do you go God-mother? will you leave me alone?



The Gentleman will not hurt you; you may venture your self with him alone.



I think I may, God-mother; what, will 
Ex. Joyner. you lock me in, Sir? don't lock me in, Sir.

Fumbling at the dore, locks it.


'Tis a private lesson, I must teach you fair.



I don't see your Fidle, Sir, where is your little Kitt?



I'le shew it thee presently Sweetest;

  52Necessity, Mother of invention; Gripe getting a Chair against the dore.


Come my dearest. Takes her in his arms.




What do you mean, Sir? don't hurt me, Sir, will you  Oh, Oh, you will kill me! murder, murder, oh, oh  help, help, oh  Crys out.






What, murder my Daughter Villain?



I wish he had murder'd me, oh, oh 



What has he done?



Why wou'd you go out, and leave me alone? unfor∣tunate woman that I am.



How now, what will this end in?Aside.



Who brought him in?



That Witch, that Treacherous false Woman, my God-mother, who has betray'd me, sold me to his lust; oh, oh 



Have you ravish'd my Daughter then, you old Goat? ravish'd my Daughter, ravish'd my Daughter, speak Villain.



By yea, and by nay, no such matter.



A canting Rogue too; take notice Landlord, he has ravish'd my Daughter, you see her all in tears and distraction; and see there the wicked Engine of the Pointing to the Chair. filthy execution; Jeremy, call up my Neighbours, and the Con∣stable, false Villain, thou shalt dye for't.



Hold, hold; nay, I am caught. Aside.



Go, go, make haste 







Poor wretch, go quickly.



Hold, hold; thou young Spawn of the old Serpent; Wicked, as I thought thee Innocent; wilt thou say I wou'd have ravish'd thee?



I will swear you did ravish me.



I thought so, Treacherous Eve, then I am gone, I must shift as well as I can. Aside.







Will none of you call up the Neighbours, and the Au∣thority of the Alley?



Hold, I'le give you Twenty Mark among you, to let me go.



Villain, nothing shall buy thy life.



But stay, Mrs. Crossbite, let me talk with you.







Come, Sir, I am your Friend; in a word, I have ap∣peas'd her, and she shall be contented with a little sum.



What is it? what is it?



But five hundred pound.



But five hundred pound; hang me then, hang me ra∣ther.



You will say I have been your friend.



The Constable, and Neighbors are coming.



How, how; will you not take a hundred? pray use con∣science in your ways. 
Kneels to Crossbite.



I scorn your money, I will not take a thousand.



My enemies are many, and I shall be a scandal to the Faithful, as a laughing-stock to the wicked; Aside. go, prepare your Engines for my Persecution; I'le give you the best security I can.



The instruments are drawing in the other room, if you please to go thither.



Indeed, now I consider; a Portion will do my Daughter more good, then his death; that wou'd but publish her shame; money will cover it, probatum est, as they say  let me tell you, Sir, 'tis a charitable thing to give a young Maid a Por∣tion. Exeunt Omnes.








'Tis as hard for a woman to conceal her indignation from her apostate Lover, as to conceal her Love from her faith∣ful servant.



Or almost as hard as it is, for the prating fellows now a∣days, to conceal the favours of obliging Ladies.



If Ranger shou'd come up, (I saw him just now in the street) the discovery of my anger to him now, wou'd be as



mean as the discovery of my love to him before.



Though I did so mean a thing, as to love a fellow, I wou'd not do so mean a thing, as to confess it, certainly, by my trouble to part with him; If I confest Love, it should be before they left me.



So you wou'd deserve to be left, before you were; but cou'd you ever do so mean a thing, as to confess love to any?



Yes; but I never did so mean a thing, as really to love any?



You had once a Husband.



Fye, Madam, do you think me so ill bred, as to love a Husband.



You had a Widows heart, before you were a Widow I see.



I shou'd rather make an adventure of my honour, with a Gallant, for a Gown, a new Coach, a Neck-lase, then clap my Husbands cheeks for them, or sit in his lap; I shou'd be as asham'd to be caught in such a posture, with a Husband, as a brisk well bred of the Town, wou'd be, to be caught on his knees at prayers, unless to his Mistress.


To them, Ranger, Dapperwit.


Mr. Ranger, 'twas obligingly done of you.



Indeed Cousin, I had kept my promise with you, last night, but this Gentleman knows 



You mistake me, but you shall not lessen any favour you do me; you are going to excuse your not coming to me last night, when I take it as a particular obligation, that though you threatned me with a visit, upon consideration you were so civil, as not to trouble me.



This is an unlucky morning with me; here's my eter∣nal persecution, the Widow Flippant.Aside.







Indeed Cousin, besides my business, another cause, I did not wait on you, was, my apprehension, you were gone to the Park, notwithstanding your promise to the contrary.



Therefore, you went to the Park, to visit me there, not∣withstanding your promise to the contrary.



Who, I at the Park? when I had promis'd to wait upon you at your lodging; but were you at the Park, Madam?



Who, I at the Park? when I had promis'd to wait for you at home; I was no more at the Park then you were; were you at the Park?



The Park had been a dismal desart to me, notwith∣standing all the good company in't; if I had wanted yours.



Because it has been the constant endeavour of men, to keep women ignorant, they think us so, but 'tis that encreases our inquisitiveness, and makes us know them ignorant, as false; he is as impudent a dissembler as the widow Flippant, who is making her importunate addresses, in vain, for ought I see. Aside.

Flippant driving Dapperwit from one side of the Stage, to the other.



Dear, Mr. Dapperwit, merciful, Mr. Dapperwit.







Will you be satisfied?



Won't you be satisfied.



That a Wit shou'd be jealous! that a Wit shou'd be jea∣lous! there's never a brisk young fellow in the Town, though no Wit Heaven knows; but thinks too well of himself, to think ill of his Wife, or Mistress; now that a Wit shou'd lessen his opinion of himself, for shame. 
Aside to Dapperwit.



I promis'd to bring you off, but I find it enough to shift for my self  
Softly apart to Ranger.



What, out of breath, Madam?



I have been defending our cause, Madam; I have beat him out of the Pit; I do so mumble these prating, censorious fellows, they call Wits, when I meet with them.



Her Ladyship indeed, is the only thing in Petty-coats, I dread, 'twas well for me there was company in the Room; for I dare no more venture my self with her alone, then a Culley that has been bit, dares venture himself in a Tavern, with an old Rook.



I am the revenger of our Sex, certainly.



And the most insatiable one, I ever knew, Madam; I dare not stand your fury longer; Mr. Ranger, I will go before and make a new appointment, with your friends that exppect you at dinner, at the French-house, 'tis fit business, still wait on Love.

  54〈1 page duplicate〉  55〈1 page duplicate〉
  56Ran.
Do so  but now I think on't, Sir Thomas goes out of Town this afternoon, and I shall not see him here again these three months.



Nay, pray take him with you, Sir.



No, Sir, you shall not take the Gentleman from his Mistress:do not go yet, sweet Mr. Dapperwit.
Aside.



Take him with you, Sir; I suppose his business may be there, to borrow, or win, mony, and I ought not to be his hin∣derance; for when he has none, he has his desperate designs upon that little I have; for want of mony, makes as devout Lovers as Christians.



I hope, Madam, he offers you no less security, then his liberty.



His liberty, as poor a pawn to take up mony on, as honour; he is like the desperate Banke-routs of this age, who if they can get peoples fortunes into their hands, care not though they spend them in Goale, all their lives.



And the poor crediting Ladies, when they have parted with their mony, must be contented with a pitiful composition or starve for all them.



But Widows are commonly so wise, as to be sure their men are solvable, before they trust 'em.



Can you blame 'em; I declare, I will trust no man, pray do not take it ill, Gentlemen; Quacks in their Bills, and Poets in the titles of their Plays, do not more disapoint us, then Gallants with their promises; but I trust none.



Nay, she's a very Jew in that particular; to my know∣ledg, shee'll know her man, over and over again, before she trust him.



Well, my dearest Cousin, good morrow; when I stay from you, so long again, blame me to purpose, and be ex∣treamly angry; for nothing can make me amends for the loss of your company, but your reprehension of my absence; I'll take such a chiding, as kindly, as Russian Wives, do beating.



If you were my Husband, I cou'd not take your absence more kindly, then I do.



And if you were my wife, I wou'd trust you as much out of my sight, as I cou'd, to shew my opinion of your virtue.



A well-bred Gentleman, I warrant; will you go then cruel Mr. Dapperwit?
Ex. Ranger and Dapperwit.



Have I not dissembled well, Leonor?Apart.



But, Madam, to what purpose; why do you not put him to his tryal, and see what he can say for himself?



I am afraid lest my proofs, and his guilt, shou'd make him desperate, and so contemn that pardon, which he cou'd not hope for.



'Tis unjust to condemn him, before you hear him.



I will reprieve him till I have more evidence.



How will you get it?



I will write him a Letter in Christina's name, desiring to meet him; when I shall soon discover, if his love to her be of a longer standing, then since last night; and if it be not, I will not longer trust him with the vanity, to think she gave him the oc∣casion, to follow her home from the Park; so will at once dis∣abuse him and my self.



What care the jealous take in making sure of ills, which they, but in imagination, cannot undergo.



Misfortunes are least dreadful, when most near.
'Tis less to undergo the ill, then fear. Exeunt.













WHat not well your Worship? this it is, you will be laying out your self beyond your strength; you have taken a Surfeit of the little Gentlewoman, I find; indeed, you shou'd not have been so immoderate in your embraces, your Worship is something in years, intruly.



Graceless, Perfidious Woman, what mak'st thou here? art thou not afraid to be us'd like an Informer, since thou hast



made me pay thee for betraying me?



Betray your Worship, what do you mean? I an Infor∣mer, I scorn your words.



Woman, I say again, thou art as Treacherous as an Informer, and more unreasonable; for he lets us have something for our money, before he disturbs us.



Your money, I'me sure, was laid out faithfully; and I went away because I wou'd not disturb you.



I had not grudg'd you the money I gave you, but the five hundred pound; the five hundred pound, inconscionable false woman; the five hundred pound; you cheated, trappand, rob'd me of the five hundred pound.



I cheat you, I rob you; well, remember what you say, you shall answer it before Mr. Double-Cap, and the best of 



Oh impudent woman, speak softly!



I will not speak softly, for innocence is loud, as well as bare-fac'd; is this your return, after you have made me a meer drudge to your filthy lusts?



Speak softly, my Sister, Daughter and Servants will hear.



I wou'd have witnesses, to take notice, that you blast my good name, which was as white as a Tulip, and as sweet as the head of your Cane; before you wrought me to the carrying on the work of your fleshly carnal seekings.



Softly, softly, they are coming in.





What's the matter Brother?



Nothing, nothing Sister, only the Godly woman is fallen into a fit of Zeal, against the enormous transgressions of the Age; go, go, you do not love to hear vanity reprov'd; pray be gone.



Pray stay, Madam, that you may know 



Hold, hold, here are five Guinies for thee, pray say no∣thing. 
Aside. To Joyner.
Sister, pray be gone, I say; wou'd you prejudice your own re∣putation, to injure mine?
Ex. Flippant and Martha.



Wou'd you prejudice your own Soul to wrong my re∣pute, intruly?She seems to weep.



Pray have me in excuse; indeed, I thought, you had a share of the five hundred pound, because you took away my Seal Ring, which they made me send, together, with a Note to my Cash-keeper for five hundred pound; besides, I thought none, but you, knew it was my wonted token to send for money by.



'Twas unlucky I shou'd forget it, and leave it on the Table; but, oh the Harlotry! did she make that use of it then? 'twas no wonder you did not stay till I came back.



I stay'd till the money released me.



Have they the money then? five hundred pound.







They told me not a word of it; and have you no way to retrive it?







I am glad of it; Aside. is there no Law but against Saints?



I will not for five hundred pound, publish my trans∣gression my self; lest I shou'd be thought to glory in't; though, I must confess, 'twould tempt a man to conform to publick pray∣ing and sinning; since 'tis so chargeable to pray, and sin in private.



But are you resolv'd to give off, a loser?



How shall I help it?



Nay, I'le see you shall have, what the young jade has; for your money, i'le make 'um use some conscience however; take a mans money for nothing?



Thou say'st honestly indeed; and shall I have my pen∣niworths out of the little Gentlewoman for all this?



I'le be engag'd body for body for her, and you shall take the forfeiture on me else.



No, no, I'le rather take your word, Mrs. Joyner.



Go in and dress your self Smug, and leave the rest to me.



No man breathing would give off a loser, as she says.








'Tis a Lords Mortgage, and therefore requires the more hast; pray do not jog me, Madam.








They cannot stay for money, as other Folks; if you will not let me make an end on't, I shall loose my expedition fee.



There are some Clerks wou'd have understood me be∣fore this. Aside.




Nay, pray be quiet, Madam; if you squeeze me so to the wall, I cannot write.



'Tis much for the honour of the Gentlemen of this Age, that we Persons of Quality are forc'd to descend to the impor∣tuning of a Clerk, a Butler, Coachman, or Footman; while the Rogues are as dull of apprehension too, as an unfledg'd Coun∣try Squire, amongst his Mothers Maids. Aside.Jogs him again.




Again, Let me tell you, Madam, familiarity breeds contempt; you'l never leave, till you have made me sawcy.



I wou'd I cou'd see that.




I vow and swear then, get you gone; or i'le add a black patch, or two, to those on your face.
I shall have no time to get Mrs. Martha out, for her. Aside.



Will you, Sir, will you?Jogs him again.




I must have a plot for her, she is a coy woman.


I'le kiss you in plain English.



I wou'd I cou'd see that, do you defie me?










I thought you wou'd have been asham'd, to have done so to your Masters own Sister.




I hope you'l be quiet now, Madam?



Nay, I'le be reveng'd of you sure.








You do more to me then that; nay, if you'l do more to me, then that  She throws down his Ink, and runs out, he follows her.





I must visit my young Clyants in the mean time.


Sir Simon returns holding up his hands.



What's the matter, Sir Simon?




Lord, who wou'd have thought it?



What aile you, Sir Simon?




I have made such a discovery, Mrs. Joyner.








Such an one, that makes me at once glad, and sorry; I am sorry my Lady Flippant is nought, but i'me glad I know it; thanks still to my disguise.








Nay, this hand can tell 








She threw down my Ink glass, and ran away into the next room; I follow'd her, and in revenge, threw her down up∣on the bed; but in short, all that I cou'd do to her, wou'd not make her squeek.



She was out of breath man, she was out of breath.




Ah, Mrs Joyner, say no more, say no more of that.





You rude, unmannerly Rascal.



You see she complains now.




I know why, Mrs. Joyner, I know why. Apart.



I'le have you turn'd out of the house, you are not fit for my brothers service.








I'le go and acquaint my Brother 



Hold, hold, Madam, speak not so loud, 'tis Sir Simon Addleplot, your Lover, who has taken this disguise on purpose to be near you; and to watch, and supplant his Rivals.



What a beast was I, I cou'd not discover it, you have undone me; why wou'd you not tell me sooner of it. 
Aside to Joyner.



I thought he had been discernable enough.



I protest I knew him not; for I must confess to you, my eyes are none of the best, since I have us'd the last new wash of Mercury water; what will he think of me?



Let me alone with him; come, come, did you think you cou'd disguise your self from my Ladies knowledg; she knew you man, or else you had ne're had those liberties; alas, poor Lady, she cannot resist you.








How's this? but here comes my Master.





Come, Mrs. Joyner, are you ready to go?



I am ever ready when your Worship commands.



Brother, if you go to to'ther end of the Town, you'l set me down near the Play-house.



The Play-house, do you think I will be seen near the Play-house?



You shall set me down in Lincolus-Inn-Fields then, for I have earnest business there; (When I come home again, I'le laugh at you soundly, Sir Simon.)Apart.








Martha, be sure you stay within now; if you go out, you shall never come into my dores again.



No, I will not, Sir; I'le ne're come into your dores a∣gain, if once I shou'd go out.



'Tis well said. Girl. 
Ex. Gripe, Joyner, Flip.




'Twas prettily said, I understand you, they are dull, and have no intrigue in 'em; but dear, sweet Mrs. Martha, 'tis time we were gone, you have stole away your Scarfs, and Hood from your Maid, I hope.



Nay, I am ready, but 




Come, come, Sir Simon Addleplot, poor Gentleman, is an impatient man to my knowledge.



Well, my venture is great, I'me sure, for a man I know not; but pray Jonas do not deceive me; is he so fine a Gentle∣man, as you say he is?




Pish, pish, he is the  Gentleman of the Town faith, and troth.



But may I take your word Jonas?




'Tis not my word, 'tis the word of all the Town.



Excuse me, Jonas, for that; I never heard any speak well of him, but Mr. Dapperwit, and you.




That's because he has been a Rival to all men, and a Gallant to all Ladies; Rivals, and deserted Mistresses, never speak well of a man.



Has he been so general in his Amours, his kindness is not to be vallu'd then?




The more by you, because 'tis for you he deserts all the rest, faith and troth.



You plead better for him, then he cou'd for himself; I believe, for indeed they say, he is no better then an Ideot.




Then believe me, Madam, for no body knows him better then I; he has as much Wit, Courage, and as good a Meen to the full, as I have; he an Ideot?



The common Gull, so perspicuous a Fop, the women find him out, for none of 'em will marry him.




You may see now, how he and you are abus'd; for that he is not Married, is a sign of his Wit; and for being per∣spicuous, 'tis false, he is as mysterious as a new Parliament man, or a young States-man, newly taken from a Coffee-house, or Tennis-court.



But is it a sign of his Wit because he is not Married?




Yes, yes, your Women of the Town ravish your Fops; there's not one about the Town unmarryed, that has any thing.



It may be then he has spent his Estate.






If he had, he has a head, can retrieve it again.



Besides, they say, he has had the modish distemper.




He can cure it with the best French Chyrurgion in Town.



Has his practice, on himself, been so much?





Fame, like deserted Jilt, does still belye men,
Who doubts her man, must be advis'd by Hymen.









Now the Lucy's have renounc'd us; hey for the Christina's, she cannot use me worse, then your honourable Mistress did you.



A Pox, some young Heir, or another, has promis'd her



Marriage; there are so many Fools in the world, 'tis impossible for a man of Wit to keep his Wench, from being a Lady, let me perish.



But have you no other acquaintance that sticks to her vocation, in spight of temptations of honour, or filthy lucre; I de∣clare, I make honourable Love, meerly out of necessity; as your Rooks play on the square, rather then not play at all.


To them Leonore, Lydias woman mask'd, with a Letter in her hand.



Come, the Devil will not lose a Gamester; here's ready money for you, push freely.



Thou'rt as well met, as if by assignation. To her.



And you are as well met, as if you were the man I look'd for.











Come, I am thy Prisoner, (without more words) shew but thy warrant. Goes to pull off her Mask.



You mistake, Sir, here is my Pass. Gives him the Letter.



A Letter, and directed to me. Reads.

I cannot put up the injuries, and affronts you did me last night; (a challenge upon my life, and by such a messenger) therefore conjure you by your Honour, at eight a Clock precisely, this evening, to send your man to St. James's Gate, to wait for me with a Chair, to conduct me, to what place you shall think most fit, for the giving of satisfaction to the injur'd Christina.

Christina! I am amaz'd! what is't a Clock Dapperwit?



It wants not half an hour of eight.



Go then back, my pretty Herauld, To the Maid. and tell my fair Enemy, the service she designs my man, is only fit for my Friend here; of whose Faith and Honour, she may be secure of; he shall, immediately, go wait for her at St. James's Gate; whilst I go to prepare a place for our ran-counter, and my self to dye at her feet:
Ex. Leonore.
Dapperwit, dear Dapperwit.



What lucky Surprisal's this?



Prethee ask no questions, till I have more leisure, and



less astonishment; I know, you will not deny to be an instru∣ment in my happiness.



No, let me perish, I take as much pleasure to bring Lovers together, as an old Woman, that as a Bankrupt Gamester loves to look on, though he has no advantage by the play; or as a Bully that fights not himself, yet takes pleasure to set people together by the ears; or as 



S'death, is this a time for similitudes?



You have made me miscarry of a good thought, now let me perish.



Go presently to St. James's gate, where you are to ex∣pect the coming of a Lady, ('tis Christina) accompany'd by that woman you saw ev'n now; she will permit you to put her in∣to a Chair, and then conduct her to my lodging, while I go be∣fore to remove some Spies, and prepare it for her reception.



Your lodging; had you not better carry her to Vin∣cent's, 'tis hard by, and there a vizard Mask, has as free egress, and regress, as at the Play-house.



Faith, though it be not very prudent, yet she shall come thither in my vindication; for he wou'd not believe I had seen her last night.



To have a fine woman, and not tell on't, as you say, Mr. Ranger 



Go, and bring her to Vincent's lodging, there I'le ex∣pect you. Exeunt severally.






This is the door, Madam, here Mr. Vincent lodges.



'Tis no matter, we will pass it by, lest the people of our lodging shou'd watch us; but if he shou'd not be here now.



Who, Mr. Valentine, Madam? I warrant you, my intelli∣gencer dares not fail me.



Did he come last night, said he?







And not see me yet; nay, not send to me; 'tis false, he is not come; I wish he were not, I know not which I shou'd take more unkindly from him, exposing his life to his revengeful Ene∣mies;



or being almost four and twenty hours so near me, and not let me know't.



A Lovers dangers, are the only secrets kept from his Mistress; he came not to you, because he wou'd not purchase his happiness with your fear and apprehensions.



Nay, he is come, I see, since you are come about again of his side.



Will you go in, Madam, and disprove me if you can; 'tis better then standing in the street.



We'le go a little farther first, and return. Exeunt.







I told you I had sent my man, to Christina's, this morn∣ing, to enquire of her Maid, (who seldom denies him a secret) if her Lady had been at the Park last night; which she peremp∣torily answered to the contrary, and assur'd him, she had not stirr'd out since your departure.



Will not Chamber-maids lye, Vincent?



Will not Ranger lie, Valentine?



The circumstances of his story prov'd it true.



Do you think so old a Master in the faculty, as he, will want the varnish of probability for his lies?



Do you think a Woman, having the advantage of her Sex, and Education, under such a Mistress, will want impudence to dis-avow a truth, that might be prejudicial to that Mistress?



But if both testimonies are fallible; why will you needs believe his? we are apter to believe the things we wou'd have, then those we wou'd not.



My ill luck has taught me to credit my mis-fortunes, and doubt my happiness.



But Fortune we know inconstant.



And all of her Sex.



Will you judge of Fortune by your experience, and not do your Mistress the same justice? go see her, and satisfie your self and her; for if she be innocent, consider how culpable you



are, not only in your censures of her, but in not seeing her since your coming.



If she be innocent, I shou'd be afraid to surprize her, for her sake; if false, I shou'd be afraid to surprize her, for my own.



To be jealous, and not inquisitive, is as hard as to love extreamly, and not be something jealous.



Inquisitiveness as seldom cures jealousie, as drinking in a Fever quenches the thirst.



If she were at the Park last night, 'tis probable she'l not miss this; go watch her house, see who goes out, who in; while I in the mean time search out Ranger; who, I'le pawn my life, upon more discourse, shall avow his mistake; here he is, go in, how luckily is he come?



Valentine retires to the dore behind, over hearing them.



Ranger, you have prevented me; I was going to look you out, between the Scenes at the Play-houses, the Coffee-house, Tennis-Court, or Giffords.



Do you want a pretence to go to a Bawdy-house? but I have other visits to make.



I forget, I shou'd rather have sought you in Christina's lodgings, ha, ha, ha.



Well, well, I am just come to tell you that Christina 



Proves not by day-light, the kind Lady you follow'd last night out of the Park.



I have better news for you, to my thinking.







Not that I have been in Christina's lodging this morn∣ing; but that she'l be presently here in your lodging with me.







You see now, his report was a jest, a meer jest:

Drawing back to the dore, where Valentine stood, and speaking softly to him.

well, must my lodging be your Vaulting School still; thou hast appointed a Wench to come hither, I find. 
To Ran.



A Wench; you seem'd to have more reverence for Christina last night.



Now you talk of Christina, prethee tell me what was the meaning of thy last nights Romance of Christina.



You shall know the meaning of all, when Christina comes; she'l be here presently.















Incredulous envy; thou art as envious, as an impotent Letcher at a Wedding.



Thou art either mad, or as vain as a French-man, newly return'd home from a Campagn, or obliging England.



Thou art as envious as a Rival; but if thou art mine, there's that will make you desist; Gives him the Letter. and if you are not my Rival; intrusting you with such a secret, will, I know, oblige you to keep it, and assist me against all o∣ther interests.



Do you think I take your secret as an obligation? don't, I know, Lovers, Travellers, and Poets, will give money to be heard; but what's the Paper? a Lampoon upon Christina, hatch'd last night betwixt Squire Dapperwit and you, because her maid us'd you scurvily.



No, 'tis only a Letter from her, to shew, my company was not so disgustful to her last night, but that she desires it again to day.



A Letter from her. Behind.



A Letter from Christina; Reads.









You mistake, I laugh at you not the Letter.



I am like the winning Gamester, so pleas'd with my luck, I will not quarrel with any, who calls me a Fool for't.



Is this the stile of a woman of honour?



It may be, for ought you know; I'm sure, 'tis well if your female correspondents can read.



I must confess, I have none of the little Letters, half name, or title, like your Spanish Epistles Dedicatory; but that a man so frequent in honourable Intrigues, as you are, should not know the summons of an impudent common woman, from that of a person of honour.



Christina is so much a Person of Honour, she'l own what she has writ, when she comes.



But will she come hither indeed?



Immediately, you'l excuse my liberty with you; I cou'd not conceal such a happiness, from such a friend as you, lest you shou'd have taken it unkindly.



Faith, you have oblig'd me indeed; for you, and o∣thers wou'd often have made me believe your honourable In∣trigues, but never did me the honour to convince me of 'em before.



You are merry, I find, yet.



When you are happy, I cannot be otherwise.



But I lose time, I shou'd lay a little Person in Aside. ambush, that lives hard by, in case Christina shou'd be impatient to be reveng'd of her Friends, as it often happens with a discon∣tented Heiress; Women like old Souldiers, more nimbly exe∣cute, then they resolve. Going out.



What now, you will not dis-appoint a woman of Christi∣na's quality?



I'le be here before she comes, I warrant you. 
Ex. Ran.



I do believe you truly: what think you Valentine?



I think, since she has the courage to challenge him; she'l have the honour of being first in the Field.



Fye, your opinion of her must be as bad, as Rangers of himself is good, to think she wou'd write to him; I long till his bona-roba comes, that you may be both dis-abus'd.



And I have not patience to stay her coming, lest you shou'd be dis-abus'd.





Here she is i'faith; I'm glad she's come.



And I'm sorry; but I will to my post again, lest she shou'd say she came to me.



By heavens, Christina her self, 'tis she!Aside.

Christina pulls off her Mask.



'Tis she; curs'd be these eyes, more curs'd, then when they first betray'd me, to that false bewitching face. Behind.



You may wonder, Sir, to see me here 



I must confess I do.



But the confidence your Friend has in you, is the cause of mine; and yet some blushes it do's cost me, to come to seek a man.







How am I deceiv'd!Aside.



Where is he, Sir, why does he not appear to keep me in countenance? pray call him, Sir, 'tis something hard if he shou'd know I'm here.



I hardly can, my self, believe you are here, Madam.



If my visit be troublesome, or unseasonable, 'tis your Friends fault, I design'd it not to you, Sir; pray call him out, that he may excuse it, and take it on himself, together with my shame.



How impatient she is!Aside.



Or do you delay the happiness I ask, to make it more welcom? I have stay'd too long for it already, and cannot more desire it; dear Sir, call him out, where is he? above, or here within? I'le snatch the favour which you will not give:

Goes to the dore, and discovers Valentine.
What do you hide your self for shame?



I must confess I do.



To see me come hither 



I acknowledge it. Val. offers to go out.




Before you came to me; but whither do you go? come I can forgive you.



But I cannot forgive you.



Whither do you go? you need not forge a quarrel, to prevent mine to you; nor need you try if I wou'd follow you; you know I will, I have you see.



That impudence should look so like innocence. Aside.



Whither wou'd you go? why wou'd you go?



To call your servant to you.



She is here, what wou'd you with her?



I mean your Lover, the man you came to meet.



Oh heavens! what Lover? what Man? I came to seek no man but you, whom I had too long lost.



You cou'd not know that I was here.



Ask her, 'twas she that told me. 
Points to Isabel.



How cou'd she know?



That you shall know hereafter.



No, you thought me too far out of the way, to disturb your assignation; and I assure you, Madam, 'twas my ill fortune, not my design; and that it may appear so, I do withdraw, (as in all good breeding, and civility, I am oblig'd) for sure your wish'd for Lover's coming.



What do you mean? are you a weary of that title?



I am asham'd of it, since it grows common. Going out.



Nay, you will not, shall not go.



My stay might give him jealousie, and so do you injury, and him the greatest in the world; Heavens forbid! I wou'd not make a man jealous; for though you call a thousand vows, and oaths, and tears, to witness, (as you safely may) that you have not the least of love for me; yet if he ever knew, how I have lov'd you, sure he wou'd not, cou'd not believe you.



I do confess, your Riddle is too hard for me to solve; therefore you are oblig'd to do't your self.



I wish it were capable of any other interpretation, than what you know already.



Is this that generous good Valentine, who has disguis'd him so. She weeps.



Nay, I must with-hold you then:
Stops Val. going out.
 methinks she shou'd be innocent; her tongue, and eyes, together, with that floud that swells 'em, do vindicate her heart.



They shew but their long practice of desimulation.




Come back; I hear Ranger coming up; stay but till he comes.



Do you think I have the patience of an Alderman?



You may go out this way, when you will, by the back∣stairs; but stay a little, till  Oh, here he comes.





My revenge will now detain me. Valen. retires again.



Vpon Rangers entrance, Christina puts on her Mask.



What, come already? where is Dapperwit?Aside.
The blessing's double that comes quickly; I did not yet expect



you here, otherwise I had not done my self the injury to be ab∣sent; but I hope, Madam, I have not made you stay long for me.



I have not staid at all for you.



I am glad of it, Madam.



Is not this that troublesome stranger, who To Isabel. last night follow'd the Lady into my lodgings? 'tis he. Aside.

Removing from him to t'other side.


Why do's she remove so disdainfully from me?Aside.

I find you take it ill, I was not at your coming here, Madam.



Indeed I do not, you are mistaken, Sir.



Confirm me by a smile then, Madam; remove that Cloud, which makes me apprehend Goes to take off her Mask. foul weather: Mr. Vincent, pray retire; 'tis you keep on the Ladies Mask, and no displeasure, which she has for me; yet, Ma∣dam, you need not distrust his honour, or his faith; but do not keep the Lady under constraint; pray leave us a little Master Vincent.



You must not leave us, Sir; wou'd you leave me with a stranger?







I've done amiss, I find, to bring her hither, Aside. Madam, I understand you  
Apart to Christina.



Sir, I do not understand you.



You wou'd not be known to Mr. Vincent.



'Tis your acquaintance I wou'd avoid.



Dull Brute, that I was, to bring her hither:Aside.I have found my error, Madam; give me but a new appointment, where I may meet you by and by, and straight I will with∣draw, as if I knew you not. Softly to her.



Why, do you know me?



I must not own it. Aside.

No Madam, but  Offers to whisper.




Whispering, Sir, argues an old acquaintance; but I have not the vanity to be thought of yours, and resolve you shall never have the disparagement of mine: Mr. Vincent, pray let us go in here.



How's this! I am undone I see; but if I let her go



thus, I shall be an eternal laughing stock to Vincent.



Do you not know him, Madam? I thought you had come hither on purpose to meet him.







By your own appointment.



What strange infatuation do's delude you all? you know, he said, he did not know me.



You writ to him, he has your Letter.



Then you know my name sure? yet you confess'd but now, you knew me not.



I must confess, your anger has disguis'd you, more then your Mask; for I thought to have met a kinder Christina here.



Heavens! how cou'd he know me in this place? he watch'd me hither sure; or is there any other of my name, that you may no longer mistake me, for your Christina? I'le pull of that which sooths your error. Pulls off her Mask.



Take but t'other vizard off too; I mean your anger, and i'le swear you are the same, and only Christina, which I wish'd, and thought to meet here.



How cou'd you think to meet me here?



By virtue of this your Commission, Gives her the Letter. which now, I see, was meant a real challenge; for you look, as if you wou'd fight with me.



The Paper is a stranger to me, I never writ it; you are abus'd.



Christina is a Person of Honour, and will own what she has written, Ranger.



So, the Comedy begins; I shall be laugh'd at sufficiently, if I do not justifie my self; I must set my impudence to hers, she is resolv'd to deny all I see, and I have lost all hope of Aside. her.



Come, faith Ranger 



You will deny too, Madam, that I follow'd you last night from the Park, to your lodging, where I stay'd with you till morning; you never saw me before I warrant?



That you rudely intruded, last night, into my lodging, I cannot deny; but I wonder you have the confidence to brag



of it; sure you will not of your reception?



I never was so ill-bred, as to brag of my reception in a Ladies Chamber; not a word of that, Madam.



How! if he lies, I revenge her; if it be true, I revenge my self.

Valentine draws his Sword, which Vincent seeing, thrusts him back, and shuts the dore upon him before he was discover'd by Ranger.





What do I see! Christina with him! a Counter-plot to mine, to make me, and it, ridiculous; 'tis true, I find they have been long acquainted, and I long abus'd; but since she intends a triumph, in spight, as well as shame (not emulation) I retire; she deserves no envy, who will be shortly in my condition; his natural inconstancy, will prove my best revenge on her  on both. 
Exeunt Lydia with her Woman.






Christina's going away again; what's the matter?



What do you mean?



I scarce had paid the Chair-men, and was coming up after her, but I met her on the stairs, in as much haste, as if she had been frightn'd.



Who do you talk of?



Christina, whom I took up in a Chair, just now at Saint Jamses's Gate.



Thou art mad, here she is, this is Christina.



I must confess, I did not see her face; but I am sure the Lady is gone, that I brought just now.



I tell you, again, this is she; did you bring two?



I came in no Chair, had no guide, but my woman there.



When did you bring your Lady, Dapperwit?



Ev'n now, just now.



This Lady has been here half an hour.



He knows not what he says, he is mad, you are all so, I am so too.



'Tis the best excuse you can make for your self, and by owning your mistake, you'l shew you are come to your self; I  75
my self saw your woman at the dore, who but look'd in, and then immediately went down again, as your friend Dapperwit too affirms.



You had best follow her, that look'd for you; and i'le go seek out him, I came to see; Mr. Vincent, pray let me in here.



'Tis very fine, wondrous fine!

Christina goes out a little, and returns.



Oh he is gone! Mr. Vincent, follow him; he were yet more severe to me, in indangering his life, then in his censures of me; you know the power of his Enemies is great, as their ma∣lice; just Heaven preserve him from them, and me from this ill, or unlucky man. 
Ex. Christina, her Woman, and Vincent.



'Tis well nay, certainly, I shall never be master of my Senses more; but why do'st thou help to distract me too?



My astonishment was as great as yours, to see her go a∣way again; I wou'd have stay'd her if I cou'd.



Yet, again, talking of a woman you met going out, when I talk of Christina.



I talk of Christina too.



She went out just now; the woman you found me with, was she.



That was not the Christina I brought just now.



You brought her, almost, half an hour ago; s'death, will you give me the lye?



A Lady disappointed by her Gallant, the night before her journey, cou'd not be more touchy with her Maid, or Husband, then you are with me now, after your dis-appointment; but if you thank me so, i'le go serve my self hereafter; for ought I know, I have dis-appointed Mrs. Martha for you, and may lose thirty thousand pound by the bargain: farewel, a raving Lover is fit for solitude. 
Ex. Dap.



Lydia, triumph, I now am thine again; of Intrigues, honourable or dishonourable, and all sorts of rambling, I take my leave; when we are giddy, 'tis time to stand still: why shou'd we be so fond of the by-paths of Love? where we are still way-lay'd, with Surprizes, Trapans, Dangers, and Murder∣ing dis-appointments:


Just as at Blind-mans Buff, we run at all,
Whilst those that lead us, laugh to see us fall;
And when we think, we hold the Lady fast,
We find it but her Scarf, or Veil, at last. Exeunt.













AT length, you see, I have freed the Captive Lady, for her longing Knight. Mr. Dapperwit, who brings off a Plot cleverly now.



I wish our Poets were half so good at it; Mrs. Martha, a thousand welcoms 

Dapperwit Kisses and Embraces Mrs. Martha.



Hold, hold, Sir; your joy is a little too familiar, (faith and troth.)



Will you not let me salute Mrs. Martha?



What Jonas, do you think I do not know good breed∣ing? must I be taught by you?




I wou'd have kept the Maiden-head of your lips, for your sweet Knight, Mrs. Martha, that's all; I dare swear, you never kiss'd any man before, but your Father.



My sweet Knight, if he will be a Knight of mine, must be contented with what he finds, as well as other Knights.




So smart already, faith and troth!



Dear, Mr. Dapperwit, I am over-joy'd to see you; but I thank honest Jonas for't.








Poor, Mr. Dapperwit, I thought I shou'd never have seen you again; but I thank honest Jonas there 






Do not thank me, Mrs. Martha, any more then I thank you.



I wou'd not be ungrateful, Jonas.




Then reserve your kindness, only, for your Worthy Noble, Brave, Heroick Knight; who loves you only, and only deserves your kindness.



I will shew my kindness to my Worthy, Brave, Heroick Knight, in being kind to his Friend, his dear Friend, who help'd him to me. 
Hugs Dap. again.





But, Mistress Martha, he is not to help him always; though he helps him to be married, he is not to help him when he is married.



What, Mr. Dapperwit, will you love my worthy Knight, less after marriage, then before? that were against the custom; for marriage gets a man friends, instead of losing those he has.



I will ever be his Servant, and yours; Dear, Madam, do not doubt me.



I do not, sweet, dear, Mr. Dapperwit; but I shou'd not have seen you these two days, if it had not been for honest Jonas, there  
She Kisses Dap.




For shame, though she be young and foolish, do not you wrong me to my face. 
Apart to Dap.



Wou'd you have me so ill bred, as to repulse her inno∣cent kindness; what a thing it is to want Wit!Aside.








Wives must be obedient, let him take his own time.




Can you trust your self, a turn or two, with Master Dapperwit?



Yes, yes, Jonas, as long as you will.





So marry'd Wight, sees what he dares not blame;
And cannot budge for fear, nor stay for shame. 
Ex. S. Sim.





I am glad he is gone, that I may laugh; 'tis such a mi∣racle of Fops, that his conversation shou'd be pleasant to me,



even when it hindred me of yours.



Indeed, i'm glad he is gone too, as pleasant as he is.



I know why, I know why, sweet Mrs. Martha; I war∣rant you, you had rather have the Parsons company, then his? now you are out of your Fathers house, 'tis time to leave being a Hypocrite.



Well, for the jests sake, to dis-appoint my Knight, I wou'd not care if I dis-appointed my self of a Ladyship.



Come, I will not keep you on the Tenters, I know you have a mind to make sure of me; I have a little Chaplain, I wish he were a Bishop, or one of the Fryars, to perfect our revenge upon that Zealous Jew, your Father.



Do not speak ill of my Father, he has been your friend, i'm sure.







His hard usage of me, conspir'd with your good Meen, and Wit, and to avoid slavery under him, I stoop to your yoke.



I will be obliged to your Father, for nothing but a por∣tion, nor to you for your love; 'twas due to my merit.



You shew your self Sir Simons original, if 'twere not for that vanity 



I shou'd be no wit, 'tis the badge of my calling; for you can no more find a man of wit without vanity, then a fine woman without affectation: But let us go, before the Knight comes again.



Let us go before my Father comes, he soon will have the intelligence.



Stay, let me think a little. Pauses.



What are you thinking of? you shou'd have thought before this time, or, I shou'd have thought rather.







What are you thinking of?



I am thinking, what a Wit without vanity is like; he is like 



You do not think we are in a publick place, and may be surpriz'd, and prevented by my Fathers Scouts.



What, wou'd you have me lose my thought?



You wou'd rather lose your Mistress, it seems.



He is like  I think i'm a Sot to night, let me perish.



Nay, if you are so in love with your thought.




Are you so impatient to be my Wife? he is like  he is like  a Picture without shadows, or, or  a Face with∣out Patches  or a Diamond without a Foyl; these are new thoughts now, these are new.



You are wedded already to your thoughts, I see, good night.



Madam, do not take it ill;
For loss of happy thought, there's no amends.
For his new jest, true Wit will lose old Friends.
That's new again, the thought's new. Exeunt.







Mrs. Joyner, I can conform to this mode of publick walking by Moon-light, because one is not known.



Why, are you asham'd of your company?



No, Pretty one; because in the dark, or as it were the dark, there is no envy, nor scandal; I wou'd neither lose you, nor my reputation.



Your reputation; indeed, your Worship, 'tis well known, there are as grave men, as your Worship; nay, men in office too, that adjourn their cares, and businesses, to come and unbend themselves at night here, with a little vizard mask.



I do believe it, I do believe it, Mrs. Joyner.



I God-mother, and carries, and treats her at Mulberry Garden.



Nay, do's not only treat her, but gives her his whole gleanings of that day.



They may, they may Mrs. Crossbite, they take above six in the hundred.



Nay, there are those of so much worth, and honour, and love, that they'l take it from their Wives and Children, to give it to their Misses; now your Worship has no Wife, and but one Child.



Still for my Edification. Aside.



That's true indeed, for I know a great Lady, that can∣not follow her Husband abroad to his Haunts, because her Far∣rendine is so ragged and greasie; whilst his Mistress is as fine as sippence, in her embroidered Satens.



Politickly done of him indeed; if the truth were known, he is a States-man by that, umph 



Truly, your women of quality, are very troublesom to their Husbands; I have heard 'em complain, they will allow them no separate maintainance, though the honourable Jilts, themselves, will not marry without it.



Come, come, Mistress, sometimes 'tis the craft of those Gentlemen, to complain of their Wives expences, to excuse their own narrowness to their Misses; but your Daughter has a Gal∣lant can make no excuse.



So Mrs. Joyner  my friend Mrs. Joyner 



I hope, indeed, he'l give my Daughter no cause to dun him; for, poor wretch, she is as modest as her Mother.



I profess, I believe it.



But, I have the boldness to ask him for a Treat; come Gallant, we must walk towards the Mulberry Gard'n.



So  I am afraid, little Mistress, the rooms are all taken up by this time.



Will you shame your self again?
Aside to Gripe.



If the rooms be full, we'l have an arbor.



At this time of night; besides, the Waiters will ne'r come near you.



They will be observant of good Customers, as we shall be; come along.



Indeed, and verily, little Mistress, I wou'd go, but that I shou'd be forsworn, if I did.



That's so pitiful an excuse 



In truth, I have forsworn the place, ever since I was pawn'd there for a reckoning.



You have broken many an Oath for the good old cause, and will you boggle at one for your poor, little Miss? come along.


  81Lady Flippant behind.



Unfortunate Lady, that I am! I have left the Herd on purpose to be chas'd, and have wandred this hour here; but the Park affords not so much as a Satyr for me, (and that's strange) no Burgundy man, or drunken Scourer will reel my way; the Rag-women, and Synder-women, have better luck then I  but who are these? if this mungril light do's not deceive me, 'tis my brother, 'tis he, there's Joyner too, and two other women; I'le follow 'em; it must be he, for this world hath nothing like him; I know not what the Devil may be in the other. Ex. Omnes.







Well, after all my seeking, I can find those I wou'd not find; i'm sure 'twas old Gripe, and Joyner with him, and the Widow follow'd; he wou'd not have been here, but to have sought his Daughter, sure; but vigilant Dapperwit has spy'd him too, and has, no doubt, secur'd her from him.








The Rogue is as good at hiding, as I am at stealing a Mistress; 'tis a vain conceited fellow, yet I think, 'tis an honest fellow: but again, he is a damnable Whoring fellow; and what opportunity this air, and darkness may encline 'em to, Heaven knows; for I have heard the Rogue say himself, a Lady will no more shew her modesty in the dark, then a Spaniard his courage.



Ha, ha, ha 




Nay, if you are there my true Friend, i'le forgive your harkning, if you'l forgive my censures? I speak to you, dear, Madam Martha; dear, dear  Behold your worthy Knight.



That's far from neighbours.




I's come to reap the fruit of all his labours.



I cannot see the Knight; well, but i'm sure I hear Jonas.




I am no Jonas, Mrs. Martha.



The night is not so dark, nor the Perruque so big, but I can discern Jonas.




Faith and troth, I am the very Sir Simon Addleplot, that is to marry you; the same, Dapperwit solicited you for; ask him else, my name is not Jonas.



You think my youth, and simplicity, capable of this cheat; but let me tell you, Jonas, 'tis not your borrow'd cloaths, and title, shall make me marry my Fathers man.




Borrow'd title; i'le be sworn I bought it of my Lan∣dress, who was a Court Landress; but, indeed, my cloaths I have not pay'd for, therefore in that sense they are borrow'd.



Prethee, Jonas, let the jest end, or I shall be presently in earnest.




Pray be in earnest, and let us go; the Parson, and Supper, stay for us, and I am a Knight in earnest.



You a Knight, insolent, sawcy Fool?




The Devil take me, Mrs. Martha, if I am not a Knight now; a Knight Baronet too: a man ought, I see, to carry his Patent in his Pocket, when he goes to be marry'd, 'tis more necessary then a License; I am a Knight indeed, and, indeed now, Mrs. Martha.



Indeed, and indeed, the trick will not pass, Jonas.




Poor wretch, she's afraid, she shall not be a Lady: come, come, discover the Intrigue, Dapperwit 



You need not discover the Intrigue, 'tis apparent al∣ready; unworthy Mr. Dapperwit, after my confidence repos'd in you; cou'd you be so little generous, as to betray me to my Fa∣thers man? but i'le be even with you.




Do not accuse him, poor man, before you hear him; tell her the intrique man.



A Pox, she will not believe us.




Will you not excuse your self? but I must not let it rest so; know then Mrs. Martha 



Come, I forgive thee before thy confession, Jonas; you never had had the confidence to have design'd this cheat upon me, but from Mr. Dapperwits encouragement, 'twas his Plot.




Nay, do not do me that wrong, Madam.



But since he has trapan'd me out of my Fathers house, he is like to keep me as long as I live; and so good night, Jonas.




Hold, hold, what d'y' mean both? prethee tell her I am Sir Simon, and no Jonas.



A Pox, she will not believe us, I tell you.




I have provided a Parson, and Supper, at Mulberry Gard'n, and invited all my Friends I cou'd meet in the Park.



Nay, rather then they shall be dis-appointed, there shall be a Bride and Bridegroom, to entertain 'em; Mrs. Martha, and i'le go thither presently.




Why, shall she be your Bride?



You see she will have it so.




Will you make Dapperwit your Husband?



Rather then my Fathers man.




Oh the Devil 



Nay, come along Jonas, you shall make one at the Wedding, since you help'd contrive it.




Will you cheat your self, for fear of being cheared?



I am desperate now.




Wilt thou let her do so ill a thing, Dapperwit, as to marry thee? open her eyes, prethee, and tell her I am a true Knight.



'Twou'd be in vain, by my life, you have carry'd your self so like a natural Clerk  and so adieu good Jonas.


Ex. Martha, and Dapperwit.



What, ruin'd by my own Plot, like an old Cavalier: yet like him too, I will plot on still, a plot of prevention, so I have it  her Father was here ev'n now, i'm sure; well  i'le go tell her Father of her, that I will;
And punish so her folly, and his treachery,
Revenge is sweet, and makes amends for leachery. Ex.






I wish, I had not come hither to night, Leonore.



Why did you, Madam? if the place be so dis-agreeable to you.



We cannot help visiting the place often, where we have lost any thing we value; I lost Ranger here last night.



You thought you had lost him before, a great while ago; and therefore you ought to be the less troubled.



But 'twas here, I miss'd him first, i'm sure.



Come, Madam, let not the loss vex you, he is not worth the looking after.



It cannot but vex me yet, if I lost him by my own fault.



You had but too much care to keep him.



It often happens, indeed, that too much care, is as bad as negligence; but I had rather be rob'd, then lose what I have carelesly.



But, I believe, you wou'd hang the Thief, if you cou'd.



Not if I cou'd have my own again.



I see, you wou'd be too merciful.



I wish I were try'd.



But, Madam, if you please, we will wave the discourse; for people seldom (I suppose) talk with pleasure, of their real losses.



'Tis better then to ruminate in them; mine, i'm sure, will not out of my head, nor heart.



Grief is so far from retrieving a loss, that it makes it greater; but the way to lesson it, is, by a comparison with others losses; here are Ladies, in the Park, of your acquaintance, I doubt not, can compare with you; pray, Madam, let us walk and find 'em out.



'Tis the resentment, you say, makes the loss great, or little; and then i'm sure, there is none like mine; however go on. Exeunt.





I am glad I have found you, for now I am prepar'd to lead you out of the dark, and all your trouble; I have good news.



You are as unmerciful, as the Physician, who with new Arts, keeps his miserable Patient alive, and in hopes, when he knows the disease is incurable.



And you, like the melancholy Patient, mistrust, and hate your Physician, because he will not comply with your despair: but i'le cure your jealousie now.



You know, all Diseases grow worse by relapses.



Trust me once more.



Well, you may try your experiments upon me.



Just as I shut the dore upon you, the woman, Ranger, expected, came up stairs; but finding another woman in dis∣course with him, went down again, I suppose, as jealous of him, as you of Christina.



How do's it appear she came to Ranger?



Thus, Dapperwit came up after, who had brought her, just then, in a Chair from St. Jamses's, by Rangers appointment; and it is certain your Christina came to you.



How can that be? for she knew not I was in the King∣dom.



My man confesses, when I sent him to enquire of her wo∣man, about her Lady's being here in the Park last night; he told her you were come, and she, it seems, told her Mistress.



That might be  Aside. But did not Christina confess, Ranger was in her lodging last night?



By intrusion, which she had more particularly inform'd me of, if her apprehensions of your danger had not posted me after you; she not having yet (as I suppose) heard of Clerimonts recovery: I left her, poor creature, at home, distracted with a thousand fears for your life and love.



Her love, i'm sure, has cost me more fears, then my life; yet that little danger is not past, (as you think) till the great one be over.



Open but your eyes, and the Fantastick Goblin's vanish'd, and all your idle fears, will turn to shame; for Jealousie, is the basest cowardize.



I had rather, indeed, blush for my self, then her.



I'm sure you will have more reason 
But is not that Ranger there?

Ranger enters, follow'd by Christina and her Woman, after them, Lydia and her Woman.



I think it is.



I suppose, his friend Dapperwit is not far off; I will exa∣mine them both before you, and not leave you so much, as the shadow of a doubt; Rangers astonishment at my lodging, con∣fess'd his mistake.



His astonishment might proceed from Christina's unex∣pected strangeness to him.



He shall satisfie you now himself to the contrary, I warrant you, have but patience.



I had rather, indeed, he shou'd satisfie my doubts, then my revenge; therefore I can have patience.



But what women are those that follow him?



Stay a little 



Lydia, Lydia poor Lydia.



If she be my Rival, 'tis some comfort yet, To her Maid. to see her follow him, rather then he her.



But if you follow them a little longer, for your comfort, you shall see them go hand in hand.



Sir, Sir  
To Ranger.



She calls to him already.



But he do's not hear, you see; let us go a little nearer.



Sure it is Ranger?



As sure as the woman that follows him closest, is Chri∣stina.



For shame, talk not of Christina; I left her just now at home, surrounded with so many fears and griefs, she cou'd not stir.



She is come, it may be, to divert them here in the Park; I'm sure 'tis she.



When the Moon, at this instant, scarce affords light e∣nough to distinguish a man from a tree, how can you know her?



How can you know Ranger, then?



I heard him speak.



So you may her too; i'le secure you, if you will draw but a little nearer: she came, doubtless, to no other end but to speak with him; observe 



Sir, I have follow'd you hitherto; 
To Ranger. but now, I must desire you to follow me out of the company, for I wou'd not be over-heard, nor disturb'd.



Ha! is not this Christina's voice? it is I am sure, I cannot be deceiv'd now dear Madam 



It is she indeed. 
Apart to Val.







Come, Sir  
To Ranger.



Nay, I'le follow you too, though not invited, Aside.



I must not, cannot stay behind. Aside.Exeunt.


They all go off together in a huddle, hastily; Christina, her Woman, and Valentine, return on the other side.







So I must stick to her when all is done; her new servant has lost her in the crowd, she has gone too fast for him; so much my revenge is swifter then his love: now shall I not only have the deserted Lovers revenge, of dis-appointing her of her new man; but an opportunity infallibly at once, to discover her falseness, and confront her impudence. Aside.



Pray come along, Sir, I am in haste.



So eager, indeed  I wish that Cloud may yet with-hold the Moon, that this false Woman, may not discover me, before I do her. Aside.



Here no one can hear us, and i'm sure we cannot see one another.



S'death, what have I giddily run my self upon?
'Tis rather a tryal of my self then her;
I cannot undergo it. Aside.








Hell and vengeance, I cannot suffer it, I cannot. Aside.



Come, come; yet nearer, pray come nearer.



It is impossible, I cannot hold; I must discover my self, rather then her infamy.



You are conscious, it seems, of the wrong you have done me, and are asham'd, though in the dark.








I'm glad to find it so; for all my business with you, is to show you your late mistakes, and force a confession from you, of those unmannerly injuries you have done me.



What! I think she's honest; or do's she know me? sure she cannot. Aside.



First, your intrusion, last night, into my lodging, which I suppose, has begot your other gross mistakes.



No, she takes me for Ranger, I see again. Aside.



You are to know then, (since needs you must) it was not me you follow'd last night to my lodging, from the Park, but some Kinswoman of yours, it seems; whose fear of being discover'd by you, prevail'd with me to personate her, while she withdrew, our Habits and our Statures being much alike; which I did with as much difficulty, as she us'd importunity to make me; and all this, my Lady Flippant can witness, who was then with your Cousin.



I am glad to hear this  Aside.



Now, what your claim to me, at Mr. Vincent's lodg∣ing meant; the letter, and promises, you unworthily, or erro∣neously lay'd to my charge, you must explain to me and others, or 



How's this! I hope I shall discover no guilt but my own; she wou'd not speak in threats to a Lover  Aside.



Was it because you found me in Mr. Vincent's lodg∣ings, you took a liberty to use me, like one of your common Visitants? But know, I came no more to Mr. Vincent, then to to you; yet, I confess, my visit was intended to a man  A brave man, till you made him use a woman ill, worthy the love of a Princess; till you made him censure mine; good as Angels, till you made him unjust; why  in the name of honour, wou'd you do't?



How happily, am I dis-appointed! poor injur'd Chri∣stina.Aside.



He wou'd have sought me out first, if you had not made him flye from me; our mutual love, confirm'd by a contract, made our hearts inseparable; till you rudely, if not maliciously, thrust in upon us, and broke the close, and happy knot: I had lost him before for a month, now for ever. She weeps.



My joy, and pity, makes me as mute, as my shame; yet I must discover my self. Aside.



Your silence, is a confession of your guilt.



I own it. Aside.



But that will not serve my turn; for strait you must go clear your self, and me, to him you have injur'd in me; if he has not made too much haste from me, to be found again;



you must, I say, for he is a man that will have satisfaction; and in satisfying him, you do me.



Then he is satisfy'd.



How! is it you? then I am not satisfy'd.



Will you be worse then your word?



I gave it not to you.



Come, dear Christina, the Jealous, like the Drunkard, has his punishment, with his offence.













Where have you been all this while?

Valentine holds Christina by the hand, who seems to struggle to get from him.



Here, with my injur'd Christina.



She's behind with Ranger, who is forc'd to speak all the tender things himself; for she affords him not a word.



Pish, pish, Vincent, who is blind now? who deceiv'd now?



You are, for I'm sure Christina is with him; come back and see.

They go out at one dore, and return at the other.
Ranger to Lydia.


Still mock'd, still abus'd! did you not bid me follow you, where we might not be disturb'd, nor over-heard? and now not allow me a word?




Did you hear him?
Apart to Val.



Yes, yes, peace  
Apart to Vin.



Disowning your Letter, and me, at Vincent's lodging, declaring you came to meet another there, and not me; with a great deal of such affronting unkindness, might be reasonable enough, because you wou'd not intrust Vincent with our love; but now, when no body sees us, nor hears us, why this unseason∣able shyness? 



It seems, she did not expect him there, but had appointed to meet another; I wish it were so. Aside.



I have not Patience; do you design thus to revenge my



intrusion into your lodging last night? sure if you had then been displeas'd with my company, you wou'd not have invited your self to't again by a Letter? or is this a punishment for bringing you to a house, so near your own, where, it seems, you were known too? I do confess, it was a fault; but make me suffer any Penance, but your Silence, because it is the cer∣tain mark of a Mistress's lasting displeasure 



My cue is not yet come. Aside.



Not yet a word? you did not use me so unkindly last night, when you chid me out of your house, and with indigna∣tion bid me be gone; now, you bid me follow you, and yet will have nothing to say to me; and I am more deceiv'd this day and night, then I was last night; when, I must confess, I follow'd you for another. 



I'm glad to hear that. Aside.



One that wou'd have us'd me better; whose love, I have ungratefully abus'd for yours; yet from no other reason, but my natural inconstancy 
Poor Lydia, Lydia  Aside.



He mutter'd my name sure, and with a sigh. Aside.



But as last night, by following (as I thought) her, I found you: so this night, by following you in vain, I do re∣solve, if I can find her again, to keep her for ever.



Now I am obliged, and brought in debt to his incon∣stancy; faith, now cannot I hold out any longer, I must disco∣ver my self. Aside.



But, Madam, because I intend to see you no more, i'le take my leave of you for good and all; since you will not speak, i'le try if you will squeek 

Goes to throw her down, she squeeks.


Mr. Ranger, Mr. Ranger 



Fye, fye, you need not ravish Christina sure, that loves you so.



Is it she! Lydia all this while? how am I gull'd, and. Vincent in the Plot too?







Now false Christina too; you thought I did not know you now, because I offer'd you such an unusual civility.



You knew me, I warrant you knew too, that I was the Christina you follow'd out of the Park last night; that I was the Christina that writ the Letter too.



Certainly, therefore I wou'd have taken my revenge, you see, for your tricks.



Is not this the same woman that took refuge in your house last night, Madam?
To Christina.







What, Mr. Ranger, we have chop'd, and chang'd, and hid our Christina's so long, and often, that at last, we have drawn each of us our own?



Mr. Valentine in England! the truth on't is, you have jugled together, and drawn without my knowledge; but since she will have it so, she shall wear me for good and all now.

Goes to take her by the hand.


Come not near me.



Nay, you need not be afraid, I wou'd ravish you, now I know you.



And yet, Leonore, I think 'tis but justice, to pardon the fault, I made him commit?
Apart to Leonore, Ranger listens.




You consider it right, Cousin; for indeed, you are but merciful to your self in it.



Yet, if I wou'd be rigorous, though I made the blot, your over-sight has lost the game.



But 'twas rash womans play, Cousin, and ought not to be play'd again, let me tell you. Dap. to them.




Who's there? who's there?







Mr. Ranger, I am glad I have met with you; for I have left my Bride just now, in the house at Mulberry Garden, to come and pick up some of my Friends in the Park here, to sup with us.



Your Bride! are you marry'd then? where is your Bride?



Here at Mulberry Garden, I say, where you, these La∣dies, and Gentlemen, shall all be welcome, if you will afford me the honour of your company.



With all our hearts; but who have you marry'd, Lucy?



What, do you think I wou'd marry a Wench? I have marry'd an Heiress worth thirty thousand pound, let me perish.



An Heiress worth thirty thousand pound!



Mr. Vincent, your servant, you here too?



Nay, we are more of your acquaintance here (I think) go, we'le follow you, for if you have not dismiss'd your Parson, perhaps we may make him more work. Exeunt.







'Tis as I told you, Sir, you see.



Oh graceless Babe, marry'd to a Wit! an idle, loyter∣ing, slandering, foul-mouth'd, beggarly Wit; Oh that my child should ever live to marry a Wit!



Indeed, your Worship had better seen her fairly buried, as they say.



If my Daughter, there, shou'd have done so, I wou'd not have gi'n her a groat.








Mrs. Joyner, do not let me lose the 
To Joyner. Widow too; for if you do, (betwixt friends) I and my small annuity are both blown up; it will follow my estate. Aside.



I warrant you. Aside.



Let us make sure of Sir Simon to night, 
To Joyner. or  Aside.



You need not fear it, like the Lawyers, while my Cli∣ents endeavour to cheat one another; I in justice cheat 'em∣both. Aside.







Dapperwit stops 'em, and they stand all behind.



What is he here, Lucy and her Mother?Aside.



Tell me how thou cam'st to marry a Wit?



Pray be not angry, Sir, and i'le give you a good reason.



Reason for marrying a Wit!



Indeed, I found my self six months gone with Child, and saw no hopes of your getting me a Husband, or else I had not marryed a Wit, Sir.



Then you were the Wit. Aside.



Had you that reason? nay, then 

Holding up his hands.






Who wou'd have thought, Dapperwit, you wou'd have marryed a Wench?Aside.



Well, thirty thousand pound will make me amends; I have known my betters wink, and fall on for five or six. 
To Ran. What, you are come, Sir, to give me joy?
To Gripe and the rest.
 you Mrs. Lucy, you, and you? well, unbid guests are doubly welcom 
Sir Simon, I made bold to invite these Ladies, 
To Sir Simon. and Gentlemen, for you must know, Mr. Ranger, this worthy Sir Simon, do's not only give me my Wedding Supper, but my Mistress too; and is as it were my Father.




Then I am as it were a Grand-father to your new Wives, hans en kelder; to which you are but as it were a Fa∣ther; there's for you again, Sir  ha ha 



Ha, ha, ha  
To Vincent.



Fools sometimes say unhappy things, if we wou'd mind 'em, but  what, Melancholy at your Daughters Wedding, Sir?



How deplorable is my condition?Aside.



Nay, if you will rob me of my Wench, Sir, can you blame me for robbing you of your Daughter? I cannot be with∣out a Woman.



My Daughter, my Reputation, and my Money gone  but the last is dearest to me; yet at once I may retrieve that, and be reveng'd for the loss of the other; and all this by mar∣rying Lucy here: I shall get my five hundred pound again, and get Heirs to exclude my Daughter, and frustrate Dapperwit; besides, 'tis agreed on all hands, 'tis cheaper keeping a Wife then a Wench. Aside.



If you are so melancholy, Sir, we will have the Fiddles, and a Dance to divert you; come.




Indeed, you have put me so upon a merry pin, that I resolve to marry too.



Nay, if my Brother come to marrying once, I may too; I swore I wou'd, when he did, little thinking 




I take you at your word, Madam.



Well, but if I had thought you wou'd have been so quick with me 



Where is your Parson?



What, you wou'd not revenge your self upon the Parson?



No, I wou'd have the Parson revenge me upon you; he shou'd marry me.



I am glad you are so frolick, Sir; but who wou'd you marry?



This innocent Lady. 
Pointing to Lucy.







Nay, I am impatient, Mrs. Joyner, pray fetch him up, if he be yet in the house.



We were not marry'd here; but you cannot be in earnest.



You'l find it so; since you have rob'd me of my House∣keeper, I must get another.



Why? she was my Wench.



I'le make her honest then.



Upon my repute he never saw her before: but will your Worship marry my Daughter then?



I promise her, and you, before all this good company, to morrow I will make her my Wife.







Our Ladies, Sir, I suppose, expect the same 
To Val. promise from us.



They may be sure of us without a promise; but let us (if we can) obtain theirs, to be sure of them.



But will you marry her to morrow?  
To Gripe.







I am undone then, ruin'd let me perish.




No, you may hire a little room in Covent-Garden, and set up a Coffee-house; you, and your Wife, will be sure of the Wits custom.



Abus'd by him, I have abus'd!
Fortune our foe, we cannot over-wit,
By none but thee, our projects are Cross-bit.



Come, dear Madam, what yet angry? jealousie sure is much more pardonable before marriage, then after it; but to morrow, by the help of the Parson, you will put me out of all my fears.



I am afraid then you wou'd give me my revenge, and make me jealous of you; and I had rather suspect your faith, then you shou'd mine.



Cousin Lydia, I had rather suspect your faith too, then you shou'd mine; therefore let us e•en marry to morrow, that I may have my turn of watching, doging, standing under the window at the dore, behind the hanging or 



But if I cou'd be desperate now, and give you up my liberty; cou'd you find in your heart to quit all other engage∣ments, and voluntarily turn your self over to one woman, and she a Wife too? cou'd you away with the insupportable bon∣dage of Matrimony?



You talk of Matrimony as irreverently, as my Lady Flippant; the Bondage of Matrimony, no 
The end of Marriage, now is liberty,
And two are bound to set each other free.




PAge 3. line 11. read of a Woman, p. 4. l. 3. r. Is he here? p. 14. l. 9. r. this Jilt. p. 23. l. 2. r. lead her, p. 25. l. 9. r. she, p. 36. l. 20. r. Ran. five doors off on the right hand, p.•0. l. 23. r. into the Play-house, p. 40. l. 27. r. sick with envy, p. 52. l. 1. r. setting a Chair, p. 84. l. 1. r. ruminate on them.
